






















































Hansard: May 12, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1563 
 May 12, 1997 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 1997 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 
official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I couldn’t hear you, Mr. Chair. I don’t 
know if your mike is not working or not. With me tonight is 
Merv Ross from Sask Ag and Food. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Committee members, I understand there 
might be some problem with the microphones this evening, so I 
remind all members of what Speakers have tried to do for some 
time, and that is to encourage private conversations to be 
carried on outside of the Chamber. I apologize for being more 
stringent this evening than normal. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Is Hansard hearing us? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I hear a question of, is Hansard hearing 
us? I don’t know the answer, but our job is to do the work of the 
people. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Sounds like 
we have our sound back again. And I’d just like to welcome the 
minister’s official here this evening. 
 
I am going to skip around a little bit I guess, and first go to 
essentially what is clause 7 with respect to the lien right 
provisions of this Bill. Now as I understand it, there’s a new 
section that’s being added here, subsection 50(10), with respect 
to the lien rights. And what it does, essentially, is, as far as I 
read it, it provides a contradiction to what are the lien rights as 
provided under the section 50(8) and (9). Now section 50(8) 
and (9), essentially it says that there are the lien rights in place 
if you don’t sign an agreement. 
 
Now section 50(10), the way I would read it, would basically 
say that you have lien rights if you do sign an agreement. Now 
in either case, I understand you can basically reverse that 
situation by essentially signing an agreement. 
 
Now it seems to me that this is somewhat confusing, and I 
would think that perhaps there could have been a better way of 
preparing this particular aspect of this legislation. And I would 
just ask the minister if he sees any better way of having 
provided for lien rights within this particular Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’d ask you for your suggestion if you 
don’t think this is right, but what happens in this clause is that 
this ensures the individual cannot attempt to apply a lien unless 
a custom fitting arrangement is in place. So I think this clarifies 
that section quite a bit in . . . historically, there has been some 
problems here and all this does is clarify that. But if you, if you  

have a suggestion I would be willing to entertain it. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Mr. Minister, by adding the subsection 
that you are referring to, it does indeed state then that there has 
to be a prior written agreement in place between what now is a 
custom operator and a producer association in order that the 
custom operator would retain some lien rights. 
 
But then if we go . . . I guess I should go back to the start where 
we were talking about . . . I guess essentially what we’re trying 
to do is make this in synch with the animal keepers Act perhaps. 
Is that what section 50(8)and (9) would provide for, that having 
a . . . retaining lien rights if you aren’t signing an agreement to 
an opposite effect? That would be more in keeping I guess, with 
the animal keepers Act, and I guess now we’re defining custom 
operators could be animal keepers under this Bill as well. 
 
So nonetheless, having said that, maybe the minister and his 
official could provide us with a little bit of history here because 
I know there . . . in discussions with some of the . . . oh the 
custom operators, I guess you would call them, I think in terms 
of like feedlot operators, they’ve made reference to me in 
discussions to the . . . I think they’ve referred to it as the stable 
keepers’ Act. Now is this a piece of legislation that is no longer 
in existence and the animal keepers Act has, has succeeded, I 
guess you’d say and in so doing . . . I guess I’d just like to point 
out the fact that these are feedlot operators who’ve been in the 
business for a lot of years and yet they’re not fully familiar with 
what stage even the current legislation is at. And given that I 
think you’re adding an extra layer of confusion here in 
providing within the same subsection two different variations of 
how to maintain a lien right on stock that might be on your 
premises. 
 
So I might just take my seat and let you have some comment on 
that, just some clarifications if you could, on that aspect of the 
Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well under The Animal Products Act it 
was automatic where a lien would be placed. But in recent years 
there has been some changes involving associations in conflict 
with a member or marital breakup. Individuals who are not 
members of the association but were part of the farm operation 
at which association cattle were kept claimed to have a lien on 
the cattle when the association attempted to recover the cattle. 
So what happens, this subsection 50(10) will ensure that 
individuals cannot attempt to apply a lien unless custom feeding 
arrangements have been made. 
 
So what it does is it applies some rules to the sort of modern 
conditions that we all live by. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, it still really isn’t addressing 
what I perceive as the problem here. And you’re asking me for 
a solution, how could this legislation have been better prepared. 
But just for the sake of consistency it would seem what was 
wrong with just leaving this consistent with the other legislation 
and just provide that there are lien rights in place, as long as 
there wasn’t some other, separate written agreement? Just as the  
  



1564  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

subsection 50(8)and (9) provide, rather than having within that 
same section of this new piece of legislation something that’s 
somewhat contradictory and again, I might add, very confusing. 
 
And it seems to put more onus, more responsibility, onto 
custom operators. Whereas I look at this Bill and it seems to, to 
my notion, it seems to take a little bit of the responsibility off of 
the lending agencies in terms of their . . . as long as they can 
provide that they were somewhat ignorant of the facts 
surrounding what happened to the monies that were loaned out 
to a producer association, they’re essentially off the hook in 
terms of being responsible for the making good or seeing that 
the association makes good on the commitments that they 
originally entered into. 
 
And then by preparing this legislation in such a way that the 
custom operators now have to have a written agreement in 
advance, it seems like you’re throwing the extra responsibility 
onto their backs. And as I say, it seems in a number of cases 
there’s already some confusion on their part as to what even in 
fact the existing legislation was, even without looking at this 
new Bill before us. So I would think that it would serve 
everyone better if within this subsection 50, if we could have 
just maintained some consistency. Either you have a written 
agreement and it waives what was your inherent lien right as 
provided in section 50(8) and (9), or else we go a complete 
reversal and we have what is essentially the other way. But by 
having, like all of these different scenarios, it seems like it’s just 
adding to some confusion here on everyone’s part. And I can 
see that it might eventually lead to some hardship too. 
 
(1915) 
 
But before I let you make any further comment on that, I just 
had one other question concerning, I guess, essentially what 
becomes the supervisor of the whole program — if I use the 
correct terminology here — somebody who is the provincial 
supervisor of this program. There seems to now be a fair bit of 
authority delegated to whoever that individual may be in terms 
of just who is allowed to be a so-called custom operator in the 
province now. And could this not in some ways be restrictive 
on the growth of an industry where you’re keeping who is 
authorized to be a custom operator down to a more of a select 
list or a restricted list? It seems to me that this legislation might 
in fact lead to some problems that way and might inhibit some 
future growth in the industry. And might you provide us with 
some comments on that this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well as far as the supervisor is 
concerned — I’ll answer your last question first — there have 
been situations where they’ve had managers who have been 
custom feeding and got themselves into some trouble for 
various reasons. And what this does is ensures that that person 
doesn’t come back into the system, or at least doesn’t come 
back into the system before the feeder, the institution 
supervisor, agree to that. 
 
And as far as your first question is concerned, what that does, it 
simply assures that there is an agreement in place. Section 
50(10) ensures that there is a custom feeding agreement in place 
in order that 50(8) and 50(9) can be applied to that 
 

situation. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
with respect to clause 9 and as it relates to the new access rights 
provisions that are within, I was wondering if you might be able 
to more fully explain those to me, because I’ve had some 
concern expressed to me that as a release to seizure of 
properties with respect to those individuals within the Act that 
are authorized now to have access, and as it relates to them — 
some of them being able to seize properties — that it might not 
be just restricted to properties of a particular association. 
They’re worried that it might also involve other properties on 
the premises of a custom operator. 
 
And I was wondering if you might provide some clarification 
there, a degree of comfort, to those who have these concerns. 
Whether they’re valid ones or not, I’d like to hear your 
comments here this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well what this section does is that it 
gives rights to access that association and . . . (inaudible) . . . 
that association, even though the owner of that property may 
not be a member or a part of that association, because it goes 
back to the section 50(10) where we’ve had instances of 
matrimonial property problems and that the owner may not be 
part of the association and would deny access. What this does, it 
allows access to ensure that all the proper counting measures 
and so the supervisor can attend the property to make sure that 
there’s nothing being done wrong in the association. Otherwise, 
how would you ever get there to count cattle or determine 
whether there is any problems at the association if he didn’t 
have the right to access that property when somebody else 
owned it through . . . in the real case, a matrimonial dispute? 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  So the fears of a custom operator who has no 
other relationship to the entire venture other than that they have 
an agreement that they’re feeding this particular producer 
association’s stock, as far as them having a fear that any of their 
properties may be at risk in the event of seizure of animals of a 
particular association, those are unfounded then is what you are 
saying; was a misinterpretation of the provisions that I provided 
then essentially. Could I just get that final clarification. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, that’s right. It’s simply access for 
the association for the purpose of the association cattle. There’s 
no personal liability involved in this at all for those other 
people. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I’d also 
like to thank the minister and his officials for the answers he’s 
provided tonight. 
 
I can understand where programs are put in place such as this 
that are well-intentioned, well-meaning. They are to provide 
some access to capitals to expand . . . to allow producers to 
expand into enterprises such as cow-calf operations, feeder 
operations. However always well-meaning, well-intentioned, 
there is a certain segment of people who might want to take 
advantage of any given program and my understanding would 
be that some of these provisions are an attempt to try and rectify 
some of those problems. 
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

So I would conclude my remarks here tonight and just thank 
you again for your responses. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to welcome you and your official here this 
evening. I have a couple of questions dealing with the access. 
Would the inspector also have access to determine . . . to look 
through the books to determine sales and to whom those sales 
were made, and when those sales were made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Just for clarification, is that access 
related to access to a non-member’s property? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  No, this would be for access to a 
member’s property at the custom feeder to determine the sales 
that may or may not have been made by that custom feeder, and 
where those sales were made to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well we don’t have access to the books 
as such, nor would we need access to the books. What we have 
to have access to is the property to ensure that the numbers of 
cattle are there. Whether or not the association is operating for 
themselves in a beneficial manner is of not — I shouldn’t say 
any concern — of not great concern to us. It’s just that if we . . . 
We have to have access to make sure that the provisions are 
there; that we can count the animals. Because there have been 
situations where animals have disappeared. 
 
And one of the problems, and this ties into this, is that Manitoba 
does not have brand inspection. And we are working with 
Alberta and Manitoba now to ensure . . . to try to put together 
sort of a prairie-wide brand inspection. Because if there were 
animals that, for whatever reason, mysteriously disappeared 
from a Saskatchewan association into Manitoba where they 
don’t have brand inspection, nothing’s stopping that. Now if 
those animals were replaced in the allotted period of time that’s 
okay; but if there was some skulduggery going on, let’s say, 
then we have to make sure we have access to determine the 
numbers of cattle. 
 
But the most important part, I think of this is that we have . . . 
we continue the talks with Manitoba to ensure that they put in 
place some kind of a brand inspection program so that there’s 
no possibility of our animals drifting to Manitoba without 
anyone knowing where they come from. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. As you 
know, my constituency borders right up against Manitoba, so 
. . . Okay, let’s say you’re supposed to have a hundred animals 
in a feedlot and somebody believes that there aren’t a hundred 
there, and the inspectors go in and he counts 85. What happens 
beyond that point? If you have access though to the 
association’s books and you can determine whether actually 
there was a hundred in there at one time — a hundred had been 
purchased — if any of them had died of whatever reasons, or if 
there had been sales, I think it would be advantageous to be able 
to do that to know what was happening within the association. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Let me back up just for a minute, just for 
clarification, and I hope I didn’t mislead you, but what I was  

saying is we do not have access to the feedlot’s books. We do 
not have access to the feedlot’s books, but we do have access to 
the association’s books. And so that if there are 85 animals and 
there should be 100, we can then go to the association’s books 
and say, these animals are sold on such and such a date and you 
have 30 days to replace those animals and if they’re within that, 
then you should . . . nothing’s wrong. If it’s more than that 
amount of time, then you have identified a problem; then you 
can proceed on correcting that problem. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, because I’m aware of 
a case that would sort of fall within these areas and that’s why I 
have a concern about it, and access to the association’s books 
would have been advantageous. And I’m not sure that the 
department had, at that time, that opportunity. 
 
(1930) 
 
Another part on the access, 54(3), where an inspector or 
supervisor can enter the premises . . . we’re getting into 
Saskatchewan more and more intensive hog operations. Now I 
don’t know whether or not there would be custom feeding of 
hogs, but nevertheless if it should happen, I know that most 
modern hog operations do not want anyone accessing their 
buildings because of the potential to bring in disease that’s 
foreign to their environment. What does this Bill have in place 
that . . . does the department have in place to deal with those 
kinds of circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I just want to finish off the last topic 
when you’re talking about the 85 versus 100. We have an 
opportunity to go through the public, licensed facilities and 
determine whether or not those animals were sold publicly or 
privately. So if they were sold publicly then we would . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  I know some of them were sold 
privately. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Sold publicly, there’s no problem; but if 
they’re sold privately or in Manitoba, then it’s a problem. 
 
And that is why we have to ensure that we have complete 
western . . . Canada-wide cooperation for brand inspection. 
 
In terms of the hog operators, there are no custom feeding 
arrangements now that we’re aware of of any magnitude. But if 
there were, you’re right, access to these facilities is very, very 
restricted. 
 
However I myself have been on and in large hog barns, but 
what you have to do is make sure that you comply to the 
bio-security provisions that they ask for in order to enter that 
facility. That means . . . I know when I went into one of the hog 
barns that means that you shower in and then put their clothes 
on and shower out. 
 
An Hon. Member:  That’s for your benefit . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Maybe. But in terms of if there were 
custom-feeding arrangements, we would . . . our people would 
certainly comply by the bio-security measures that were  
  



1566  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

implemented at that site. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Chair, I would like to thank Merv 
Ross, my staff person, for helping me out this evening. And I 
would move that we report Bill No. 12, The Farm Financial 
Stability Amendment Act, 1997 be moved without amendment. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I 
would like to thank the minister and his official for coming in 
this evening and for answering our questions. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1997 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With me on 
my right is Scott Banda, the general counsel and corporate 
secretary of the Crown Investments Corporation, and behind me 
is Mark Guillet, the general counsel for SaskEnergy. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I wonder if you could inform us as to whether or not 
any of these rate changes will fall under the 45-day review 
process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Without making an unequivocal answer, 
probably not. What is being done here is simply technical 
wording changes that establish consistency between the words 
of the individual Crown corporations and the words of the 
Crown Investments Corporation with respect to the 
establishments of rates and charges and levies. And that’s 
generally with respect to charges for services and those kinds of 
things. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, if someone like 
TransGas, who is mentioned in the Bill, makes a rate change, 
ultimately that is going to roll down to the consumer because 
it’s going to cost SaskEnergy more money because they’re 
paying for that transportation by TransGas. SaskEnergy is going 
to pass that on to the consumer, and there’s going to be a rate 
increase at the consumer level. 
 
So the consumer, in my opinion, should have an opportunity to 
speak to the rate increases of all Crown corporations, not just 
those that deliver the direct service such as SaskEnergy does 
with the gas because the gas costs upstream are all part of what 
I, as a customer, pay to the SaskEnergy. 
 
So in that case, because it is a Crown corporation, I believe that 
the 45-day review process, however limited of an impact that 
45-day review process has  in fact as I believe, it’s totally  

ineffectual  but it should nevertheless be a part of this 
process. 
 
So outside of TransGas, what other services or fees or charges 
would be levied, and would any of those be levied directly to 
the consumer or are they passed on to a . . . to its parent 
company, which would then in turn pass it on to the consumer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  May I say again that it . . . I don’t 
anticipate, from the description of the clarification of the 
wording, that it would apply to a 45-day review sorts of fees 
and charges. The fact is that the words here do not change 
anything except if SaskEnergy, for example, wanted to change a 
fee for doing a particular service to an installation, it clarifies 
the authority  whether it stays in SaskEnergy or whether they 
have to get our approval for that kind of a rate change; whether 
it’s strictly an administrative charge that might apply to the cost 
of installing a meter or removing a meter. 
 
With respect to the authorities for the larger rate changes, those 
are by definition generally dealt with at every level of authority 
before they’re issued to the public for the 45-day review. And 
then they are again reviewed by cabinet for approval of the 
recommendation, not . . . including the individual boards. 
 
What we’re talking about here is the clarification of the 
authorities between the Crown corporations individually for the 
sorts of things they can charge themselves, and the authority 
that CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
has to review those fees and charges. It’s simply making . . . it’s 
not even expected to affect what’s being done; it’s just making 
the language in the two Acts consistent so that the words are the 
same. Generally I think the practice will not change at all but it 
clarifies the words so that they are the same in both Acts. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. So 
basically what you’re talking about is SaskEnergy wants to run 
in a gas line into a farm. Now we’re talking about the fees for 
that access. So roughly $10,000 a mile for SaskEnergy to run. 
So it’s not a fee change in the sense of how much you’re going 
to pay every month for your natural gas, it’s that service charge 
. . . or SaskTel running in a telephone line at 200 bucks a mile 
or whatever the case may be — those fees. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, all those fees though do add up. They’re 
part of the cost for that service. And I think some of those fees, 
particularly in those kind of situations where you’re charging 
$10,000 a mile for natural gas, if you jack those fees up, that 
makes a dramatic increase to anybody who’s setting up a new 
home or expanding their business on the farm — putting in a 
hog operation or a large grain dryer, any of those types of 
things. If you’ve increased the fees substantially, which you 
have increased them over the past few years, makes a big 
impact on what economic activity happens out in rural 
Saskatchewan. It tends to concentrate those kind of businesses 
into areas where the . . . particularly natural gas, where the 
larger service distribution lines are already in place. 
 
So those kind of fees do have a dramatic impact and I believe, 
Mr. Minister, should go to the 45-day review process; even  
though I don’t like that 45-day review process. 
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Yes, I appreciate the question. And what 
this in fact does is it gives CIC the authority to make a decision 
whether or not that’s then reported up and approved at our level 
or sent on to further levels. So it actually broadens CIC’s 
authority relative to the authority of the individual Crowns in 
that regard. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to 
ask you to take it under advisement though that those fee 
structure changes be moved into the 45-day review process. 
And perhaps once a year all those major fees could be reviewed 
if there are changes happening. I wouldn’t suggest that every 
time a fee changes that you have the 45-day review process. But 
perhaps on an annual basis or something all of those fees, if 
they’re reviewed and changed, could be done at that time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  I appreciate the advice and we will ask 
officials to consider that as we continue to examine our open 
and accountability structures for the Crowns. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Chairman, let me first of all thank my 
officials, Scott and Mark, for their continuing good work on 
behalf of the people of the province; the opposition for their 
insightful advice and questions. And I will, Mr. Chairman, 
move that this Act be moved . . . reported without amendment. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like 
to thank the minister and his officials for coming in this 
evening. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Trust and Loan 
Corporations Act, 1997 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m very pleased to have with me 
this evening Jim Hall, who is the Superintendent of Insurance 
and the registrar of credit unions, and Linda Zarzeczny, who is 
the deputy superintendent of insurance and deputy registrar of 
credit unions, and Brent Prenevost, who is with the legislative 
services branch of the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I welcome the 
minister here this evening and his officials, and I would also 
like to thank these officials and the minister for making 
themselves available to the opposition for an explanation of this 
Bill. And we had, I think, a beneficial session last week to go 
through the provisions of this somewhat complicated 
legislation. And I would like to say I appreciate that. 
 

I think though that my first question, and in the sense 
everything funnels back into this question, and it’s simply this: 
in the history of this country, and particularly in the last 10 to 
20 years, the blunt fact is that provincially incorporated trust 
and loan companies have not had as good a track record as — 
say — the federally chartered banks. 
 
And I think what the public really wants to know is what is in 
this legislation to protect the public and ultimately to protect 
our government too against claims, in view of the fact . . . And I 
say I hazard to bring this up, but it’s a fact that, not only in this 
but in other provinces, provincially incorporated trust and loan 
companies have not always had the greatest of records in terms 
of solvency. And I would like to know what is in this legislation 
that the minister thinks identifies this and leads to the integrity 
of the industry and the solvency of the industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that that question can be answered 
in a number of ways, but practically I’ll just give you a few of 
the ways that we see that this legislation will help in 
Saskatchewan. And I think your question relates directly to the 
kinds of losses that the public might suffer and how they are 
protected. 
 
But what this legislation will do is it’ll substantially increase the 
minimum capital requirements; it’ll place an onus on the board 
of directors to monitor the activities of the company; it will 
establish committees that will conduct in-depth reviews of 
internal operations and related party transactions; and it also 
requires the company to formalize policies covering certain 
areas of its operation. 
 
And basically any type of regulatory scheme is not a guarantee, 
but it is the best efforts of all of the players in a particular 
industry to make sure that it operates in a way that will protect 
the public. We see that this will provide more clearly defined 
authority for the regulators here in Saskatchewan and also some 
better means to intervene when problems are detected. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, while we are always 
reluctant to suggest the hiring of more and more personnel, one 
of the things that concerns me in this particular area is whether 
we have the resources to properly manage and regulate the 
industry. The industry involves multimillion dollar companies 
with their own very high-powered staff, and it must be no easy 
thing to keep on top of their prospectuses, the financial 
information that they file or don’t file. 
 
So I’d like to ask the minister if we have the resources available 
to us to properly review the activities of trust and loan 
companies and make sure that the bad apples are culled out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think this legislation and the new 
legislation like this that is coming across the country, answers 
your question directly. Because what happens is now, in a much 
more coordinated fashion, every jurisdiction in the country 
works together with the other jurisdiction as well as the federal 
government. And what that means and what we’re doing with 
this legislation is eliminating the need to go through the review 
that’s done, for example, in Ontario here in Saskatchewan. But 
what we will do is those companies that are  
  



1568  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

based in Saskatchewan, they will end up with much closer 
scrutiny because all of the other jurisdictions in Canada where 
they operate will be relying on the scrutiny that we do here. 
 
So I think rather than diminishing or diluting the ability of our 
regulators, this type of legislation and this legislation is actually 
providing greater strength and greater ability to monitor this 
industry in Canada. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I thank the minister for that explanation, 
and I did understand from the session we had that the primary 
regulation will be done in the home province of each trust and 
loan company, and so we will rely on that and others, as you 
say, will rely on us for a company whose primary home is 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I understand that it makes a certain amount of sense. However I 
do have to ask the minister, if there is any danger then of flags 
of convenience, as it were, if there is any danger that the 
weakest and smallest province will become the incorporating 
home of choice of companies who don’t want a lot of 
examination of their books and their activities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the answer to that is that even 
if a company was licensed in another province which had lesser 
capital requirements, for example, we will always maintain our 
capital requirements before the company could operate here in 
Saskatchewan. So there is always a minimum standard that we 
would set in Saskatchewan, but obviously the plan would be for 
all of the jurisdictions in the country to work together and 
prevent this weak-sister approach that you’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — It strikes me that while increasing the 
minimum capital is certainly part of the answer here, there’s 
something else, and namely that . . . my understanding is that in 
the case of the chartered banks, their own internal rules prevent 
them from having too great an exposure in any one market. And 
when you have a huge exposure in one market, then you 
obviously live or die in that one market. 
 
And particularly in the case of Principal Trust, my 
understanding is that quite apart from any allegations of 
improprieties, it was a very simple case that there was a 
company that was heavily into the Edmonton real estate market. 
If Edmonton real estate boomed, the company would boom. If 
Edmonton real estate went bust, then the company would 
follow that same fate. 
 
So again I want to ask not just about the minimum amount of 
capitalization that you say is going to be dramatically increased 
through this legislation, and I applaud that, but are there any 
rules going to be in place to make sure that the capitalization 
won’t all be focused on one little market so if something 
happens to that market the whole thing collapses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think if I could refer you to section 
13 of the Act, the answer is completely there for you. What we 
have done is adopted the federal investment rules so that they’re 
exactly the same as the federal Bank Act. 
 

Mr. Hillson: — So you’re saying then, Mr. Minister, that even 
if a company meets the capitalization rules, if that capital is all 
in one small market that still wouldn’t be satisfactory. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think there’s also a requirement for 
prudent investment and development of investment policy and 
that prudent investment policy can be and will be reviewed by 
the regulators, which would be the superintendent. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, as we all know, the rules 
governing our chartered banks in Canada have been very much 
relaxed over the last two years to the extent that we get far more 
services now from our chartered banks than we used to and 
indeed our whole expectation of our financial institution has 
changed over the last 10 to 20 years. And this has obviously put 
pressure on trust and loan companies and on credit unions, and 
in view to say this is, the services we get from our financial 
institution have simply changed a great deal over the past 
several years. 
 
Is that a factor in what we are doing here in this Bill, that the 
people’s expectations of their financial institutions have 
changed as a result of the changes to the Bank Act. 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the simple answer to that is 
yes, because the whole financial services area has changed very 
rapidly, and so that people have different expectations of the 
banks and of the trust companies, and the trust companies and 
the banks have different ways of doing business. And so what 
we’re trying to do here is make sure that we’re part of the 
regulation of the next century’s banking institutions rather than 
being left behind in something that’s 20, 30, 40 years behind. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Perhaps the most dramatic change to our banks 
has been to be able to buy securities through your branch, and I 
believe now most of the security agencies are in point of fact 
owned by chartered banks today. Will that be open to loan 
companies? 
 
The other talk that we do see, that I understand is not in place is 
now, is that insurance is the next area that the banks will be 
asking for. I understand that’s not part of this legislation, but 
that it is contemplated in the legislation as a possible change in 
the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the answer to your question 
is that the federal legislation has made changes as it relates to 
the sale of securities, and practically the federally chartered 
banks do sell securities through subsidiaries and that’s the same 
requirement that would be here for the trust and loan 
companies. 
 
As it relates to insurance services, there’s a very, very narrow 
area of products that trust and loan companies are able to sell, 
very similar to what credit unions now sell  some life 
products and maybe a few other, but a very, very narrow area. 
And that would be the intention that would stay that way except 
as the whole financial services industry changes in Canada. 
 
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

We know that the federally chartered banks and all of the 
related financial services industry are under constant review, 
and that the latest review was probably going to come through 
with a report within a year. And we anticipate that we may then 
end up having to look at this legislation again to see how the 
Saskatchewan-based financial institutions will fit into that 
national scheme. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Are you anticipating that companion Bills 
parallel to this will be introduced in the other provinces of 
Canada? And has there been a consultation with our sister 
provinces and with the federal government in preparing this 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well in this area, there’s extensive 
consultation on a regular basis. Some of the provinces have 
already passed legislation and some haven’t. But this is an 
ongoing process and we anticipate that all of the provinces will 
eventually pass similar legislation. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The main challenge I see in this area, Mr. 
Deputy Chairman, is the question of how we regulate and 
protect the public without sending out the message that 
government has now become a guarantor of the investment. 
 
And of course, as the minister is aware, when Principal and 
Pioneer and, I believe, SaskTrust, when they ran into problems, 
the investors looked to government to redeem them from their 
situation. And I would like to hear the minister discuss for a 
minute, if he would, what is in place so that the message is out 
there that on the one hand, you know, we are assuming our 
obligation to try and protect the public from unscrupulous 
businesses, but that nonetheless this is a risk investment that is 
being made and it is not being guaranteed by the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that it’s quite clear that the 
public understand the Canadian Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
with its $60,000 guarantee, and that will cover all deposits that 
are related to the institutions that we’re dealing with here. But 
on top of that, there’s a . . . clearly the necessity for the 
institutions to do public education about that. 
 
But another thing that . . . what our legislation does do is 
provide the best tools that we know of at this time for our 
regulators; so that they can monitor the affairs of the company 
and step in and intervene when there are concerns. But it has to 
be absolutely clear that it’s regulatory legislation; it’s not 
guarantee legislation. And I think that’s the point that you want 
to make. And practically, $60,000 through the Canadian 
Deposit Insurance Corporation . . . If your banker or person . . . 
trust company can’t tell you that this particular money that you 
have in that institution is covered by that, well then you need to 
ask a lot of questions about why you have that money there. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I understand, Mr. Minister, that one of the 
things our regulators will be doing is reviewing the promotional 
materials and the advertising of these companies. And will they 
expect that part of the promotional materials will make clear to 
potential investors what is guaranteed, as you say, through the 
Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation, and where the investor  

is taking a risk? Will they expect that all promotional material 
will make that clear to investors  where they are taking a risk, 
and where they cannot expect the taxpayers to come to their 
rescue in the event that things don’t work out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think there’s a . . . One of the 
things that’s happening in Canada right now is the Canadian 
Deposit Insurance Corporation is entering into a, I guess I 
would call a public education campaign about its own role. So 
that it will be much clearer which deposits are covered by CDIC 
(Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation) and which ones aren’t. 
So that will exist. 
 
The other thing is that the market conduct portions of this 
legislation are meant to deal with exactly this problem. And the 
companies will be required to set forth their plans to make sure 
that the public knows exactly what they’re getting, and that 
includes setting out risks in a way that’s understandable for the 
public. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And again, Mr. Minister, I have to ask, do we 
have the resources to monitor promotional materials and 
activities of these companies without hiring armies of new 
staff? These are pretty big and pretty sophisticated companies 
we’re talking about here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that we go back to the answer 
that I gave, is that each province will regulate those institutions 
that are based in their province. So that will mean that we have 
fewer to monitor, for example, than Ontario, so we don’t need 
the same resources as Ontario. 
 
The other thing is that it is a system which is an internal 
compliance system that is controlled by the institution. So it 
will be set up in a way that they provide reports to the 
regulators, that we won’t actually have to go in and audit the 
various institutions unless there’s a concern, and then the 
powers are there to do that. But in a practical way, it will be 
done through people who are actually hired by the institutions 
themselves to provide the reports to the regulators. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I guess in that regard though, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, I have to ask . . . Okay, I understand that if the principal 
home is, say Nova Scotia, that that’s where the principal 
regulation and monitoring will be expected to be done. But 
what about the case though where the company domiciled 
somewhere else is spreading literature, making wild claims of 
instant wealth here? What will we be doing to monitor that 
situation? Because as I say, even though the home province 
may be satisfied, surely we’ll want to know what sort of 
literature and promotional material is coming in here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well even if the company is from Nova 
Scotia we will still have the ability to step in and monitor that 
because it relates to their market conduct in Saskatchewan. And 
so you know practically, we’ll cooperate with all of the other 
provinces and the regulators in the other provinces and the 
federal government so that there won’t be an overlap and a 
review of a review, if you can put it that way. If a particular 
Nova Scotia company decided to target Saskatchewan with 
some material that was pushing the boundaries of what was  
  



1570  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

appropriate, then we would have the ability to step in and raise 
the concerns and actually do the monitoring that we needed. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — My final question, Mr. Minister, and I think 
we’re all sort of hesitant to mention some of the bad 
experiences we’ve had over the last two years, but in a sense I 
think we can’t avoid it. And so I’m going to ask you again, if 
you will, to tell us what does this legislation do that if a 
Principal Trust was starting up today, is there any better chance 
that we would catch it before it got as far . . . got as away on us 
as it did in the past? Is there anything in this legislation that can 
offer the people of western Canada some comfort that we’ve got 
better security measures in place now? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the response I gave to you at 
the beginning of the question that set out some of the reasons 
for doing this legislation actually answers some of your 
questions. And one of the big ones is the higher capital . . . you 
know, the minimum capital requirements being higher; the 
other is the prudent investment requirements — some of the 
things related to the powers of the regulator to step in and make 
reviews happen maybe sooner than they might otherwise. Some 
of these things are exactly what is required. 
 
And I think it’s practically also the sharing of information 
across the country and making it clear which particular province 
would be the prime regulator involved with any particular 
company. That would go a long ways to solving some of those 
problems. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — One — I’m almost finished here — but one 
specific example I have to put to the minister, and I did to your 
officials the other day, is that I happen to know that in the case 
of Principal Trust, the commission structure for the salespeople 
was so drawn so that there was very, very little commission for 
safe, secure investments — investments under CDIC There was 
a very healthy commission for the riskier investments. So in 
other words, the salespeople certainly had a strong incentive to 
channel people into the worst possible investments, or the 
riskiest investments. Well in this case of course, the risky 
investments certainly turned out to be the bad ones. 
 
Will that be addressed in our regulation or will companies still 
be able to offer differential in commissions depending on the 
riskiness of the investment, say whether it’s under CDIC, 
whether it’s not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the clear response to your question 
is that this is not a guarantee, it’s a regulatory regime. But when 
you look at the regulation-making power under the market 
conduct section, it does allow for regulations to be made 
respecting the disclosure as to fees, charges, and commissions, 
or other payments. And so if that in fact is a problem as it 
relates to market conduct, there is a power here to make that 
entirely transparent. But I think I should emphasize that our 
whole purpose here is to provide a regulatory format for the 
institution to operate, and not a guarantee. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you to the minister  

and his officials for those explanations and for our earlier 
meeting. And I am satisfied that the Bill may now proceed 
pending questions of course from the third party. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, welcome to the 
minister and his officials and I appreciate having had the 
opportunity to sit down with your officials the other day, even 
for just part of the session. I wasn’t able to get in on all of it. 
But just a couple of things that I picked up. In clause 48 where 
it talks about: 
 

No loan broker shall contact a person at that person’s 
residence or place of employment or business or any other 
place if that person has previously requested that he or she 
not be contacted by the loan broker. 

 
And I guess the question that arises out of this, if you can 
request that you not be contacted at any place, doesn’t that 
make it difficult for a broker to certainly get in touch and follow 
up on, say, funds that are owed? Or are you just talking of the 
fact if you’ve said . . . you’ve contacted a broker to work with, 
that a person may not want that broker to call them at a certain 
place to do business with them? What specifically are you 
meaning by this clause 48? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the first part of the answer is 
that the loan broker is not normally somebody that actually 
lends you the money, so who would be contacting you if you 
owe money would be a collections agent, not a loan broker. 
 
This legislation is the same as in securities legislation, and it’s 
basically to prevent people from making cold calls or bothering 
you at home just to see if you might want to get a loan. And so 
it’s a way when . . . you know, some people are obviously 
bothered by people phoning them at home or bothering them or 
business . . . you know, trying to lend them money. And this is a 
way that they can prevent that. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So what you’re basically saying then, Minister, 
this is setting out a requirement that says to any loan broker that 
you can’t just go and start soliciting support from the general 
public without the public coming to you. Is that what you mean 
by that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think it’s if a person is fed up with that 
kind of activity and doesn’t want the loan broker to contact 
them and they let them know that or the industry generally 
know that, then they’ll stay away. 
 
But I mean some people might appreciate the telephone call and 
the conversation, and maybe they do need a loan, and I don’t 
think it prevents it. But it’s basically as a protection to stop the 
activity that’s unwanted. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Fair enough. 
 
Section 55(3), and it says that it allows the superintendent to 
exempt a trust and loan from posting a bond. However it 
doesn’t seem to give any reasons or terms that would be 
associated with such an exemption. Are the terms going to be 
spelled out in regulations or wouldn’t there be some terms or  
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

conditions set out in regards to why a trust or loan would be 
exempt from posting a bond? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think what this relates to is there 
may be a person who goes into the loan brokerage business who 
has substantial assets in Saskatchewan that are not readily 
removed from the province. And you may not require the added 
expense of a bond for that person because they in fact wouldn’t 
leave the province because they have, you know, five sections 
of land and are operating in a manufacturing business and a few 
other things. So that if there ever was a problem where you had 
to have some money paid back from them, they’d still be in the 
province and you’d be able to collect your money from them. 
 
The purpose of a bond is to deal with a fellow that goes from 
province to province or the person who just doesn’t have 
financial backing, and then you want to make sure that they’re 
able to pay for any costs if there are problems later. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, wouldn’t it be . . . even if they do 
have assets or significant holdings in the province wouldn’t it 
still be easier for them to post a bond like any other trust and 
loan corporation that would set up in the province, that would 
move in? Because at the end of the day if they don’t post that 
bond, if that’s what I catch you saying, and something arose, 
you would then be forced to go to court to try and derive the . . . 
generate the revenue or derive the revenue in order to follow up 
on those defaults or whatever that may take place. Is that not 
true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that this provision doesn’t really 
relate to the loan companies because they would have the 
minimum capital requirements and they would have the capital 
there. This relates to somebody who arranges loans and has an 
independent business, and there’s a concern that maybe they’re 
not as sufficiently capitalized as they should be. And so that’s 
why you know you end up talking about if there are assets that 
could cover. 
 
The other side — bonding companies usually require some kind 
of legal action to take place anyway to have a payment out on a 
bond because they would want, you know . . . sometimes they’ll 
pay out, but often they won’t until it’s fully clarified by the 
courts. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another question here 
coming out of section 50 — or clause 59 — requiring the 
superintendent to receive written approval from both consumer 
and the minister to investigate a problem with their loan broker. 
And I’m wondering why specifically is the minister’s approval 
necessary if the consumer has already given the consent to an 
investigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think you’ll notice that we’ve moved 
into the next part. So this part VII is for superintendents, and 
basically it relates to the whole Act and not just to loan brokers. 
 
What we’re saying here is that, if the superintendent is going to 
take some steps on behalf of a consumer, it’s prudent and 
important that the consumer consent in writing that their 
complaint would go forward at the request of the  

superintendent. In other words, the superintendent can’t sort of 
hear a rumour that a consumer is having some troubles when in 
fact they may not be having a serious trouble. What this does is 
make sure that the consumer who is making the complaint 
actually does it in writing and gives the consent to the 
superintendent to proceed with a complaint. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I guess the other question there is, it also says 
“. . . the consumer and the consent of the minister.” What do 
you mean by that term, “the consent of the minister”? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the simple answer to that is 
that anytime an action would be taken like this, using 
government funds, that there is a requirement that it go through 
all the appropriate channels. And I guess the minister, probably 
more likely, you know, the deputy minister . . . there be a 
requirement that it come forward and be approved, that any 
kind of action like this takes place. 
 
And I think what you’re looking at here, sometimes there would 
be some, you know, fairly major case that would also have an 
element of educating the public about a particular problem. But 
the key point is that if you’re going to spend government 
resources on a lawsuit, which this is basically talking about, 
then you should have the approval of the consumer who is the 
subject of the lawsuit and the minister or the government before 
you proceed. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So what you’re basically saying, it doesn’t 
necessarily mean there is ministerial consent is needed on all 
investigations. A superintendent might be called to look into . . . 
if a consumer asks the superintendent to investigate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think if you look at the section 
59(2), basically the first section says “may do any of the things 
mentioned in subsection (2) if . . .” and then you get all those 
appropriate items. 
 
And then in (2) it talks, “institute or assume the conduct of any 
proceedings; or . . . defend any proceedings.” So basically this 
only relates to a situation where there’s a lawsuit. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Toth:  And then when you look at . . . moving along 
through subsection (2) and then subsection (3), and I guess the 
reason we were looking at these questions, subsection (3)(b), 
whereas 1(c) it mentioned the superintendent needing to obtain 
consent of the consumer and the consent of the minister, we 
then have in 3(b): 
 

the superintendent may conduct the proceedings in any 
manner that the superintendent considers appropriate, 
without being required to consult the consumer or obtain 
any additional consents. 

 
Now is this something that, after an investigation has been 
called for, then the superintendent then establishes how he will 
conduct an investigation without further consent? Or what are 
we specifically talking about? 
 
  



1572  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  All we’re talking about here is the 
lawsuit, and so once the minister or the government lawyers are 
involved in the case, then they will have the conduct of the 
case, and this sets out clearly that that’s what’s intended. 
 
Mr. Toth:  One further question. I understand you’re 
changing, if I understand correctly, the level of the bond, and 
you were going to put that into regulation. But you’re 
increasing the bond holding by this legislation, but moving it 
through regulations so that it can keep up with the changes. Is 
that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think there’s a little bit of a confusion in 
the terms that you’re using. The only place where a bond is 
referred to is in the part that refers to the loan broker. 
 
But I think what you are asking a question about is section 24, 
which talks about the minimum capital requirement, and there 
we used to have an amount set out directly in the Act. We are 
moving the amount out of the Act to set it out in the regulations. 
And basically this relates to allowing us to match, I suppose, 
what other provincial jurisdictions would do and the federal 
jurisdiction would do. But it gives more flexibility to increase 
that as the market changes. 
 
Mr. Toth:  That’s correct, Mr. Minister, and I thank you for 
pointing that out. Thank you, Mr. Minister, and to your 
officials. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 91 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to move the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you. Just before I do that, I’d like 
to thank my officials for their work this evening, but also the 
work over the last couple of years on this legislation and the 
related legislation for insurance and credit unions, which we 
hope to bring forward next session. And with that thank you, 
then I would move that we report this Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 
THIRD READINGS 

 
Bill No. 71  The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 

1997/Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 
alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 72  The Children’s Law Act, 1997/ 
Loi de 1997 sur le droit de l’enfance 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 73  The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 

1997/Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances 
alimentaires 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 74  The Family Maintenance Act, 1997/ 
Loi de 1997 sur les prestations alimentaires familiales 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 75  The Matrimonial Property Act, 1997/ 
Loi de 1997 sur les biens matrimoniaux 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 1997 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1997 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Trust and Loan 
Corporations Act, 1997 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

(2045) 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Government 

Vote 24 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
right is Ken Pontikes, deputy minister of Municipal 
Government. Just behind him is Ron Styles, the associate 
deputy minister of housing. On my left is Brij Mathur, the 
associate deputy minister for culture and recreation. And behind 
him Larry Chaykowski, director of finance and administration. 
And right behind me is Ron Davis, assistant deputy minister of 
municipal services. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And welcome 
to the minister this evening and her officials. I would like to 
begin this evening . . . and I see the hour is late, and I 
understand members of the third party are wishing to ask some 
questions, but I would like to begin by asking some questions 
about library services. 
 
The minister will be aware that there is a new funding formula 
for regional libraries being proposed this year, and I would ask 
the minister when the new funding formula is expected to go 
into effect, if it will be in effect this year, and if she would 
kindly explain how it will affect library regions in the province, 
whether there will be changes then in the relative position of 
our various library regions and some going up and some going 
down. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we have . . . as you 
know it, in this year’s budget, the grants to libraries are the 
status quo, and we have received recently a report of the library 
financing review committee. We haven’t had an opportunity 
yet, or my department hasn’t had an opportunity yet to 
deliberate upon it and give me some recommendations. When 
they do, then we will be in a position to act on them. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. So then I take it that that would not 
likely be in effect for this fiscal year then? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  No, Mr. Chairman, that’s correct. As I 
said . . . I think you indicated you couldn’t hear me. But you 
notice that the grants to libraries this year over last reflect the 
status quo; there is no change. So if there is a change it would 
be in future years. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — May I ask the minister if she’s in favour of a 
standard minimum municipal levy for the support of public 
libraries? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, if I could clarify 
whether the member opposite means all libraries, or is he 
speaking again about regional libraries. Because obviously the  

levels of service at municipal libraries and the different types of 
libraries across the province vary greatly, and the library boards 
in Saskatoon and Regina, for example, go to their respective 
city councils for approval of their budgets. And I guess their 
city councils would make the determination at the political level 
as what is the appropriate level at which to fund libraries. 
 
So I think the province saying that there should be a set library 
mill rate province-wide would not be very well received by 
municipalities, I believe. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — My understanding, Madam Minister, is that in 
the province of Alberta there is a minimum library assessment 
in all municipalities. The municipality has the right to direct it, 
depending on what their library system is, and of course the 
municipality would have the option of increasing that. But 
nonetheless there is, as I understand it, in Alberta, a minimum 
municipal library levy that is standard across the province. It 
was that sort of proposal I was wondering if this government 
supports or not. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, no. As I’ve outlined 
before, in a province with the demographics of Saskatchewan, 
the level of library services that’s appropriate varies a great 
deal. However, as reflected in the legislation that we passed last 
year with respect to regional libraries and the requirement for 
all municipalities to contribute to a regional library, to that 
extent, we do agree. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. Many libraries and regions are 
computerizing now, as the minister is aware, and I’d like to ask 
what assistance is available for computerization of libraries and 
of regional systems? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The Provincial Library, in 
consultation with the library system in the province, has 
recently completed their public library information service. And 
it has the effect of making . . . creating a registry where every 
title in a library in Saskatchewan can be accessed through an 
inter-library loan to any other library. So there was a great deal 
of assistance, if you like, in the development of the system, a 
great deal of cooperation amongst the various libraries and 
library systems in the province to reach this point. And I think 
it’s a very progressive development in information technology 
for our libraries. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And will that same be available to systems 
throughout the province in any region of the province, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, that is the plan 
and that was the reason it would be developed, so that all 
libraries would have access to it. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Is there any fear, Madam Minister, that as 
grants decrease that some systems, such as the two largest 
cities, may opt out of the provincial system and simply supply 
service to their own ratepayers? You mentioned that with 
computerization you’re trying to develop a system where 
persons anywhere in the province can access titles from any 
library in the province. But my understanding is that as grants  
  



1574  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

decrease, there has been some talk, especially in the larger 
cities, that they might be better advised to go it alone, that the 
grants they receive are less than the cost of providing 
out-of-city service. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, first of all, under the 
system that we have in the legislation framework that we have, 
libraries are not permitted to withdraw from the system. 
 
And in fact last year, in the fiscal year prior to this one, we 
made an adjustment of $170,000 to the public library system in 
Saskatoon in recognition of the very heavy load of out-of-city 
borrowers in their system due to the number of university 
students and the number who are resident while the time they’re 
students, but essentially they become non-residents of the city 
and non-taxpayers; and also of the large number of bedroom 
communities around the city which access the public library 
system with reciprocal borrowing through . . . by virtue of the 
Wheatland Regional Library card that they hold. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, I 
understand that with the most recent amendments, all 
municipalities are now required to join one region or another. 
But I have to ask, what is in place if a municipality simply 
refuses to follow through or refuses to sign up and join a 
region? What does the department intend to do if some 
municipalities simply decline to act? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, because they 
would be violating the law of the province, then there would be 
due recourse for those municipalities that don’t obey the law. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I guess, Madam Minister, that’s my point. 
What is this due recourse that the Madam Minister has in mind? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we would hesitate to 
do this, and we hope that it isn’t going to be necessary, that 
municipalities will follow the law, but we do at the end of the 
day make funding contributions to the library system and we 
could simply withhold the grant from a library where 
municipalities do not participate. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I understand there will be a 
number of changes in personnel at the Provincial Library this 
year and I’d like to ask the minister if she anticipates any 
changes to staffing levels, or if staffing levels at the Provincial 
Library will remain the same? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there are, I believe, 
four early retirements from the library system, and as 
everything else in advanced technology, it’s possible to do the 
same amount of work with fewer people as information systems 
are developed. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — We hear the word amalgamation in the field of 
municipalities and of course in school divisions. Does the 
minister consider that we have the right and the appropriate 
number of regional library systems or does she anticipate there 
will be some consolidation on that front? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, those decisions are  

made by the regional library boards. The system seems to be 
working fairly well. It’s developed over a number of years and I 
don’t anticipate, haven’t heard of, any libraries wanting to 
consolidate with other libraries and we certainly wouldn’t be 
encouraging it at this point. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — On a somewhat different front, it seems to be 
agreed by all municipalities in this province that the difficulties 
of reassessment have been made infinitely worse because of the 
inability of SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency) to provide timely, accurate information as to values. 
And I realize the minister has been asked about this previously 
and has made statements to the effect that SAMA is not under 
her direct control, but I think it’s accepted by everyone that 
Municipal Affairs has some responsibility of oversight and of 
course some appointments to the board of SAMA. What can the 
minister tell us she is doing to try and alleviate the problems 
that say that assessment has been made more difficult than 
necessary, simply because municipalities got into the 1997 
reassessment year and they simply didn’t have the information 
they should’ve had in order to implement the assessment? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, we have had 
exchanges on this subject before and I stated before that the 
assessment roll and the assessment process is a dynamic thing. 
And this particular year of a general reassessment after some 32 
years of neglect, if you like, is posing some particular 
challenges for administrators and councils. But we have notified 
municipalities previously that if they were going to have any 
problem meeting any of the statutory deadlines, that we would 
be pleased to act upon a request for an extension of those, 
feeling that it was more important to do the job accurately than 
to try to do it quickly to some arbitrary deadline, and we have 
approved a number of those extensions. 
 
As a matter of fact I just spoke with the rural administrators 
convention in Saskatoon today, and I spoke to other individuals 
after for about an hour or so, and there was general agreement 
that it’s been tough, but they’re getting there. And there really 
weren’t any complaints at all. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, valuations are 
dynamic, to use the minister’s word there; yes, they change 
over time. But I understand in the case of the city of Swift 
Current, they got four sets of valuations in 1997 in the first 
couple of months. And of the fourth set of evaluations, the city 
council of Swift Current threw up their hands and passed a 
motion demanding the resignations of the top heads. 
 
I mean that’s a little bit too dynamic, surely, to lead to the 
stability we need for this reassessment process. And I think that 
most municipal councils would say that we really need better 
valuations than that. And well, valuations can be expected to 
change over the years  four valuations in two months sounds 
a bit too dynamic for me and a bit too dynamic for the council 
of Swift Current. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in a year of such a 
magnitude of a correction, if you like, to a system that’s based  
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

on 1965, there are bound to be some anomalies; there are bound 
to be some mistakes made. And I have found that if a 
municipality has had a problem, that when they contact SAMA, 
that they’re expeditious attempting to deal with it. 
 
And it’s always like that; there is never a year, not even a 
so-called normal year, where the assessment is cast in stone in 
the month of January or February. There’s always buildings 
being added, buildings being renovated, buildings burning 
down, buildings being demolished and taken off the roll. 
 
So the roll may be a little more dynamic in 1997 than in a 
normal year, but it’s always a moving target. And 
municipalities know that, and they have the facility to adjust for 
it, and they’ve done it very well. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Madam Minister, the pitting of school boards 
against municipalities seems to go back to the fact that 
traditionally the property tax base supported approximately 40 
per cent of the education costs in this province. Now that 
average, of course, is up to 60 per cent. And it seems to me we 
have to get back to that 40 per cent. 
 
Does the minister have any good news, any hope to hold out 
there, that we can get back to a reasonable level of support for 
our school districts from the property tax level, or are we 
simply going to continue seeing the property tax shoulder a 
higher and higher and higher burden of education as those 
grants cut back? Are you in communication with Education to 
get back the proper balance between the municipal tax load with 
the school tax load? Has this been part of the reassessment 
discussions you have in cabinet with your colleagues? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer is yes, 
because when you come to the local tax effect, you have to take 
the assessment base and the foundation grant for education  
which is very sensitive to assessment  you have to take them 
in tandem to find the effect on the local taxpayer. 
 
And the Premier made a commitment at both the SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
conventions in his address to them that we recognized that 
perhaps it’s no longer appropriate to fund education with such a 
high proportion of local share and that the matter would be 
under review, and that as soon as a substantive reduction in the 
local share could be picked up by the treasury on an incremental 
basis, as soon as that could be financially sustainable, that we 
would try to move in that direction. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — One of the complaints that has been made by 
municipalities has been that when they are called to 
emergencies, the Jaws of Life or the fire department, that there 
is no payment unless they are actually used. 
 
So the problem has been flagged particularly by — say — one 
is the town of Moosomin, which of course is on the 
Trans-Canada Highway. When they are called out to an 
accident scene, there is no assistance granted to them if the 
Jaws of Life are not actually used or if the fire department is not 
actually used. And of course when there is an emergency call,  

we don’t know initially whether these facilities are going to be 
required or not. So you bring out the emergency vehicles, and 
well there isn’t a fire, so we don’t need the fire department; or 
the victims can be safely removed from the car without the use 
of the Jaws of Life. So we’re told that the municipality has to 
bear that cost with no assistance. 
 
What can the minister tell us, for those municipalities which 
find that they get no help at all for servicing, say, not just the 
people of Moosomin but obviously all users of the 
Trans-Canada Highway? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, responses for 
emergency service providers is not something that we fund. 
While we do recognize services provided by a municipality for 
revenue-sharing purposes, we are not prescriptive about what 
kind of equipment is available. And it would be a council’s own 
determination as to what level they wanted to equip their 
emergency service providers and how they would be 
reimbursed for that service. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, reassessment year is 
difficult partly because, as the minister has pointed out, this is 
the first time we’ve done it in over 30 years. But the other two 
factors which have made it very difficult is that we have had 
reassessment year the same year as 42 per cent cuts in revenue 
sharing and the difficulty in getting figures from a 
Saskatchewan assessment. 
 
Is there no way that the minister can’t make sure that these 
devastating cuts to municipalities can’t come at another time 
than when our municipalities are already having to cope with 
the tax shifts caused by reassessment? Why did these two have 
to come at the same moment in history, so that municipalities 
would have to deal with both together? And now I understand 
they’re going to have to deal with the issue of policing costs as 
well. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it is difficult for 
municipalities, but they were given . . . they voted themselves 
and chose the year of 1997 on September 29, 1995; so they 
knew for over a year that this would be the year of 
reassessment. They also knew from budget time in March of 
1996 that the revenue-sharing cuts would be there and that they 
would have to deal with them. 
 
But I do challenge the amount that you’re talking about, the 
cuts, because you have to . . . To be honest, you have to say that 
the revenue-sharing pool was reduced, but the province picked 
up all of the hospital, public health, and social assistance levies 
off the municipal tax base, or they were traded off out of the 
revenue-sharing pool — 5.1 was contributed back into the pool 
by the province and 12 million, approximately 12 million, was 
taken from the revenue-sharing pool. 
 
But the fact is that the municipalities no longer have to collect 
those levies and pass them through to the government to the 
extent of $17.6 million in the province, which created tax room 
where they can still, without raising their mill rate, they can 
now continue to collect that money and keep it for municipal 
purposes. So there . . . in actual fact, when you take that into  
  



1576  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

account, there are a number of municipalities that had increases 
in their . . . an enhancement of their situation over what it was 
before. 
 
And for those who did have reductions, we created a safety net 
so that no municipality, no matter what the configuration, lost 
more than 50 per cent. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Madam Minister, I’ll give you two specific 
examples. The RM (rural municipality) of Meota in my 
constituency gave the figure of cuts in grants from 53,000 down 
to 18,000. The city of North Battleford had a revenue-sharing 
cut of 47 per cent. Now are you saying there’s something 
offsetting to those municipalities, or are you confirming that 
those in fact are the cuts that those councils are having to deal 
with and the ratepayers of those councils are having to pick up? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I did make an error 
when I said that no municipality got reductions of more than 50 
per cent. That is the revenue sharing for urban municipalities. 
Rural municipalities are affected somewhat differently, 
depending on their level of road construction and the type of 
construction and maintenance activities that they employ. 
 
But if North Battleford, for instance, had a reduction of 47 per 
cent, then they did better than some urban municipalities which 
would have had reductions of 50. And I don’t know whether the 
47 per cent revenue cut . . . whether they add back in the levy 
room that they have. And if they do that, the effect of their cut 
would be considerably less than the percentage that you quote. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And what about . . . so I understand your 
answer to the city of North Battleford is you should be thankful 
it wasn’t worse. But what about the RM of Meota — the 
53,000, I believe, to 18,000? Is that again the case, that it could 
have been even more Draconian than it was? Is that the answer 
from Madam Minister? Or is there some offsetting benefit here 
to the RM of Meota I don’t know about? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, for the RM of Meota, 
it would show that their net reduction would amount to 42.9 per 
cent. And that would be calculating the tax room that they 
gained by the offset of the levies. And in North Battleford, 
North Battleford’s net reduction, taking into account the tax 
room they have by virtue of the change in the levies, is only 
21.7 per cent reduction, which is only half the percentage of 
what some urban municipalities received. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Madam Minister, the official opposition will 
have further questions later; however I understand that the third 
party has some questions this evening, so at this point I will 
thank your officials for their attendance, and thank Madam 
Minister for her answers. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And welcome, 
Madam Minister, and to your officials this evening. 
 
First question I have comes from page 100 on the Estimates  

book on the infrastructure assistance. It’s top of page 100, item 
no. 6. Now underneath that you have sub-programs. You have 
four programs there — this is page 100. And my question is, if 
you could expand a little bit what’s involved in each one of 
those four specific programs. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the operations would 
be administrative costs, and then the other costs are . . . there’s 
some residual left from the previous program that while the 
projects have all been approved, their money hasn’t all been 
expended yet. And then the municipal infrastructure works 
program, the 23 million, that is the new program just 
announced, where the deadline for applications is May 31. So 
none of that money would have been expended yet. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  On what basis is that money being 
distributed? Like who’s going to get it and on what basis? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, on the previous 
program, obviously those are all approved projects that are in 
progress or that have been completed and will likely be paid out 
very soon. 
 
On the new program, it’s difficult to say. I mean the criteria has 
been established but the deadline for applications is not until 
May 31, when we still have over two weeks left before we get 
there. 
 
So I wouldn’t be able to answer your question yet at this time 
because there would not have been the full approvals yet 
because all the applications aren’t in. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  If you have more applications than what you 
have finances — this usually happens — what’s the criteria for 
cutting back on applications? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, SUMA and SARM 
and the northern municipalities are involved in the approval 
process, and so they were also consulted in developing the 
criteria. It would be a joint determination of that committee at 
the time. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I’d like to move for a little while 
into spring run-off and floods. And every year in Saskatchewan, 
no matter what kind of year it is, we tend to have some run-offs 
and those run-offs do some damage. At what point is the 
damage that run-offs do categorized as being a flood situation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the criteria to 
access the provincial disaster assistance program for additional 
assistance to reconstruct roads and other municipal works above 
and beyond the normal construction allocation is . . . was 
previously a 3 mill deductible. 
 
And if there’s an occurrence in a municipality of either personal 
property or municipal property that’s over a certain threshold — 
it would be 5,000 to an individual or 25,000 to a municipality 
— that municipality is then eligible, or they can request the 
province to declare the municipality eligible, for disaster 
assistance. 
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

Then once the occurrence is over and the clean-up is done . . . it 
was a 3 mill deductible, and what we are saying now is that just 
because the assessment has changed the value of a mill, we 
have no intent to increase the deductible. We will, as soon as 
assessment is all in, we’ll reduce the 3 mill number to reflect 
the same amount of dollars of deductible that would have been 
in place previously and we’ll make those determinations and 
pay-outs after all the damage has been assessed. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  In the Manitoba situation, I believe 
home-owners get up to something like $100,000. There’s a 
maximum there. I believe we also have a deductible. What 
kinds of coverage would a home-owner get on their house in 
case there’s flood damage? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the provincial disaster 
assistance program is meant to cover uninsurable property. 
Most dwellings are not insured for a flood occurrence of that 
kind. It’s usually an exclusion in an insurance policy. So subject 
to the deductibles, the owner would be refunded. 
 
Now in the case of the magnitude of the occurrences in 
Manitoba, once the claims on the provincial disaster assistance 
program reach a million dollars, which in Manitoba’s case is 
not too hard to imagine, then the federal component of 
compensation also comes to bear. 
 
That’s what happened in Saskatchewan in 1995 where we had 
severe damage to municipal roads almost across the province. 
Fortunately, this year when we had some occurrences in the 
south-west and then, as you know, it was a real blessing that the 
weather cooled down and the rate of thaw reduced. So we’re not 
likely to see the same magnitude of damage. It’s a bit too early 
to say, but we may not have over a million dollars; so we may 
not have the federal compensation in the program this year, but 
in Manitoba they certainly would have. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I would still 
like to sort of pursue the home situation that we set up where 
you have that $100,000 damage done. What kind of 
compensation specifically would someone in Saskatchewan get 
if their home, which may not have been insured, is damaged, 
let’s say, to $120,000. In Manitoba they would get 100,000 out 
of it. What would someone in Saskatchewan get? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is an outline of the 
cost sharing in the program where municipalities incur the 
deductible based on their last confirmed tax assessment, and 
eligible amounts over that deductible are subject to an 
incremental formula from 50 to 90 per cent. 
 
And individuals incur the first 500 on basic claims plus 30 per 
cent on the eligible amount more than 500. And on small 
business claims, soil erosion claims, and so on, claimants incur 
the first thousand dollars damage plus 30 per cent on the 
eligible amount that’s more than 1,000. So it varies depending 
whether it’s municipal property, an individual or a business, and 
the type of damage. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Okay, still don’t quite have my answer but I 
think I heard you say that after the deductible kicks in there is  

something like 30 per cent that may come in to individuals, 
which would mean that someone that has $100,000 damage 
done to their home in Saskatchewan would get $30,000 of help, 
maybe. In Manitoba they would have got 100,000, and that’s 
quite a disparity. 
 
On the floods that we have had in Saskatchewan, how many 
individuals have applied for assistance so far this year and how 
many municipalities; because those are two separate categories 
I believe? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there would be four 
municipalities that have already applied and been designated as 
eligible. There would be four that have requested designation 
but we may not have quite enough information to know yet 
whether they will be eligible. But if they are, we would approve 
that. And it’s estimated that . . . and also we don’t . . . these are 
municipalities. We don’t have claims in yet from individuals 
and it’s estimated that the province could be expending from 
2.4 to $3 million. So on that basis, if that materializes, then 
there would be some element of federal assistance in this too 
which would come later. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  That 2.4 to $3 million then is the collective 
amount between what would go to municipalities and what 
would go to individual home-owners? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, these are based upon 
estimates of damage that municipalities have indicated that they 
think would have occurred within their jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  You mentioned that there’s four 
municipalities that have already been designated and okayed to 
get some assistance. Could you overlap that with the cuts that 
were made to municipalities and let us know what the cuts were 
to those four municipalities; so we kind of know what the total 
damages for the year is? Because they’re going to be suffering 
from two things happening to them this year. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the payments 
under the disaster assistance program are in no way related to 
the amount of revenue-sharing. If the damages are incurred, 
subject to the deductible, and they’re uninsured, then those 
damages will be compensated for. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m aware that 
one isn’t dependent on the other one, except for the 
municipalities — they’re going to have to pick up some of the 
cost of those damages that happened because of the floods. 
They may also have had other cut-backs. And my question is, 
what kind of percentage cut-backs, as far as grants are 
concerned, did those four municipalities get? Like did they 
happen to be lucky and be municipalities that got 3, 4 per cent 
cuts, or were they the ones that the previous person asking 
questions came up with, 47 per cent and those sorts of things 
like Meota was? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
will have to bear with me for a moment while I look up the 
revenue-sharing information for the respective municipalities. 
 
  



1578  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

Mr. Heppner:  I’d like to call quorum, please. 
 
(2130) 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Pringle): — I would ask the officials 
to leave, please, so we could count the members. Quorum has 
been called. And if the members could return to their proper 
seats, please. Could all the members please rise, and as your 
name is called, please be seated. 
 
Lautermilch Kowalsky Calvert 
Teichrob Trew Nilson 
Cline Serby Stanger 
Murray Kasperski Sonntag 
Langford Murrell McLane 
D’Autremont Heppner  
 
Clerk Assistant:  Mr. Chair, including yourself there are 18 
members present. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Pringle): — Hon. members, there 
being quorum, we’ll proceed. Call in the officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well maybe after all the excitement 
that the member opposite forgot the question he answered . . . 
asked me, but I just thought that I would render him the answer 
anyway. 
 
The four municipalities that he asked about in terms of their 
revenue sharing was RM 135, Lawtonia, and they had a net 19 
per cent reduction in revenue sharing. The RM of Rodgers, 133, 
had a reduction of 39 per cent. The city of Moose Jaw had a 
reduction of 16 per cent. And the RM of Swift Current actually 
had a net increase in their financial position of 13 per cent. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. We were 
spending some time discussing government involved in aid to 
emergencies, and if they could respond as quick to emergencies 
as they did to the little one that occurred here, I’m sure the 
people of the province would be duly impressed. 
 
The question on the 300,000 that is there for foreign disaster 
relief, how much money is set aside for provincial disaster 
relief? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I need some 
clarification on the number that the member is citing because 
we don’t have any number budgeted for the provincial disaster 
assistance program. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. So my question 
then is, why not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s just like you 
don’t budget for forest fires. I mean when you do a whole 
budget you try to allow a little room for contingencies, but there 
might not be any disasters. So why in the world would you 
identify a fund and have it sitting there and be unused when you 
could put the money to some other purpose? So we don’t 
budget for an amount and when occurrences happen we make 
adjustments to keep our commitments. 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister, but I’m sure we 
have flood damage every year, we have forest fires every year, 
and yet there’s $300,000 tucked aside for foreign disaster 
reliefs. Those may or may not either happen every year. So if 
it’s good for people outside of Canada, why isn’t it good for 
people inside Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure 
what the member opposite is referring to but it’s not in my 
budget. 
 
He may be referring to the amount that is committed for foreign 
aid and relief in the Intergovernmental Affairs budget, but that 
is different because that is based on commitments to 
organizations like the Mennonite Central Committee; and where 
in the case of disasters it might not be accurate to say that in all 
years there’s flood damage that reaches that threshold, or in all 
years there are forest fires that reaches certain threshold, these 
are variables and the member opposite will now that, having 
been a member of a council that you might have a certain 
amount budgeted for snow removal and you might not use a 
penny of it if it doesn’t snow all winter. 
 
And so these are just the kinds of things that municipalities 
adjust for as they happen but we don’t allocate money for any 
purpose where we don’t know that it will be committed to that 
use. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  This is truly amazing that we would have 
items that occur, that are considered disaster, occur in from one 
type to another type on a very regular basis and there’s no 
money set aside  and two members from across the House 
seem to intimate that when that happens we’ll let the 
Mennonites take care of it. 
 
Well I know they’ve got an excellent reputation for taking care 
of damages all around the world. But I didn’t think it was the 
responsibility of the government’s side of the House to sort of 
say, well the Mennonites will cover disaster in Saskatchewan. 
They do a great job without your help. 
 
But this still doesn’t answer the question why with all the 
various kinds of disasters that occur . . . And I guess to take 
your answer a little further, is there a year where no disasters 
have occurred in Saskatchewan such as no money spent on fire, 
and flood, and wind in any one year; that there has been a zero 
expenditure? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I can’t say whether 
there has been a zero expenditure in all of those categories in 
any one year. But for example, last year in the member’s own 
riding, there was — I think it was on July 4 — an incident of a 
plough wind and a series of tornadoes that swept through the 
countryside in the very intensified agricultural livestock 
operations in his own constituency. And the same thing 
happened there that was subject to the deductible. It was for 
uninsured items only, but between 3 and $400,000 was paid out 
to every eligible claimant, even though there had not been any 
provision made in the budget for it. There are contingencies to 
keep our commitments in those areas. 
 
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

But as I said, it wouldn’t be prudent to set aside a fund in a 
budget and have it not available for other use, not needed for a 
disaster contingency, and then at the end of the year, turn it 
back into the treasury. That’s not an efficient way for a 
government to budget, it’s not an efficient way for 
municipalities to budget, and they don’t do that. 
 
And I just want to make one mention on the plough wind 
incident, for example. The Mennonite disaster service, which 
had been active in the States in the Mississippi floods and so on, 
came to that area and did a very excellent job of assisting 
people in cleaning up and restoring their property. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. You’ve made 
my point exactly, because you couldn’t think of a single year 
that there hadn’t been disaster funds that needed to be paid out, 
and therefore if you cannot recall a single year where that 
occurrence has happened, then we should probably have some 
money set aside on a regular basis, as we do for foreign 
disasters. 
 
Changing gears here slightly, any plans for service districts 
amalgamation? I know the minister would probably like to see 
something happening there as a sort of moving on in education. 
What are your hopes and what are your plans? They may be 
different. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we have said again and 
again that in terms of amalgamations, that governance is not the 
issue; that having as many dollars go to the service level rather 
than to administration is an issue. 
 
So that’s why we have ceased to recognize administration costs 
as a cost for the purposes of revenue sharing. And we have 
budgeted again this year for a transition fund where it consists 
of a hundred thousand dollars, which is not a lot of money, but 
it will be available within some criteria to give some 
municipalities who want to look at their combined governance a 
bit of a financial boost. 
 
But again I say that inter-municipal cooperation in the delivery 
of services on a voluntary basis is much more important than 
the governance structure and where the boundaries are. The 
important thing is service and dollars finding their way to the 
service level, to the ratepayers of the province. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I want to move over a little bit to 
policing and RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
cut-backs because that affects municipalities and towns, 
especially in rural Saskatchewan, in a major sort of a way. 
There have been substantial cut-backs. The RCMP are cutting 
back 22 highway patrol positions. On top of that, what’s been 
happening, and I think my community is an example of this, 
where the highway patrol was taken out of the community, put 
into Saskatoon, and almost never gets out to that particular area. 
So my question generally is, how does this sort of thing affect 
safety? How much will it add to the fatalities across the 
province and the social cost? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, with respect, I think 
that these questions relating to the level of police service, R 

CMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) service in the province 
of Saskatchewan, would be more appropriately directed towards 
the Minister of Justice, as it’s his responsibility. 
 
And as you know, legislation has been introduced which will 
give you adequate opportunity in debate and in committee to 
raise those questions and get accurate answers. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  I move we report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
To my right is Ray Clayton, deputy minister of Energy and 
Mines. Dan McFadyen to his right is the assistant deputy 
minister of resource policy and economics. Donald Koop is 
right behind me, assistant deputy minister of finance and 
administration; Bruce Wilson — where’s Bruce? — Bruce is to 
my left, executive director of petroleum and natural gas; and 
George Patterson, to my right and just a little behind, is the 
executive director of exploration and geological services. 
 
(2145) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Minister. I neglected to tell 
committee members this department was last before the 
committee on April 14. 
 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to you this evening, and to your officials. 
 
To begin with, Mr. Minister, I’d like to invite you to tell us why 
the Department of Energy and Mines is indispensable to the 
well-being and prosperity of the mining industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think to begin I would want 
to say, Mr. Chair, that the Department of Energy and Mines has 
a long, long history in our province as an arm of our 
government. It has been responsible for delivering 
much-needed resource dollars by virtue of the regulation and 
licensing capacity that it is charged with enacting. 
 
It has been, I think as well, an arm of government that has been 
able to work with industry, the mining sector, the energy sector; 
and with communities, with farmers, with people in whose 
areas non-renewable resources and renewable resources are 
extracted. 
 
And so I guess in terms of the economic well-being of our 
province, Energy and Mines has played a very large role. 
 
They’re responsible as well for anticipating the future in terms 
of what we might be able to expect from those who work with  
  



1580  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

us in developing our resources. 
 
The number of jobs that are created directly and indirectly by 
the activity that happens is a result of the fact that we have been 
very fortunate in . . . we have a large number of resources in 
this province — oil, gas, potash, uranium, and others. 
 
And I think as well, they’ve been very much responsible for 
encouraging investment in Saskatchewan by people who look at 
resource extraction as their way of doing business and have 
been able to, I think, work certainly with me as the minister in 
terms of developing a good, very good working relationship 
with business. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can you 
give me some concrete examples where Energy and Mines has 
played a pivotal role in instigating and stimulating exploration, 
development and production, and processing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think one only has to look at the 
activity in our province with respect to the amount of oil and 
gas development that’s taken place, particularly I can speak, 
since 1991 — the growth in that industry, the activity in the 
heavy oil industry. 
 
When I look at the fact that we are about 35 per cent of world 
production with respect to potash, when I look at the new mines 
coming on stream in northern Saskatchewan in terms of 
uranium, I look at the incremental activity that has taken place 
with respect to base metal exploration in this province last year 
over this year — I think those are some very prime examples of 
the activities that the department has been responsible for, been 
very much part of. And I think all of us in Saskatchewan owe a 
debt to the people who work in that department. It’s a small 
department, has a very small budget, but it has a very large 
impact. 
 
And so those are the . . . I guess just off the top of my head, 
those would be the kind of activities that I think we as 
Saskatchewan people can be very proud of. Energy and Mines 
has certainly been a very large and integral part of making that 
kind of activity happen in our province. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I note that 
between 1992 and 1996, the cumulative increases in mining 
industry operating costs due to budget measures are 
conservatively — and I mean small “c” conservative — 
estimated at $140 million. So my question is, are you trying to 
tax the mining industry out of existence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, I think what we’re attempting 
to do is to ensure that we are extracting these resources. Many 
of them are non-renewable. And that we are attempting to do 
what the mining industry and what the oil and gas companies 
are doing. They’re trying to maximize the return on their 
investment for their shareholders. We are trying to return and 
maximize the investment that the people of Saskatchewan have 
on a resource that in some cases will never be here again. 
 
And as I speak of resources, they’re owned by the people of this 
province. We have a responsibility to maximize their  

return. It’s really no secret that we have got a one-time shot at 
many of these resources. So we have to ensure that those 
royalties and taxation revenues that come as a result of these 
activities are turned into roads and into highways and health 
care and education — all of the things that we use to maintain 
Saskatchewan as a great place to live. And so quite clearly, we 
have a responsibility on one hand as a government to ensure we 
maximize our return, as the mineral and oil and gas sector tend 
to do for their shareholders. 
 
What we have really done, I think, has been successful in 
attracting investment to this province which is quite evidenced 
in the blue book. As you go through the revenue numbers that 
will be generated, I think it says something about the fact that 
we have been able to build a balance and a bridge between 
industry and government, and we found something really that 
works very well. 
 
International markets will always come to play, but unless we 
have a good environment here at home, it’s not going to work. 
And I think the numbers are evidence that we have been able to 
make something work here. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, the value of 
Saskatchewan people owning Crown corporations, right from 
the years of Tommy Douglas, was to serve and enhance the 
quality of life for all residents no matter where and how they 
lived. If that is the case, what planning are you doing to extend 
natural gas services to northern Saskatchewan communities and 
other rural communities around the province that, as of yet, 
have not been favoured with the same subsidized rate as the 
areas of the province who have enjoyed this subsidy? 
 
La Ronge, as we all know, is a bustling community of 4,500 
people without the benefit of relatively inexpensive natural gas, 
and the impetus for and development with natural gas there is 
unlimited. So regarding La Ronge first, I would like to ask the 
minister when the government is going to hook La Ronge up 
with natural gas, considering the potential for growth there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I can speak to La Ronge and 
other communities that aren’t served by natural gas; it really has 
nothing to do with the Department of Energy and Mines, as 
that’s not part of their mandate. It’s not part of what they do. 
SaskEnergy is a Crown corporation, as you will know, that is 
charged with the transmission and distribution of natural gas. 
And that would probably be more appropriately reviewed under 
Crown Corporation estimates. And I would certainly be more 
than willing to answer those questions for you. 
 
I think the answer there though, will be similar to what I would 
give in any forum. Although we would like to see every 
community in Saskatchewan have the service of natural gas, 
which is an efficient and energy . . . you know, it’s a 
clean-burning fuel. And quite clearly we would like to see that 
service all over Saskatchewan, whether it be La Ronge or 
Uranium City or Creighton. But I think when you do those 
kinds of projects, you need to look at the cost effectiveness. 
You need to look at your return on your investment and whether 
or not you can get a return on your investment that equals what 
you’re investing to put the infrastructure in place. 
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1581 

So at that, I just say to the member, it would be much more 
appropriately asked in Crown Corporation estimates. With 
Energy and Mines, I can say to you though that we certainly 
work very closely with Energy and Mines . . . Department of 
Energy and Mines works closely with the Crown corporation, 
and we do what we can to assist and to facilitate when they ask 
us for information that’s pertinent to natural gas. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there has 
been a lot of discussion about SaskPower’s future generation 
needs with reports that we may be short on generating capacity 
in the not-too-distant future and could face a disaster should 
there be a power failure during a cold snap or should the power 
poles burn down or whatever. Can the minister provide some 
ironclad guarantees that Saskatchewan residents will not freeze 
to death or sweat to death because of lack of generating 
capacity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well again, you know, certainly it 
is energy related — your question — but it would be much 
more appropriately asked under Crown Corporations under 
SaskPower. But I can say to you that our commitment, and I 
think the commitment of all of us in this legislature, is to ensure 
that one of the things we achieved in this province many, many 
years ago was rural electrification. And I think that it’s 
something that we can all be proud of and certainly it’s 
something that we will strive as a government to ensure — that 
there is an adequate supply of electrical energy. 
 
I can say that although it’s not part of Energy and Mines’ 
purview and what this department deals with on a day-to-day 
basis, as a minister I understand quite clearly your concern. And 
I can give you all measure of assurance that we will ensure 
there will be an adequate and a secure supply of electricity 
around this province whether it be north, south, east, or west. 
 
One of the initiatives we’ve embarked on quite recently is the 
construction of the Condie-QE line, which you will be familiar 
with, which will not only be an energy efficient construction 
project — it will save 20 megawatts of line loss — it will 
certainly assist to ensure that in the west and in the north-west 
we will have an adequate supply of electricity up there. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I am asking you to 
bear with me with SaskEnergy and SaskPower questions if you 
would. I would really appreciate you answering some of these. 
 
Do you know when your government is expecting to build the 
next generating station possibly, if there’s going to be one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We have recently done a study in 
this province with respect to the options. It was tabled in this 
legislature — the Energy Options document — I think it was 
1995 if I’m right, March or April that we tabled it. And what it 
is is a study that outlined the different options that we have 
when we might require incremental electrical energy in the 
province. That study suggested to us that we did have a number 
of options; one of them was non-utility generation internal to 
the corporation. We have an opportunity or certainly the ability 
to expand some of our existing facilities. 
 

And the other component of that I guess, is what we’re 
attempting to do with energy conservation. The Department of 
Energy and Mines is working with our two major Crown 
corporations, our energy Crowns, SaskPower and SaskEnergy, 
and the Saskatchewan Research Council in terms of programs 
and programing for businesses and businesses’ buildings in the 
province. 
 
(2200) 
 
As you will know, energy conservation is certainly an option to 
rebuilding or retooling an existing plant or putting on a new 
plant. And so if we can work together with business to ensure 
energy conservation initiatives to reduce the amount of capacity 
that’s required for generation, that that will do, you know, some 
very positive things for us here in this province and for us as a 
global society. Greenhouse gas emissions are something that 
we’re all concerned with. And we are a major producer of 
coal-fired energy, and what we can do to reduce the amount of 
CO2 emissions by a reduction in consumption, I guess is for all 
of us a very positive thing. 
 
I want to say that the Department of Energy and Mines has been 
very instrumental in helping to coordinate SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy, and the Saskatchewan Research Council in putting 
together what I think will show to be a very effective program. I 
believe that industry and business, and communities — 
Battlefords, Prince Albert — are involved in energy efficiency 
programs. 
 
So I think that those are very positive signs that people in 
Saskatchewan are willing to work together. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, what are 
the current ratios of aboriginal versus non-aboriginal employees 
in the entry-level jobs in your department and in SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I was attempting to work from 
memory on SaskEnergy, and I don’t have the officials here to 
help me with that. I can say that SaskEnergy certainly has a 
very positive track record. I will get to you the numbers in 
terms of aboriginal employment within the department, and 
we’ll send that across to you. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. While you’re at it if, in 
addition to that, you could tell me what the ratios are in middle 
and upper management positions, or do you have that with you 
right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  That would be part of the same 
answer. We’ll send that across at the same time. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
government is trumpeting its regulatory reform program which 
will reduce regulations at the blinding speed of 2.5 per cent a 
year over the next 10 years. This of course is meaningless, 
inasmuch as in your zeal to regulate everyone and everything, 
your annual increase in regulatory production far exceeds 2.5 
per cent. However, assuming for a moment the government is 
indeed serious about a 2.5 per cent reduction, would you inform  
  



1582  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

us if your department is part of the process? And if so, what 
regulatory areas of your department are under scrutiny, and who 
are the potential candidates for reform? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I can say to the member from 
Humboldt that we have made significant change within the 
department. One of the areas that we have been very successful 
in thus far is with respect to the way natural gas reporting takes 
place. 
 
We are doing an overall review within the department, through 
the whole department, and our goal is to reduce the red tape and 
the burden that business faces in terms of doing business with 
this government. I might want to say to the member that one of 
the comments that I get that are very favourable in terms of 
doing business in Saskatchewan as opposed to other provinces, 
so many times there are comparisons with our neighbouring 
province, Alberta. 
 
And what I hear from the oil and gas sector on a regular basis, 
and I think almost every time I’m dealing with industry, they 
speak very positively about the fact that they have access to our 
officials at a senior level, that I guess the ability to do business 
with our department is very much constricted in terms of 
process. They don’t need to go through near the process here in 
Saskatchewan that they do in Alberta. 
 
And so I think that speaks something for what we have in place 
already, but that doesn’t mean that we aren’t improving. We are 
reviewing through our department from one end to the other to 
see where we could reduce the red tape and the paper flow. 
 
And part of that is we just don’t have the people to do it. It’s a 
small department. They have faced the same constraints that 
other departments within government have faced, and there 
isn’t the manpower to put to tasks that aren’t absolutely 
necessary. So what we’re attempting to do is eliminate areas of, 
I guess burden, paper burden, red tape, that aren’t absolutely 
necessary, but at the same time ensuring that we have the ability 
still to keep the records for people who want to do, I guess, 
exploration in the province, records for those who want to see 
what has been done in terms of exploration in the past, and just 
to allow quick and expedient access to a decision within the 
department. 
 
So we’re going through from one end to the other, and certainly 
we as a department are going to do our part. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a survey 
of the economic impact of mining in Saskatchewan showed that 
in 1994, besides paying $25.8 million in provincial corporate 
income tax, the mining sector paid $40 million under The 
Crown Minerals Act, $44 million under the Saskatchewan 
mineral taxation Act, 18.1 million in other provincial 
production royalties, and 15.9 million in other mineral taxes. 
 
That’s astounding. Can the minister explain the thinking and the 
rationale behind each of these tax and royalty measures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well okay, you know, the member 
cites a number of gross figures. And I guess those are all  

dependent on the amount of activity. If we have little activity in 
the province, we will have little revenue because that’s what 
most of the royalties and the taxation is based on. The taxation 
is based on profit, the royalties similarly. And if the activity 
isn’t there the money isn’t going to be there. As an overall 
figure, in this province we generate in the neighbourhood of 
three-quarters of a billion dollars a year from oil, gas, uranium, 
potash, and others. So I guess it’s fine to talk about a number 
but what you need to do is have a look at whether or not 
industry is doing activity in your jurisdiction, you know. And 
certainly if you’re competitive you’ll have investment. If you 
have investment you have jobs created and you have royalties 
and you have taxation. 
 
So in terms of a detailed explanation of each and every one of 
the numbers you know that you have questioned, we can give 
you a detailed analysis inasmuch as can be done of all of those 
different numbers, but I think it’s fair to say that the larger the 
number the more the activity. And the more revenue we can 
generate in this province the more jobs will be created and the 
more that we can put into programing around the province with 
respect to health care, education, social services, and other 
services that we as government deliver and would want to 
continue to deliver. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, do each of 
those taxes apply across the mining industry as a whole or are 
they targeted at specific mining activities, for instance, at 
uranium or potash or coal or oil or gas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well you know each specific sector 
will have a different royalty and taxation structure and those 
will be based on negotiations and discussions that happen with 
industry. There are, I don’t know how many tiers of royalties 
with respect to oil because there are a number of different types 
of oil and there are a number of different circumstances that 
will create a different rate of return and a different cost of doing 
business, and therefore the royalties will be negotiated to reflect 
what those costs are. 
 
Potash will have a number of different royalties and taxation 
regimes and structures, and they change over the years. So there 
isn’t just one shoe that fits all. It’s not one size fits all. It’s a 
matter of looking at what your, you know, what your ability to 
generate return for the people who invest in this particular 
initiative, looking at what we can do in terms of a reasonable 
return on the resource for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So they really do vary with every sector and it’s . . . they’re all 
fairly complex. So it’s not just a matter of one size fits all in oil 
or in natural gas or in potash or uranium. They are very 
complex regimes. 
 
Ms. Julé:  In terms of the level of mining taxes and royalties, 
where does Saskatchewan rank among the provinces across the 
country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I would think it’s fair to say 
with oil and natural gas we would rank as a . . . and what is 
being recognized as a fairly high tax province. 
 
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

I have had this discussion with oil and gas producers. We’ve 
done analysis of other jurisdictions. And so with respect to 
royalties and taxation, I would give that we are a fairly high tax 
jurisdiction. But I think it’s also fair to say if you look at the 
activity that’s been happening in Saskatchewan, the amount of 
oil wells that have been drilled, the increasing number of oil 
wells, the land sales and the fact that land sales have been ever 
growing, it would be fair to say that investors see this as a 
reasonable place to do business. Our land costs are cheaper than 
other jurisdictions. 
 
And so there are a number of things that have to be factored in. 
And I guess one of them would be the environment that we as a 
government have created and the working relationship that we 
have built with industry would suggest to me that although we 
are a high tax province . . . we recognize that. We’ve had a 
major debt load and we’ve had some circumstances here in 
Saskatchewan that we’ve had to deal with. And I think the 
industry recognizes that, and that’s been evidenced by the fact 
that they’re here. They’re doing business, and they’re very 
comfortable doing business with us here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 
suggest that the high tax rate for the oil and gas industries has 
had an impact on the competitiveness of the Saskatchewan 
mining industry. 
 
Mr. Minister, the corporation capital tax resource surcharge is 
unique to Saskatchewan in that it is the only province to levy a 
resource surcharge — a levy that has no relation to the 
company’s ability to pay it. This surtax results in significant 
production cost increases. Resource companies will, to the 
extent possible, sometimes at the cost of eroding their 
competitive position, pass the surtax on to their customers. In 
the case of coal, the coal companies pass the full resource 
surcharge cost on to SaskPower, which in turn passes on the 
additional cost by increasing electrical rates to Saskatchewan 
businesses and households. Can the minister tell us the total 
amount collected from the resource surcharge tax on corporate 
capital and specifically the annual surtax collected from coal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by my officials that this is 
an issue that is dealt with by the Department of Finance, and 
that would be best asked . . . The Minister of Finance will be 
before this House in the next few days, and that would be the 
appropriate place to ask that question. 
 
(2215) 
 
Ms. Julé:  According to the economic survey in 1994, the 
mining industry purchased $451 million worth of Saskatchewan 
goods and services and paid 415 million in various taxes, levies 
and royalties. And it employed 5,300 workers. Saskatchewan is 
one of the few, if not the only province, which does not exempt 
direct agents used in mining and mineral processing from sales 
tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of as yet the untapped vast potential in 
exploration and development, extraction and processing, has the 
government considered exempting direct agents in mining in 
order to stimulate growth in job creation? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think again that would be a 
question that would be best directed to the Department of 
Finance in that that is not a tax that we as a department levy. 
But I think it’s fair to say that we have a very good 
understanding of industry’s concerns in terms of different levels 
of taxation and different types of taxation. We deal with them 
on a regular basis so we hear what they have to say. 
 
I think one of the things that we have attempted to do is in 
Saskatchewan, with respect to our whole level of taxation in 
this budget, is to find an area of tax reduction that gives 
everyone a little bit. And I think with the reduction of the sales 
tax from 9 to 7 per cent everyone gets a little bit — farmers get 
a little bit, home-owners, small business, large business. So I 
think we found a bit of a balance. And based on that, with 
respect to this last budget, we’ve been able to be somewhat 
successful. But the specific question that you ask I think is one 
that the Minister of Finance would be more than willing to 
address when she does her estimates. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to suggest 
that actually maybe exempting direct agents in mining would 
certainly in the long run lead to lesser rates for the consumers 
out there. And I think it’s something government should think 
about. 
 
Every year the government estimates the various expenditure 
and revenue components of the General Revenue Fund. 
Revenues from non-renewable resources are a large part of the 
government’s revenues. So, Mr. Minister, what role does 
Energy and Mines play in the annual forecasting for 
non-renewable resources? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well we prepare the forecasts that 
go as part of putting the budget together. 
 
Ms. Julé:  On what factors other than prices and quantities 
are the forecasts based? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Those are the factors that would be 
put together in terms of forecasting revenue flow. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, non-renewable resource 
revenues were underestimated every year between 1992-93 and 
the 1996-97 fiscal years to the cumulative tune of $931 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to know if it’s a deliberate policy by Sask 
Energy and Mines to underestimate projected non-renewable 
resource revenues, or is this simply poor forecasting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Oh it’s certainly not poor 
forecasting. This is based on industry across this country and 
businesses across this country who do forecasting. And what we 
have done in the estimate that I’ve been involved in is taken the 
average. What we have been in Saskatchewan is very fortunate 
to get more than, I guess in some cases, our share of the 
exploration and the development activity and the extraction 
activity. 
 
So I think what it says is a couple of things — that this 
government doesn’t come before the people of Saskatchewan to  
  



1584  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

give them a snow job. When we tell them that we think we can 
balance the budget, we do that. We might, in some cases, be a 
little small “c” conservative in terms of our estimates. But it’s 
based on industry. It’s not based on an isolated, 
picked-out-of-the-air figure. But I think it’s fair to say that 
people of Saskatchewan would far sooner be surprised with a 
small nest egg after the end of the year, after industry has 
created thousands of incremental jobs, than to be forecasting 
and end up with a deficit that people aren’t ready for. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Minister. Mr. Minister, the Provincial 
Auditor has for several years recommended that the Estimates 
should present payments by Energy and Mines to the 
NewGrade upgrader as department expenditures. In 1991, 1992, 
and 1993 both the Standing Committee on Public Accounts and 
the Assembly concurred. Then on December 31, 1996 the 
committee reversed itself. I am curious about this reversal. 
 
But leaving that aside, Mr. Minister, why are you so reluctant to 
call a spade a spade and acknowledge the department’s royalty 
remissions to NewGrade for what they are, namely a grant paid 
by Energy and Mines to NewGrade and therefore an 
expenditure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I would want to say to the hon. 
member that this is an agreement that took place, I believe in 
the late 1980s. It was accounted for in the fashion that it is 
based on legal opinion from the Department of Justice in terms 
of the propriety of accounting for it in the fashion that it is. It’s 
true that Public Accounts is . . . had, I guess, a couple of 
different views on the appropriateness of accounting in this 
fashion. But I think it’s fair to say that we have remained as a 
department consistent. We have had opinion that would suggest 
this is the appropriate way to account for that particular issue 
that you describe. 
 
I think what the people of Saskatchewan want to know is that 
the methodology of reporting might not be as important as the 
fact that there is an open and an accountable reporting system. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like 
to welcome the minister and his officials here this evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to start off with the Surface Rights Board 
if we could, please. I wonder if you could tell us who the 
members of the board are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  That is a board that is appointed, 
Mr. Chairman, by, I believe the Department of Justice, and the 
members are selected by . . . I’m not sure what process they use, 
but it’s certainly separate and apart and arm’s length from my 
department. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does your 
department then deal with regulations of the Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well I guess I’ll have to direct these 
questions then to the Minister of Justice perhaps when his  

estimates come up because the Southeast Saskatchewan Surface 
Rights Association, dealing with oil leases, Energy and Mines, 
has a great deal . . . or some problems with the Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board. 
 
And some of them are fairly menial problems that I think could 
be resolved fairly easily — such as the board hearings all start 
at 9 o’clock in the morning so that means anybody coming in to 
do a presentation or have a hearing before the board has to drive 
in the night before and stay overnight. Because they’re always 
held in Regina rather than being held in some other place in the 
province, some locale much more centrally located to the actual 
problem for both the landowner and the oil company involved. 
 
They’re always dealt with in Regina here and they should be 
spread around the province, be it in the south-east or up at 
Lloydminster or Swift Current, wherever the actual 
circumstances are being dealt with. 
 
I don’t know if you want to comment on any of these, Mr. 
Minister, but there are a number of other problems such as the 
fact that perhaps mediation should be in place before it goes to 
a board hearing, that it be compulsory that there be some 
mediation — not that the result be accepted but that there is a 
sit-down and some attempt at mediation. I wonder if you’d care 
to comment on that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well certainly it’s a process that’s 
not under the purview of our department. I can say that the 
Department of Energy and Mines attempts to work with 
landowners and with industry to assure . . . or to help to 
facilitate disagreements and resolution to disagreements. 
 
Certainly they’re not always successful, but I want to say that in 
the time that I’ve spent responsible for this department, Energy 
and Mines has worked with landowners and oil companies. I 
think what everybody wants to see is harmony. 
 
There is some bad operators out there and no one will deny that. 
Certainly the practices of industry have improved in the last 
couple of decades and I think that that is a very positive sign. 
There are problems that exist and that will happen when you’re 
doing that amount of activity. And as the amount of activity 
with respect to oil and gas development in Saskatchewan 
increases, there will be more impact on landowners, and 
consequently there will be more disagreements. 
 
With respect to the meetings and timing and the place of 
meetings, I can say to you that the minister responsible for the 
arbitration board is in the House this evening. He’s, I’m sure, 
heard what you’ve said. But I will undertake to have a chat with 
him in terms of seeing if we can’t make it a little more 
accommodating for landowners in the next very short while. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I 
hope that the Minister of Justice was listening and that some of 
these changes can be made before the next millennium starts. 
 
Mr. Minister, we presented your department with global  
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

questions. Have those global questions been received? Do you 
have the answers for those global questions? And if you don’t 
have them with you tonight, when can we expect them, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  As I understand it, they’ve been 
prepared and they are in process and they should be to you 
shortly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. How 
many trips did you take this year, Mr. Minister? And where did 
you go to? And what benefits were accrued from those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I have a list of out-of-province trips 
and I can just send the list over if you’d like, rather than reading 
them into the record. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, that would be 
more than acceptable. I wonder if you could indicate what kind 
of successes you had on those trips, whether any contracts were 
signed and what benefit is Saskatchewan going to accrue from 
these benefits. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I guess I would say 
to the member opposite, he’s probably had an opportunity to 
look through my list of out-of-province trips. He will notice that 
the vast majority of these trips are to Calgary. It’s . . . 
 
(2230) 
 
An Hon. Member:  It’s an exotic place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, it’s a very exotic place in the 
winter. And it’s where we have to attend to do business. Many 
of the oil and gas companies that do business in Saskatchewan 
are headquartered there. Canadian Association of Petroleum 
Producers are headquartered there and the other organizations 
that we work with. 
 
I guess the one . . . if there was . . . well I don’t know if 
Yellowknife is an exotic trip, but we were in Yellowknife to 
attend the Mines ministers conference along with the other 
Mines ministers across Canada and the federal minister. 
 
And I can tell you that the other out-of-country trip, other than 
two to Toronto I guess, was to Hong Kong. That was to attend 
meetings with Canpotex, which is the marketing arm of our 
potash companies. We attended to an international symposium 
on fertilizer, had meetings with bureaucrats and politicians from 
the Department of Agriculture. We also met with the State 
Science and Technology Commission. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that if we look at the interaction 
between Saskatchewan and the People’s Republic of China, that 
the connections that we have been able to develop over the 
years here in Saskatchewan with that country really are very 
important. They are our largest off-shore market, are big users 
of Saskatchewan potash. We’re facing now competition with 
some other jurisdictions and certainly we want to keep our toe 
in the water. It’s an important market for us. It means thousands 
of jobs here in Saskatchewan, and so I found the trip was very  

well worthwhile. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I realize 
that the leadership debate for the national election was on TV 
tonight and in Toronto. I didn’t realize that because of that they 
had separated and that Toronto was an out-of-country trip. Now 
perhaps many of us would wish Toronto would separate but to 
my knowledge it hasn’t happened yet. 
 
The trip to Canpotex though, the trip to Hong Kong and Beijing 
for Canpotex, did your trip though actually make any 
difference? Was the trade with China on the verge of collapsing 
or was there any meaningful reason for going there to actually 
visit with them that had an impact, that made a change that is 
going to continue the relationship? Or was it just a nice warm 
and fuzzy trip, Mr. Minister, that says yes, we in Saskatchewan 
support the Potash Corporation and the sale of potash to China 
and we think you’re great guys and keep buying our potash — 
when they never had any intentions of not buying our potash, 
Mr. Minister. So was there actually any measurable value to 
this trip other than a warm and fuzzy meeting with the officials 
from China? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I can report to the member 
that I just met a week ago with Minister Chen, who is the 
Minister of Chemical Industries. He was one of the contacts that 
I made which I hope and I think was very instrumental in 
opening up a new market opportunity for us in China. 
 
My conversation with him, when he came back to have a 
reciprocal meeting here in Saskatchewan, was very positive. 
And he spoke, frankly, very highly of us as a province. He 
spoke highly of the people of Saskatchewan; in fact of Canada. 
We had a very positive exchange, and I believe that it was very 
well worthwhile and I think the avenues that we were able to 
open in our meetings with him will not only benefit us this year 
but I think in years to come. 
 
It’s very difficult to do business in an environment and in a 
climate that you’re not familiar with. The political climate in 
China certainly is much different than that of North America, 
the rest of North America, where we do a lot of our business as 
well. 
 
China is very important to us as a trading partner and I think 
anything that we can do to enhance and to ensure a good, 
positive relationship continues with them, as we have built as a 
province, is very much worthwhile. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Certainly 
the trade with China is extremely important to Saskatchewan, 
not only for potash but for wheat. After all it was Alvin 
Hamilton, the MP (Member of Parliament) from my home area, 
under the Progressive Conservative government of George 
Diefenbaker, that initiated the trade with China in wheat. 
 
And I think that has been a very worthwhile and ongoing 
relationship that we’ve had with China, expanding from . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, Mr. Hamilton did an excellent 
job. And that ongoing relationship has developed into this 
potash relationship that we have now; also with the exploration  
  



1586  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

for oil and gas in China with Canadian companies. 
 
So a long-term relationship with China is certainly worthwhile. 
I hope that the potentials that you speak of actually come to 
fruition, Mr. Minister. And I think it’s important that the public 
of Saskatchewan know that the $8,000 that you spent on the trip 
was worthwhile and of value to them. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we’ll be waiting to see what develops from 
that trip, whether or not any economic spin-offs actually do 
accrue from that. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I’d like to move on to Wascana Energy 
now. And it was pretty clear that the privatization of Saskoil, 
now Wascana Energy, has brought hundreds of jobs and 
millions of dollars to this province, and especially regarding the 
recent proposal of CanOxy to purchase Wascana Energy. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I was wondering if you can tell us what 
kind of provisions, if any, you are making to ensure that the 
head office of Wascana remains in Saskatchewan and what kind 
of positions will be in that head office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I can say to the member opposite 
that that is not a responsibility of this department; that is under 
the Crown Investments Corporation portfolio. And those 
questions would be better directed to that minister. 
 
I can say to you that we have been, as a government, on public 
record as indicating we would be enforcing the terms and the 
conditions of the legislation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. In 
question period you wanted to take responsibility for the entire 
government; now you don’t want to take any responsibility. 
 
Mr. Minister, perhaps this is one area in which you can answer 
the question; and if not, you should at least be interested in it. 
And that is, under the CanOxy take-over of Wascana, what 
effect is that going to have on the rural oilfield jobs around 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well in my discussions with both 
Wascana people and prior to the take-over, and Canadian 
Occidental officials, I can report to you that there is a great 
degree of interest in developing and working with this 
government to developing Saskatchewan’s heavy oil patch. I 
think it’s fair to say that there are some opportunities in terms 
of research and development. The technology that we use to 
abstract our heavy oil, I think will be very well served by 
CanOxy, as it was by Wascana. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. But 
CanOxy and Wascana are not involved just in the heavy oil; 
they were involved both in the south-east and in the south-west. 
And I have constituents . . . and I’ve had phone calls from the 
member from Estevan’s constituency regarding this issue, as to 
what’s going to happen to the jobs, particularly in the field 
offices, the administration offices they have in those areas. 
Under the proposal that was being put forward by Talisman, the 
fear was that the jobs, particularly in Estevan, were going to be  

lost. Is the same circumstance likely to happen now with 
CanOxy, or are those jobs in a more secure position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I would expect just by virtue of 
CanOxy’s operations prior to the take-over, there would be little 
impact. They had virtually no operations in that area. It’s 
basically a take-over of a new entity for them. And there 
wouldn’t be a lot of duplication. I would think had maybe 
another take-over bid been successful, that might have not been 
the case, where there was some existing infrastructure offices. 
But I think with CanOxy, Wascana, you’ll see very little 
because there really was no duplication. But certainly that will 
be a corporate decision that they will make. 
 
I can only say that we certainly encourage and urge maximizing 
job opportunities here in Saskatchewan. And from what I can 
tell, this will be a very favourable initiative for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m 
certainly hopeful that that is the case because in my area 
CanOxy did not have any administrative offices even though 
they had a few wells contract operated. 
 
I was wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could give us a 
breakdown of the oil production and incomes by the various 
types of oil such as light, medium, and heavy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I can for the 
member opposite, give him a more detailed breakdown if he’d 
like more than what I’m about to share with him. But the 
Lloydminster area — the total revenue — which is you will 
know is basically heavy crude, is about 97.9 million; 
Kindersley-Kerrobert, which is a mixture, about 68.4; Swift 
Current — 96.6; and the Weyburn-Estevan area, and you might 
be a little interested in this, and now this is a dandy — 279. So I 
think you can see that the area you represent is certainly a major 
component of that. 
 
But if you want any further breakdown for this we can do that. 
But it breaks down basically a third heavy, a third light, and a 
third medium. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. These will be 
the royalty revenues to the government, not the gross revenues 
produced by the oil patch, I’m assuming. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can give any indication as to what 
royalty rates are for each of the various oils — light, medium, 
and heavy. I’m not so much interested in whether they’re 
exploratory wells, step-out wells, or if they’re new oil versus 
old oil. Basically the rates for new oil. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I can use an exhibit I hope, Mr. 
Chairman. But . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Exhibits. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well these are graphs. I just snuck 
one in. I want to pass them over to the member opposite. Just as 
an example say, a 40-well-per-day with non-heavy third tier oil  
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

would be in the —oh, what — 20, I guess about $25. Or 25 per 
cent, sorry. But what I will do is I’ll send you these different 
graphs over. And it’s all public information but it might be 
interesting for you to have. 
 
And if there’s any other information that we can give you in 
this regard, we’d be more than willing to share that with you as 
well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s 
appreciated. Mr. Minister, if a member of the public wants to 
find out from Energy and Mines what the results of any drilling 
are, what’s the procedures for doing that? Is that information 
available? And how soon after a well is drilled is that 
information available? 
 
(2245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Basically, Mr. Chairman, I’m told 
that an exploratory well, the information is withheld for one 
year, but other than that, it’s 30 days. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, there’s been a lot of talk 
about the upgraders, both here in Regina and in Lloydminster 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and they’re doing excellent. Yes, 
they were good projects to start off with, and I think we have to 
credit the previous administration for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much oil is upgraded on a daily basis, and 
what is the enhanced value of that oil? What does it start off at? 
What does it end up at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, both of the 
upgraders will produce in the neighbourhood of 50 to 60,000 
barrels a day, and I guess the incremental value depends on the 
differential. If the differential is $4, it would be one figure; just 
multiply it through. And if they’re all working and none of 
them are down or if it’s $5, it’d be, you know, that much more. 
So that’s roughly the amount. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that’s 
all my questions for oil, but now I’ll move on to the mining 
sector. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much . . . there is a fund set up for the 
mining industry to pay into for the time that comes for 
abandonments. I’m wondering how much money would be in 
those funds at the present? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We have no such fund within the 
department. I think you might be referring to a fund within 
Environment and Resource Management. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Another time when the minister doesn’t 
take responsibility. 
 
Mr. Minister, high uranium and potash sales have boosted the 
province’s mining record in 1996 to revenues close to $2 
billion. How much of that money goes directly into the 
government coffers from these industries? So what’s the royalty 
on the potash and uranium sales? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, uranium would 
be in the neighbourhood of 55 million and somewhat just over a 
hundred million for potash. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  What sort of projections, Mr. Minister, 
do you have for 1997 for both of those industries, the potash 
and uranium? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Those are the figures I just gave 
you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you very much. Diamond 
exploration has increased from $4 million in ’95 to 6 million 
last year. What’s the prospects in the future for this industry? 
And what is your government doing in particular to encourage 
exploration for diamonds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, our main role 
would be to provide geological, technical information to the 
companies who are interested in exploring. It’s part of the 
records and the records that we keep. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I 
thought I was done with oil, but it turns out I’m not; I found 
some more questions. I didn’t have to look all that hard though. 
 
The royalty rates and operating costs for enhanced oil recovery, 
EOR projects, have been under a microscope in Saskatchewan 
as Saskatchewan looks for new ways to pump investment into 
this province. What have you done towards these projects? I’m 
thinking of things like the Midale project to pump CO2 (carbon 
dioxide) underground to enhance the recovery. And what’s 
happening in that area? What kind of royalty changes have you 
made to encourage those projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, there’s a generic 
EOR royalty structure, as you will know, in place in 
Saskatchewan. That has been in place for some time. I can say 
to you that there is quite a bit of excitement in this province 
with respect to enhanced oil and what’s been happening over 
the last number of years — a lot of activity in lots of different 
areas. And your area is certainly one that there has seen some 
development and some research done on different ways of 
enhancing recovery. And we certainly think that there’s some 
very positive signs down the road for us as a province because 
of the technology that’s been developed. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What other 
kinds though of enhanced recovery methods are we talking 
about? Water has been used for a long time; CO2 is just starting; 
fire flood out of Swift Current; in situ projects in the Fosterton 
field. What other types are we talking about here? What else is 
Saskatchewan looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I guess you . . . the only one 
you might have missed is steam and that is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  I never worked on that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The only one I don’t know. Maybe 
hot air isn’t a possibility; I’m not sure. But certainly, you know  
  



1588  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

steam injection, water flood, fire, and CO2 certainly look like 
and are showing very good potential. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The Minister 
of Finance took one small step this year in the reduction of the 
PST (provincial sales tax) to providing a more level 
playing-field and to aid in the investment in this province. But 
other areas of government are disincentives, such as the cost of 
power in this province with the cost of oil operations roughly 30 
per cent being electrical, Mr. Minister. And you as the . . . also 
the minister responsible for SaskPower, what are you doing in 
this area to try and reduce those costs to oil production to 
increase investment? 
 
When we look at our neighbouring jurisdictions — be that 
Alberta, Manitoba, or North Dakota — we seem to be 
somewhat out of step both in the costs of operating our oilfields 
and in the royalty structures in comparison to them — such that 
our investors are taking a serious look at going elsewhere rather 
than doing exploration and investment in this province. 
 
So what means and what measures is your department taking to 
try and encourage the investment to stay here, to encourage 
further investment to come here by reducing the costs, both 
through the operating costs and through the royalties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think, Mr. Chairman, it’s fair 
to say that the government overall has taken very seriously the 
investment with respect to oil and gas development in this 
province, and that is very much evidenced by the number of 
wells that have been drilled in Saskatchewan in the last few 
years and the fact that that number is growing. It’s evidenced by 
the fact that land sales have been increasing dramatically. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have been in 
conversation with the oil and gas sector over the past few 
months in terms of looking at the cost of doing business here in 
Saskatchewan, not only within the department but looking at 
what we might be able to do with respect to energy costs. As 
you say, SaskPower is a supplier of electrical energy for many 
of the oilfields. It’s gone through a major restructuring to 
reduce the costs of operation to make it a more efficient 
corporation. And I think that ultimately will result in lower 
power costs for the oil and gas sector. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. We 
talked about EORs here just a little bit ago, but there’s also the 
federal program of incentives to mainly the tar sands area, and 
that impacts very little in Saskatchewan, and yet we have other 
EOR projects that are happening. We’ve talked about the CO2 
at Midale, fire-flood, steam in the Lloydminster area. Are you 
approaching the federal government to provide some incentives 
for those other EOR projects besides those in the tar sands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
opposite, we have been working with the federal government 
over the last number of months. We recognized some, I guess 
unfairness between the heavy oil sands treatment in . . . the tar 
sands treatment in Alberta and our heavy oil here. We see, 
frankly, some similarities and some reasons that they should be 
treated equally. 

We have been able to achieve some small successes from the 
federal government, although not what we would have liked to 
have seen, but we have made some movement in that regard. 
And certainly we will continue to ensure that Saskatchewan is 
treated on a fair and equitable basis with other jurisdictions in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. The tar 
sand operations are obviously expensive but so are some of the 
other EOR projects and I think the incentive should be in place, 
at least on a percentage basis compared to the value of cost 
recoveries, in those areas. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Alliance Pipeline plans to build a 
3,600-kilometre pipeline from Fort St. John, Alberta to 
Chicago, and yet a number of — relatively few actually, 20 — 
landowners are attempting to hold up this particular project, 
which includes two of my constituents from the Alameda area. 
What is the status of the Alliance Pipeline? Is it going ahead? 
And what’s happening with those landowners that are trying to 
hold up the project? I understand that your department, your 
ministry at least, has dealt with the Condie line landowners that 
were somewhat hesitant about allowing that project to proceed. 
Will the same measures be used to allow the Alliance Pipeline 
to go ahead? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, that will be under 
the control of the NEB, the National Energy Board. It crosses 
provincial boundaries and so isn’t part of the jurisdiction of us; 
so that would certainly be a quarrel that might want to be taken 
up with the federal government. And I’m certain that wouldn’t 
offend you at this time if you were to start on that. But it’s a 
federal responsibility, it’s certainly not ours. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Yes, it’s those darn Liberals again that 
keep throwing monkey wrenches into everything. But, Mr. 
Minister, I’m coming to the end of my questions as you and 
your colleagues will both be pleased to know. But I do have one 
question left. Energy and Mines belongs to a web site on the 
Internet. What sorts of information are available on this site and 
has anybody visited it? 
 
(2300) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I’m glad you asked 
that question. We have about 3 to 400 visits a month, which 
really does say to me that that has been a very successful 
project. 
 
It deals with everything from the personnel within the 
department to the services the department offers to information 
about our geological formation and mineral deposits here in 
Saskatchewan. We’re certainly encouraged by the number of 
people who have visited the Internet, and I think that as 
Saskatchewan is a relatively unexplored area of North America, 
that kind of interest will hopefully turn into economic 
development opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
So it’s been very much a success and I want to thank you for 
that question. 
 
  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, if I could I would 
just like to thank the members opposite for their questions and I 
would like to thank my officials for their assistance tonight. 
And we may do this again next year. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  I would like to thank the minister and 
his officials for coming in tonight and now they can all go home 
and go to bed. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I too would like to 
thank the minister and his officials and I wish you a fine 
evening. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 46 — The 
Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:05 p.m. 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 12—The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1997 
  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1563 
  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1563 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1565 
 Bill No. 41 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1997 
  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1566 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1566 
 Bill No. 56 — The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 1997 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1567 
  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1567 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1570 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 71  The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard 
   Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1572 
 Bill No. 72  The Children’s Law Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur le droit de l’enfance 
   Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1572 
 Bill No. 73  The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances 

alimentaires 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1572 
 Bill No. 74  The Family Maintenance Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les prestations alimentaires familiales 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1572 
 Bill No. 75  The Matrimonial Property Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les biens matrimoniaux 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1572 
 Bill No. 12 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1997 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1572 
 Bill No. 41 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1997 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1572 
 Bill No. 56 — The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 1997 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1572 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Municipal Government  Vote 24 
  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1573 
  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1573 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1576 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Energy and Mines  Vote 23 
  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1579 
  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1579 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1584 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 46 — The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 ................................................................................................... 1589 
 
 


