





























































Hansard: June 03, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1569 
 June 3, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the 
communities of James Smith, Melfort, Gronlid, and Carrot 
River. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Star City, Melfort, Meskanaw, 
Kinistino, across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well to present a petition. The 
petition I’m presenting as well deals with the level of radiology 
service in the communities of Carrot River in the North Central 
Health District. 
 
And, Mr. speaker, the petition I’m presenting is signed by 
individuals from the communities of Melfort and Star City. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about funding to support regional 
radiology service in Melfort. 
 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Melfort of 
course, but also from Beatty, and Pathlow, and Porcupine Plain, 
and Kinistino. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 

today to read: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Melfort, from 
James Smith, from Leroy, and from Lake Lenore. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I as well have a petition to present 
to the Assembly this afternoon dealing with the issue of the 
level of service at the North Central Health District and the 
concerns the petitioners have with that service. 
 
The petitioners come from the Melfort, Kinistino area of the 
province and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today on behalf of people of Saskatchewan to present a 
petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to: 
 
(1) change the law to allow Saskatchewan citizens to erect 
a cross if they so choose where their loved one was killed; 
and 
 
(2) to establish safety guidelines to ensure that it is done 
properly. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Marquis, Keeler, Tuxford, Brownlee, Elbow, 
and Central Butte. And I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to: 
 
(1) change the law to allow Saskatchewan citizens to erect 
a cross if they so choose, where their loved one was killed; 
 
(2) establish safety guidelines to ensure that it is done 
properly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from Watrous, Regina, from Saskatoon, from Watrous, 
Kindersley, Young, and all throughout the land. And I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens. These ones are concerned about 
posting reminders along highways so that families in the future 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1998 

can avoid tragedies, which have occurred to others. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to: 
 
(1) change the law to allow Saskatchewan citizens to erect 
a cross if they so choose, where their loved one was killed; 
 
(2) establish safety guidelines to ensure that it is done 
properly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 

Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in bringing forward petitions. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to: 
 
(1) change the law to allow Saskatchewan citizens to erect 
a cross if they so choose, where their loved one was killed; 
 
(2) to establish safety guidelines to ensure that it is done 
properly. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed the petition are from 
Moose Jaw, Bengough, Assiniboia area. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to: 
 
(1) change the law to allow Saskatchewan citizens to erect 
a cross if they so choose, where their loved was killed; 
 
(2) establish safety guidelines to ensure that it is done in a 
proper manner. 
 

Your petitioners this afternoon come from Mankota, Lafleche, 
Ferland, Saskatoon, McCord, and Montreal. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also join my 
colleagues in presenting a petition on behalf of citizens who 
would like to have the locations remembered where loved ones 
might have been killed. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to change the law to allow 
Saskatchewan citizens to erect a cross if they so choose, 
where their loved one was killed and establish safety 
guidelines to ensure that it is properly done. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures are from the good citizens of Lang, 
Milestone, and McTaggart. I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I rise again on behalf of citizens who are seeking justice for 
men and women who have had their spouses killed in 
work-related accidents and the prayer is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan, whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatories today are from Saskatoon, Aberdeen, and 
Christopher Lake. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise on 
behalf of people petitioning with regards to Highway No. 1: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these folks today come from Morse, 
Saskatchewan, also from Ernfold and I see quite a few from 
Cabri and Hazlet as well, and I’m happy to present them on 
their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order a petition regarding the services 
in the North compared to the rest of Saskatchewan presented on 
June 2 has been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) is found to 
be irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed, 
and are hereby read and received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; to save the Plains Health Centre; to call an 
independent public inquiry into Channel Lake; to put a halt 
to all investments in foreign countries by Saskatchewan 
Crown corporations; to have the Workers’ Compensation 
Board reinstate pensions for disenfranchised widows; to 
relocate Highway 40 to alleviate congestion at the entrance 
to North Battleford; to reduce the high costs of power rates 
in the North; and to ensure the required level of service in 
radiology in the North Central Health District. 
 



June 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 64 ask the government the following questions: 
 

What is your government doing to defend the rights of gun 
owners in the ongoing battle against the federal 
government’s gun laws? What position is your government 
taking on the issues raised by Douglas Fisher in his article 
in the June 3 Ottawa Sun, wherein he expressed several 
misadventures, a copy of which is attached, Mr. Speaker. 
And what is your reply to these allegations? 
 

And this is to the Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. Members, today we are honoured to 
have a number of very special guests from Canada’s 
internationally famous police force, the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police, seated in the galleries of the Assembly. 
 
They’re here of course on the 125th anniversary of the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police). We want to recognize them 
in the legislative chambers today. 
 
In just a moment I’ll invite the Premier, then the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Leader of the Third Party to make a few 
brief remarks and following these remarks, there will be 
introductions of the senior RCMP officers and representatives 
who are seated in the galleries. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, and colleagues, it gives me great pleasure to 
welcome as you have done, sir, our very, very special guests 
who I might say look extremely distinguished and colourful and 
are the kinds of representatives and symbols of Canada that 
we’ve come to know and love. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we recognize the grand tradition and the 
great history of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police celebrating 
125 years of duty and devotion to this nation and to its citizens, 
and one could even say to this nation and to the world in their 
peacekeeping and other efforts. 
 
A few moments ago many of us had the opportunity to join His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor and Mrs. Wiebe, colleagues in 
the House, and visitors for the parade of the troops of the 
RCMP. For me this was a very profound event to review these 
men and women — outstanding men and women — whose 
devotion to duty and to country are an example for all 
Canadians everywhere. 
 
There we saw and met — and we will later today over the tea 
— with the RCMP veterans, most of whom are seated opposite 
me, with serving officers from around Saskatchewan, and with 
the young people who are learning how to maintain the tradition 
and to maintain the right, right here at the RCMP college. 
 
How well I remember that training session when I was Attorney 
General and visiting there on many occasions between ’71 and 
’82. And I want to say to all of my friends and colleagues in the 
House, if you think it’s an easy course, put it out of your mind; 

it’s very, very gruelling. 
 
All three groups are here in the gallery, sir, and will be more 
fully introduced as you’ve pointed out to the members in a few 
moments. But it’s just marvellous to have them with us here in 
this Legislative Assembly in this forum of democracy, because 
I believe that democracy is not only free speech and debate and 
elections but democracy is something else, it is respect for the 
rule of law — can’t have one without the other. 
 
And the Royal Canadian Mounted Police respect the rule of law 
and enforce it and maintain the right . . . maintain their motto to 
the very, very best of their capacity — in my judgement the best 
police force in the entire world. 
 
For me a 125-year anniversary is a special occasion; I think it is 
for anybody. If I may be permitted to reminisce briefly, I 
remember 25 years ago when I was a very, very much younger 
Attorney General, celebrating the 100th anniversary of the 
RCMP on the parade square. I was elected, as you can see, a 
boy Attorney General and a boy MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), Mr. Speaker. And what a grand, warm 
June afternoon that was. And the presentation of a beautiful 
black horse to Her Majesty the Queen which served as the 
Queen’s personal horse on all formal occasions for all these 
many, many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a great day. In another way we’re paying 
tribute to the RCMP by paying tribute to their forerunners, the 
North-West Mounted Police, for on the first floor of this great 
building we will see a series of paintings by Richard Lindemere 
depicting some of the events of the proud history of the force in 
Saskatchewan from the march-out of Fort Dufferin in Manitoba 
through the establishment of Fort Calgary in Alberta. 
 
Well that was back in the 1870s and the North-West Mounted 
Police and the RCMP have been an irreplaceable part of our 
common history in Canada and western Canada ever since. And 
the force deserves the credit for helping to create a society 
marked by civility and by dignity. 
 
A former president of the University of Toronto, Sir Robert 
Falconer, once wrote in his academic studies in his capacity as 
president of the U of T (University of Toronto) the following in 
describing the Canadian West. He said: 
 

The Canadian West never went through a riotous youth. 
From the first (he wrote), life has been held sacred, and 
respect for the law strictly enforced. 

 
And the reason he thought behind this was because we had the 
Mounties. 
 
In a strange way Sir Robert wasn’t alone, Mr. Speaker. He had 
an unlikely ally, the American frontier lawman Wyatt Earp, 
who is reported to have said: 
 

If I’d had a couple of those red-coated fellers behind me, 
maybe we’d have kept Tombstone clean for sure. 

 
Well he didn’t have those red-coated fellers behind him, and we 
did. And our country is the richer and the better for that. 
 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1998 

And so in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, let me say how proud all of 
us are, all of us in the province of Saskatchewan and indeed 
Canada, for the RCMP. Let me issue my warmest 
congratulations on this auspicious occasion. And let me thank 
the force and all of its members past, present, and future for 125 
years of service and for answering the call of duty to a grateful 
nation and a grateful world. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues in the official opposition, I 
am very pleased to join with the Premier in marking this very 
important anniversary. 
 
For 125 years the North West Mounted Police and the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police have been a constant presence in our 
landscape and in our history. Indeed, without the presence of 
this world-class police force, one doubts our country could have 
or would have been settled in such a peaceful and safe fashion. 
 
This achievement is all the more remarkable when you consider 
the size of the country, its geography, and of course its climate. 
And especially when you take into account that the original 
force consisted of just 300 officers. Settling the West was a 
daunting task and at the time it probably seemed to many an 
impossible goal. 
 
But here we sit today. And the RCMP can claim its share of 
credit for opening this country up for settlement. In a nation that 
by world standards is so very young, the RCMP is one of the 
few symbols and traditions we have that is truly . . . that is 
uniquely Canadian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for 125 years the RCMP has made achievements 
that are unmatched by any police force in the world. The RCMP 
is deservedly recognized around the world for the first-class 
organization it is. And in an age when it’s become too easy to 
criticize long-standing institutions in our country, the RCMP 
still commands the respect and the honour it so richly deserves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, I extend 
congratulations to all the men and women who make up the 
force today and to all those who have served with dignity and 
dedication since the RCMP was created on May 23, 1873. 
Much has changed in our country in the last 125 years, but one 
thing hasn’t and I don’t believe it ever will — that is the respect 
we all have for the RCMP today and for many years to come. 
Congratulations on this very special anniversary. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not only pleased 
but indeed honoured and very, very proud to have the 
opportunity today in this Assembly to honour a group that I 
hold very, very dear to my heart, the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police. 
 
As a serving member of the RCMP during my 25-year career, I 
certainly can appreciate the time and the effort that these 
members and all members of the force give and have given in 

ensuring the safety of our communities. It was an honour for me 
to serve in north-western Ontario and Manitoba — in places 
like Fort Frances, and Virden, Portage la Prairie, and Hodgson, 
and places that a lot of people haven’t even heard of. And there 
were those times, while I served on the force, I wished I hadn’t 
heard of them either. 
 
The Premier earlier talked about the ideals of the force, Mr. 
Speaker, and I would like to if I’m so bold . . . may be so bold 
as to say that some of those ideals I bring with me and to my 
continued service to the public of this great province. 
 
This year does mark an outstanding accomplishment of the 
RCMP — the 125th anniversary of the mounted police as 
Canada’s national police service — and they have come a long, 
long way. Initially in the West they provided services ranging 
from general law enforcement to establishing friendly relations 
with aboriginal peoples and easing hardships experienced by 
immigrants and settlers. 
 
The North-West Mounted Police were contracted to police 
Saskatchewan in 1905, the year of the birth of this great 
province. The force has experienced an awful lot of change 
from its beginnings and even from when I was a member. It 
now plays a multi-faceted role enforcing federal laws, providing 
contract policing to most provinces, many municipalities, 
towns, cities, and first nations communities. The RCMP has 
played a vital role in developing alternatives to traditional 
justice. The force has also expanded internationally, now 
participating in peace-keeping efforts and supplying 
world-leading expertise in areas like forensics and criminal 
intelligence to Canadian and international police. These are 
considerable accomplishments. 
 
The most important accomplishment I felt when I was within 
the force and the one I still feel is most important, is providing 
our people with safe communities. The RCMP provided me 
with many opportunities to get involved in the communities 
where I was serving; being able to build our communities 
through effective leadership, protection, and crime prevention 
are of the utmost importance to all of us and they continue to be 
today. I am confident that the RCMP will continue to provide 
safe homes and safe communities for all Canadians. 
 
The force has come a long way and each and every one of you 
can be very proud of your significant contributions and 
accomplishments without fear, favour, or affection. Today the 
force represents one of the foremost national symbols in Canada 
— the Mountie. All those who serve in the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police deserve that place of honour. 
 
So today, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of myself and my colleagues 
in the Liberal caucus, and I’m sure we’re joined by everyone 
that may be listening, that’s celebrating with us today, to 
congratulate the RCMP on their continued service to the 
communities and our country. I’m just bursting with pride, Mr. 
Speaker, to be able to have the opportunity and the distinct 
privilege to publicly express my appreciation and 
congratulation on behalf of all our citizens. 
 
The force is held in extremely high esteem and has earned a 
proud reputation — one that makes all Canadians very proud of 
our national police force. 



June 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

Congratulations and thank you once again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, we’ll now have introductions 
of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police who are here today. And 
to our guests, I’ll ask that you stand while you are being 
introduced and then remain standing for the applause that I 
know that you will receive. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am honoured to introduce the three senior officers of the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police in Saskatchewan. 
 
Deputy Commissioner Roy Berlinquette is the commanding 
officer of the north-west region of the RCMP. 
 
Five regions were established in 1997 across Canada to 
implement the new regionalized structure of the RCMP. 
Appropriately Saskatchewan and Regina were chosen for the 
headquarters of the north-west region which encompasses all 
three prairie provinces and the Northwest Territories. 
 
Deputy Commissioner Berlinquette assumed command of the 
north-west region in January 1998, the 125th anniversary year 
of the RCMP. 
 
I’d invite members to join me in welcoming him here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Assistant Commissioner Brian Watt 
is commanding officer of the “F” Division, which includes all 
of Saskatchewan. “F” Division is responsible for federal, 
provincial, and a large share of municipal policing in our 
province. 
 
I’d like members to join me in welcoming Assistant 
Commissioner Brian Watt. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Chief Superintendent Harper 
Boucher is commanding officer of the Depot Division, the 
national training academy of the RCMP in Regina. 
 
He assumed command at a ceremony last week on May 26. I’d 
invite members to join me in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, guests who are seated in your 
gallery. They are representatives of “F” Division, Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police. 
 
Commanded by Assistant Commissioner Brian Watt, “F” 
Division is effectively our provincial police force on contract to 
the province. It also provides police services to the great 
majority of municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all citizens of our province are grateful to the 

members of “F” Division for the high calibre of service they 
provide, helping to ensure the safety of our communities. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming the representatives of “F” Division here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to members of the Assembly, it is my pleasure to introduce staff 
and instructors of Depot Division seated in the east gallery, I 
believe. I’d invite them to stand. 
 
Depot Division is the oldest division in the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police, founded in Regina in 1885. Since then it has 
been the national training academy of the force and has 
symbolized the colourful history of the RCMP. The chapel at 
Depot Division is the oldest building in Regina. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, Depot Division, commanded by Chief 
Superintendent Harper Boucher, also exemplifies 
state-of-the-art instruction in modern policing. Not only do all 
RCMP cadets pass through the academy, but it attracts police 
officers from across Canada and around the world. This is why 
Regina and Saskatchewan are proud to be known as the home 
of the RCMP. 
 
And on a personal note, Mr. Speaker, I can add there was a 
fleeting moment when I thought of joining the RCMP until as a 
4-H member touring training division — specifically the 
swimming area. 
 
I thank you for joining us this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce representatives of the RCMP veterans seated in the 
west gallery. I’d ask them to stand. 
 
The veterans retain a close connection with the force after 
retirement, showing their personal pride in the national 
institution where they have served the Canadian people so well. 
They are responsible for the success of the RCMP Museum 
here in Regina. 
 
They play an active role in organizing events such as the 125th 
anniversary celebrations and the Musical Ride which we in 
Saskatchewan are privileged to have with us this month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was wonderful to see the troop of veterans at the 
parade earlier this afternoon. We are honoured by their presence 
in the Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. Members, three of the hon. members 
have school groups who are visiting here today to mark the 
125th anniversary, and I’ll invite them to introduce their school 
groups now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I have a school group; I have 
another small delegation I’d like to introduce. 



1574 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1998 

It gives me great pleasure to introduce 38 students from the 
Rosetown School. They are the grade 8 students and a number 
of them are seated in your gallery with teacher Richard 
Berezowski and some others are in the east gallery with teacher 
Mr. Cline. 
 
It is an honour for me to be here to host you today and I think 
it’s a very special time for you to be here to see this celebration. 
It’s one of those very special days in the House. 
 
And I want to commend the Rosetown students for their careful 
management of their two teachers and their three chaperons. 
When I last saw them, all the adults were behaving themselves 
well. Congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I also want to introduce Wendell Star who 
is the program coordinator for the White Calf cooperative 
education program. He’s in the east gallery. 
 
I’ve had the pleasure of working with one of the students from 
his program, Vanessa Jack, who is also with Wendell. And I 
want to pay tribute to Wendell and the people who’ve planned 
this program, and to Vanessa who’s been a real delight to have 
in my office. 
 
We’ve completed the program now for this year and I look 
forward to the further success of the program and the 
contribution it’s making to the development of young people 
and the development of our province. I ask members to join me 
in welcoming our guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Isn’t this one of those 
days where it’s just marvellous to feel surrounded and feel 
comfortable? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to invite to the Assembly today 
and introduce to you and to the rest of my colleagues and 
everyone in the Assembly, 20 students from White Calf 
Collegiate who are seated in the east gallery. And I’m very 
pleased that they are able to be here on this very special 
commemorative day. 
 
And I’d also like to welcome Wendel Starr as well for all the 
work that he’s done with the White Calf Collegiate programs, 
and congratulate you on that effort as well. 
 
Please help me welcome all these fine young people from 
White Calf Collegiate to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and to my colleagues in the legislature, it’s also my distinct 
pleasure to introduce today 62 grade 4 and 5 students from St. 
Joan of Arc School in the constituency of Regina Sherwood, 
which is just north of the depot and training academy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied today by their teachers Mrs. 
Riffel, and Mrs. Istace, and a chaperon, Mrs. Mercer. 

Again it’s my pleasure that they are here with us for this special 
day, and I would like to ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This morning several of my colleagues, government colleagues, 
had meetings with the Western Canadian Wheat Growers 
Association and I know that they are sitting in the gallery, in 
your gallery, this afternoon. 
 
I’d like to welcome, on behalf of the government, the Western 
Canadian Wheat Growers to the legislature. I’d ask them to 
stand. Particularly I want to welcome your president, Larry 
Maquire, president, from Elgin, Manitoba; Hubert Esquirol, 
past president, from Meota; Keith Lewis, director, from 
Wawota; and Len Rutledge, advisor from Carievale; and 
Shelley Jones, Saskatchewan policy manager. I know there’s 
some other people but I don’t have your names, but welcome to 
the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We in the official 
opposition would also like to welcome the representatives from 
the Western Canadian Wheat Growers. We had a very 
interesting and productive meeting with the representatives this 
morning, talking about a number of issues of interest to the 
agriculture community, finding ourselves very much in 
agreement on many of the issues that are facing the agriculture 
community. We would want to welcome all of the 
representatives from Saskatchewan and particularly the 
representative, Mr. Maquire, from out of the province of 
Saskatchewan to Saskatchewan. And we look forward to a good 
association with the western Canadian wheat growers in the 
future. 
 
And I join with all members in welcoming them to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I would just like to add my words of welcome on behalf of 
the Liberal caucus to the western wheat growers association 
officials here today, and we’re looking forward to meeting with 
them later on this afternoon. I just welcome them again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know in this job 
of all the ties we develop, it’s difficult to single out people in 
such a distinguished gallery. But as I mentioned, of all the ties 
we develop, family ties are very strong. And I don’t often have 
a chance to have family visits. So I would like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, an aunt 
and uncle through marriage to a wonderful man, Bob Hamilton, 
seated in the west gallery, Frank and Margie Weeks, and with 
them cousin Arlene. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 



June 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and to the 
members of the Assembly through you I have some guests in 
the east gallery that I would like to introduce to the Assembly 
and I’d ask them to stand as I introduce them. 
 
From the constituency of Arm River and the community of 
Marquis, we have Mrs. Gwen Dale with us today. As well her 
daughter is here from the city of Moose Jaw, granddaughter 
Joan Wright, granddaughter Rhonda Wright is with us as well, 
and from Estevan . . . Kelly Paradon is here from Estevan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these folks are here today to watch proceedings, to 
meet with us and talk about a couple of issues. They’re also 
hoping to be able to talk to the government on a couple of 
issues. And I ask the whole Assembly to welcome my guests 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I want to welcome a guest, a very special guest. It’s not too 
often that we have guests from Ile-a-la-Crosse in the Assembly. 
 
But in the east gallery we have a guest that is here with I 
believe the RCMP delegation, and I’d like to ask that we all 
welcome Mary Morin Burnouf. But I hope she doesn’t tell her 
husband I used her maiden name, because the size of her 
husband, I’m sure I’ll be sorry for saying that. But I do want to 
welcome her here today, and ask you all to join me in 
applauding her effort for being here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Luther Place in Outlook 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me a great deal of pleasure today to tell the Assembly 
about an innovative housing project in my constituency. Luther 
Place is a new seniors’ enriched housing facility which opened 
in Outlook in December. Luther Place was inspired by the 
desire of Bethlehem Lutheran Church to bring housing that 
would keep seniors in their community. 
 
The condominium style complex offers one and two bedroom 
suites in the popular life-lease arrangements. This means that 
the purchaser is entitled to a right to use the suite for life, with a 
guarantee buy-back provision. 
 
Luther Place provides a range of services including a health 
clinic, a chaplain, common dining room, recreation area, hair 
salon, elevator, underground parking, and most importantly it is 
within the community of Outlook. 
 
Senior citizens can now enjoy the fellowship of their 
neighbours, be close to their families, shop at home, and spend 
time in their community. Their needs for both housing and 
health care can now be better met in the rural community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time that we give back to the people that have 

created this province. Providing facilities so senior citizens can 
stay in their communities in rural Saskatchewan with their 
friends and family should be of utmost importance to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate them on their innovative, local 
partnership and offer best wishes to the new residents, and I 
look forward to visiting with them on Sunday for their official 
grand opening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Dividend for Pioneer Co-op Members 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A few weeks ago I 
stood in the House and related a story covered in the local news 
regarding Swift Current’s economic boom. Today I’m reporting 
that the economy in Swift Current is still going strong. 
 
June 1 Southwest Booster was inundated with terrific news for 
co-op members. Dividend days were announced to the Pioneer 
Co-op members. The board has approved a general repayment 
of equity equal to 35 per cent of the 1997 allocation: 5.1 per 
cent of food and drug purchases by members will be 
reimbursed; 8.5 per cent of service station and petroleum 
purchases will be back in the hands of the co-op members. In 
addition, 4.5 per cent of agro products; 2.5 per cent of family 
fashion; and 2 per cent of hardware, lumber, furniture, and 
plumbing purchases will be returned to the membership. 
 
All this means that $2.373 million will be paid out to 11,800 
members. That is well over two and one-quarter million dollars 
will be put back into the hands of the consumers in the Swift 
Current area; money that will not flee Saskatchewan and find its 
way into the hands of the money hawks in New York, Zürich, 
and London. This is good news for Swift Current and good 
news for south-west Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
125th Anniversary of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this, the 125th 
anniversary of the RCMP, I want to add my appreciation to the 
entire force. But more specifically I would like to thank and 
congratulate the RCMP in Wadena area for their hard work and 
dedication. 
 
Not long ago they allowed me to ride along with them so that I 
could experience firsthand an evening in the life of an RCMP 
officer. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that experience gave me a 
whole new perspective and appreciation for the huge workload, 
the huge amount of stress endured, and the huge capacity for 
caring our law enforcement officers have. 
 
Many of my colleagues can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I too 
have been stopped by our men and women in uniform and paid 
my dues in speeding tickets. It’s not only interesting but a very 
good learning experience to see a speeding ticket being given 
out from the other side. Throughout the shift it was clear that 
the officer’s primary goal is public safety and that is why they 
don’t take infractions such as speeding, lightly. 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1998 

As I rode along in the patrol car I had the opportunity to witness 
the strong support network between officers. At 3 o’clock in the 
morning officers from the neighbouring districts radioed each 
other to see how things were going. It must be a comforting 
feeling to know that at a moment’s notice you can call on your 
fellow officers and they’ll be there to watch your back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to close by expressing a special thank you 
to all Saskatchewan RCMP officers, including those in Wadena 
who provided me with the special opportunity to witness 
firsthand the hard work and dedication that goes into their 
respect for the law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nipawin Pike Festival 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is 
Tourism Awareness Week and I want to report that at the 
beginning of this week of great importance to my constituency, 
that I was unjustly misrepresented by the media. This happened 
on media day, Mr. Speaker, media day for the Nipawin Pike 
Festival, which is the day we tag the $5,000 great northern and 
runs from June 14 to October 2. Tobin and Codette Lakes by 
Nipawin provide some of the best pike and walleye fishing in 
the world. Consequently tourism is big business in Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
There are over 100 businesses associated with tourism not 
including restaurants and hotels. These employ over 500 
people. Over $15 million is spent annually on tourism in the 
Carrot River Valley. On Monday I noticed licence plates from 
Nebraska, Wisconsin, Montana, North and South Dakota, as 
well as Alberta and Manitoba. 
 
Along with the Pike Festival, this summer there is Walleye 
Classic, the Premier’s Walleye Cup, the Ladies Fish for 
Freedom Day, and the Vanity Cup — something for everyone. 
 
How was I misrepresented, you ask. I was reported that I only 
caught green stuff — weeds. But as soon as the camera shut off, 
Mr. Speaker, I caught a pike so big that when I brought it in the 
level of the lake actually dropped by two inches. And wouldn’t 
you know it, when there is good news where is the reporters? 
None to be seen. 
 
Actually the media continues to give excellent coverage of 
another great Saskatchewan tourism destination. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

McCallum Fiftieth Wedding Anniversary 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 31, 1948 
in Ile-a-la-Crosse, 50 years ago, Willie and Therese McCallum 
were married. And this past weekend they celebrated that 50th 
anniversary. 
 
In a brief history, they have two children: one son, Lawrence 
McCallum of La Ronge; and a daughter, Rosie McCallum of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. They also raised their grandchildren Julie 
Mispounas and Dion McCallum, and they have five 
grandchildren. 

Just a brief history of Willie. He worked in Cluff Lake as a 
security guard. He also done some work with the resources 
officers and was travelling and hunting for most of his life. And 
Therese worked in a sewing factory. They both are retired and 
living in Ile-a-la-Crosse. And they used to work the sugar beets 
fields in Alberta during the summer months. 
 
The family and friends and relatives all enjoyed the event. They 
had a good turnout. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So what that is, Mr. Speaker, is after 50 years Willie tells me he 
is still the boss. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Growth in Lloydminster 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Please allow me to 
read into the record a few objective and entirely non-partisan 
comments about the city of Lloydminster in my constituency. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, where are the children going? Well many of 
them are coming to Lloydminster. Our populations has been 
growing steadily since 1991, and it is expected to reach 22,000 
by the year 2001 — an increase of nearly 5,000 since 1996. 
 
This means, of course, that the demand for housing is 
increasing dramatically, and that means that our vacancy rate is 
at .05 per cent, the lowest in the province. New housing starts 
last year were almost three times that of the year before. 
 
With more people and an expanding economy comes increased 
optimism, and unemployment is below 4 per cent. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the cash registers are ringing in Lloyd. Last year retail 
sales were over 127.5 million. They are expected to project . . . 
to reach nearly 170 million by the year 2001. 
 
Hard-working people, Mr. Speaker; great location; valuable 
resources; and sound, sensible, frugal, innovative government 
policy, all have worked together to make our city, 
Lloydminster, the city of opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Deep South Personal Care Home 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to share 
with you and all members an example of how community-based 
health care is working in our province — in particular how it is 
working in the town of Pangman. Pangman is in the South 
Central Health District, and it’s also in my constituency. 
 
The members of the South Central District Board and the board 
of directors of the Deep South Personal Care Home in Pangman 
have established a unique partnership to provide necessary 
services to residents and seniors in Pangman, Ogema, and area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an example of a very successful health care 
facility conversion. First the communities of the area worked 
with the district board to renovate the health centre which 
included an addition of a new ambulance garage. Part of the 



June 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

renovation also involved a new addition attached to the health 
centre. 
 
So today in Pangman you have a district-run health centre with 
a newly attached ambulance garage; you have the Deep South 
Personal Care Home run by a non-profit community board 
working together in an integrated facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this facility is providing vital and caring service to 
the members of the communities in the area. It took a great deal 
of hard work and dedication by the South Central Board, the 
Deep South Personal Care Home Board, staff and volunteers to 
develop this example of what community-based health care 
should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the only facility of its kind in the province. I 
look forward to attending the official grand opening on June 9 
and I want to congratulate all members of the district, the 
community, the leadership, in putting this together to provide 
quality health care for our area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Voluntary Grain Marketing 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture or his designate. 
 
Mr. Minister, this morning our caucus met with the western 
Canadian wheat growers. As always it is a pleasure meeting 
with the most progressive farm group in all of western Canada; 
one that believes in voluntary grain marketing. 
 
Voluntary grain marketing, incidentally, is gaining support 
every day. A recent survey showed that over 60 per cent of the 
farmers in the Melville area supported dual market for wheat 
and 61 per cent believe farmers should be able to sell their grain 
outside of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
The amazing thing about this survey, Mr. Speaker, is it was 
conducted and published by the Liberal member for Melville. 
I’m glad to see that the Liberal member for Melville is coming 
onside, but I’m sure his boss, Ralph Goodale, won’t be too 
happy about that. 
 
Mr. Minister, even some of the provincial Liberals are now 
supporting voluntary grain marketing. When are you going to 
get with the program and start supporting a voluntary grain 
marketing system for the farmers of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Minister of Agriculture, I’d be pleased to undertake the reply to 
the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the position of the provincial government . . . By 
the way, I might add I extend my welcome to the members of 
the Canadian wheat growers association. The position of the 
provincial government has been that we favoured the notion of 
single desk marketing for a whole number of reasons — some 
historic. It’s done a very good job for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and Canada for that matter, over a long period of 

time, some on good, I think, sound, practical policy grounds. 
 
I don’t think the notion that the sellers of Canadian agricultural 
product from Sturgis, Saskatchewan ought to be competing 
against the sellers of agriculture products from Drumheller, 
Alberta when very often the buyers are single-agent, 
single-desk buyers. That really says that the sellers are 
competing against each other and the price is driven down. 
 
Having said all of that, we should work to improve the 
Canadian Wheat Board — make sure that it is more efficient, 
that it is more responsive, that the complaints and concerns of 
organizations like the association here and others, is taken into 
account. But on balance the job done has been a good one. We 
should continue to support it and strengthen it for the 21st 
century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, yesterday 
the Minister of Agriculture was encouraging farmers not to 
fertilize their crops. So why should it be any surprise if you 
people wouldn’t be in favour of something as progressive as 
farmers marketing their own crops. Mr. Premier, many farmers 
do want to market their own grain and they are simply asking 
for that opportunity. Sixty per cent of the farmers in the 
Melville area now favour dual marketing. 
 
I would hope their MLA would stand up today, represent those 
farmers, and say their party has reversed its position. And I 
would hope that for the farmers of Saskatchewan you would do 
the same, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you join us in calling for farmers to have the 
right to market their own grain. Will you support what farmers 
are asking for in this province in large numbers, a voluntarily 
grain marketing system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my answer to the 
question has to be similar to the answer that I gave to the first 
question. Undoubtedly some farmers are of the belief that they 
should be in a position to market their own grain. Although I 
think it must be also said, Mr. Speaker, that this should be 
carefully defined. 
 
If the notion is that you can market your grain to the Canadian 
Wheat Board when it is to your advantage, and not market to 
the Canadian Wheat Board and go outside the Wheat Board 
when it is to your advantage, that is dual marketing. And it can 
only weaken the Canadian Wheat Board, and weaken the very 
good job that has been carried out in the past by the agriculture 
marketing system, the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
I firmly hold the view that the majority of the people in western 
Canada still hold the view that the Canadian Wheat Board and 
many farmers in other parts of the world also favour this. 
Single-desk marketing is the best, most efficient way, albeit we 
can do much to improve it and to make it more effective. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1998 

Citizen Neighbourhood Patrols 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. 
Minister, Saskatchewan has the unfortunate distinction of 
holding down two of the top three spots in a list of high crime 
areas in this country. City of Saskatoon had the third highest 
rate of break and enter of any city in Canada in 1996, according 
to Statistics Canada. Not to be outdone, the city of Regina held 
down the number one spot on the list with the highest rate of 
home break-ins in the entire country. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is a disgrace. Every day in Saskatoon, 9 or 10 
families come home to find their house has been broken into by 
thieves. In Regina as many as 12 families suffer the same fate 
every day — every single day, Mr. Minister. 
 
And what is the NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
doing about it? Mr. Minister, what specific actions is your NDP 
government taking to curb the crime in our neighbourhoods? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this government is very 
concerned about making sure that our communities are safe. 
And if the member had been listening to the things that we’ve 
announced in our budget this spring, he would know that we are 
working very carefully with the various police forces in the 
province, including the RCMP, with the mayors and the 
communities, the rural municipalities, in addressing many of 
these problems. 
 
We know that there are issues that have to be dealt with that 
include policing issues, but we also know that it includes 
working right through the whole of our society. As was 
announced yesterday by the federal government, they are 
looking at crime prevention through social development. They 
are taking up a task which we in Saskatchewan have been 
working at many years. 
 
We’re proud of the things that we’re doing in this area, and we 
appreciate all of the work that we are doing with those people in 
the community to solve some of these very difficult problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Party today 
proposed the establishment of citizen neighbourhood patrols. 
These patrols could be organized within the community by local 
residents and they would act as an additional set of eyes and 
ears for the police. 
 
Mr. Minister, citizen neighbourhood patrols would work with 
the police by patrolling local streets and reporting suspicious 
activities via two-way radio or cellphone. The provincial 
government could contribute to the formation of citizen patrols 
with funding for those cellphones, signage, and brochures. 
 
Mr. Minister, this kind of community-based solution has been 
introduced in Manitoba with very promising results at a 
relatively low cost. Mr. Minister, will the NDP government 
support this important community-based initiative? Will you 
support the establishment of citizen neighbourhood patrols as 

the first step in making our communities safer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would want to say to 
the Hon. Leader of the Opposition with no apologies, this 
government’s record on making safe communities a priority is 
second to none. And the announcements the Minister of Justice 
has just said a moment ago and made earlier, I don’t need to 
repeat, but they are there. 
 
The idea of citizen community patrols, namely, stated another 
way that citizens should follow their obligation as citizens to 
report crime when they see suspicious activity, is nothing new. 
It has been an activity in a number of communities in Regina 
and in Saskatoon, even in Eastview in ridings that exist. 
 
There is a fine line, however, that has to be drawn between 
drawing in that kind of proper citizens’ activity, which we 
would support and laud, and getting them into the question of 
law enforcement. Because we know that the people who are 
competent to do law enforcement are those men and women 
who have been trained, disciplined, at spotting the difficulties 
and the facts surrounding a suspected crime and are capable of 
doing it. That’s the best way to protect the population. It’s a 
combination of working together to be of assistance to the 
police force. 
 
What the hon. member here is proposing is something, I think, 
entirely different and entirely one that has to be looked at very, 
very carefully. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, it must be a great 
source of embarrassment and shame for your government that 
two of the worst neighbourhoods in the whole country for home 
break-ins are Saskatoon Riversdale and Regina Elphinstone. It 
is a sad commentary that almost after eight years in 
government, the constituencies of both the Premier and the 
Deputy Premier continue to be two of the most unsafe 
neighbourhoods in our country. 
 
But then again, why would you care, Mr. Premier? After all, 
neither you nor the Deputy Premier actually live in your 
constituencies. 
 
Mr. Premier, half of those home break-ins are being committed 
by young offenders. We need tougher laws so the courts and the 
police can deal effectively with young offenders. 
 
Mr. Premier, when are you actually going to take some action to 
make our neighbourhood safer. Will you support the 
establishment of citizen neighbourhood patrols and tougher 
laws for young offenders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t live in Ituna or 
Sturgis or Preeceville or Canora, and I am just as concerned 
about law and order and safe communities there as I am in 
Riversdale or in any other part of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if I may say so with a slight amount of personal umbrage, 
after 11 years as Attorney General of the province of 



June 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

Saskatchewan, I don’t think I need any lessons from that 
collection of discredited Tories and discredited Liberals, who 
got together in the middle of the night, to tell me about law and 
order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I don’t need, I don’t need any former 
Tories telling me about law and order in this House — not one 
whatsoever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, what we need to do is to 
work on the basis of making sure that the necessary 
amendments to the Young Offenders Act are implemented. This 
government with the support of the Saskatchewan Party, 
so-called, and the Liberals, to their credit, all the members of 
the House, got together to urge those amendments be made to 
Ottawa. Those are before the Ottawa House of Commons now. 
The preventative implications are before the House of 
Commons now. 
 
Our measures of a million dollars have been announced. Our 
measures of more police and prosecutors, those have been 
announced. We stand four-square behind making safe 
communities, and that’s something more than those old, 
discredited Tories can say about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drinking and Driving 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question’s for the 
Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, Students Against Drinking and Driving are 
calling for tougher penalties against drunk drivers in light of a 
recent tragic accident that killed a young Regina woman. Mr. 
Minister, when the new laws were introduced last year I said 
they didn’t go far enough. One of the measures Students 
Against Drinking and Driving is proposing is adding a fine on 
top of the 24-hour license suspensions. This is already the law 
in Alberta, Newfoundland, and Manitoba, but not here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you considering such a measure? What other 
steps will you be taking to bring in tougher laws for drunk 
drivers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind the hon. 
member that the legislation that we have in Saskatchewan came 
from the report of an all-party committee that worked 
throughout the province to come forward with some proposals 
that would work, and we are very pleased that we have some of 
the, or if not the most strict and stringent laws in Canada. 
 
Now any time there are suggestions that will work to enhance 
that, we are willing to listen to that, and we meet with the 
various groups that are involved. But I would say that we spent 
a number of years actually working on bringing forward this 
legislation so that we could deal with this very difficult problem 
of drunk drivers. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Referral to the College of Physicians and Surgeons 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Health has indicated that the case of a Yorkton man 
who died because there were no critical care beds in Regina will 
be examined by the college of physicians and surgeons. As a 
general rule of thumb, the college only steps in after a patient or 
family member has registered a complaint about patient care. 
We contacted the victim’s father this morning who says no such 
complaint was made by the family. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, why — why has this matter 
been referred to the college of physicians and surgeons? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of days ago the 
member opposite raised in this House what I would consider a 
very, very serious allegation, where the member opposite said 
that an individual in this province has in fact lost their life and 
they’ve lost their life because the system has failed them — the 
system has failed them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite, I think it’s incumbent 
upon the ministry and the Department of Health to do an 
evaluation, assessment, of what happened in this case. And so I 
have engaged and asked the department to contact the two 
districts that were involved in dealing with this individual; have 
asked the professional community to do an examination of this 
process. 
 
And so today what we find is we have a full examination for 
disclosure for our department of what happened to this 
situation. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite that we need to receive the 
facts and we need to have a full understanding of what’s 
happened in this case. And that’s the rationale, Mr. Member, 
and Mr. Speaker, for why today we have engaged this process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as we all know the role of 
every physician is to be an advocate for each of his or her 
patients. In this case the physician’s treatment options in 
Yorkton were limited. He spoke with a Regina cardiologist on a 
number of occasions during a two-day period attempting to find 
a critical care bed for his patient. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you believe this is a care issue and not a bed 
issue, why didn’t it even warrant a letter from you last October 
when Dr. Javier brought this to your attention? Why did you not 
call the college of physicians and surgeons last October when 
you learned of this case? Why is it only now that you’re 
involving the college of physicians and surgeons? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the member, and to 
the House, when I received the letter from the doctor it clearly 
stated — and the letter was copied to me, as a copy to me, Mr. 



1580 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1998 

Speaker — and in that letter it’s clearly identified, or identified 
by the physician from Yorkton, that in fact he was advised by 
the facility in Regina that this was not classified as an 
emergency. 
 
And so on that basis I left it to the discretion of the district 
health boards to follow up on the work that they were doing. 
 
When the member brings the issue to the House, however, here 
. . . And I want to say to the member that this morning I 
received a telephone call from the family that you talk about 
and they say to me that they are extremely upset. And well they 
should be, because today they’re reliving an issue that they put 
behind them only because you’ve raised it publicly, politically. 
 
And they say to me that only this morning for the first time do 
they get a call from your caucus, which you just reinforced a 
couple of minutes ago. And I say that this is a very, very 
unfortunate situation that you’ve raised for the family, for the 
House, and for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a process, I say to you, Mr. Member, in where we can 
deal in dignity with the people of this province and you are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s right, it is a tragedy, 
and it is tragic that we have to bring situations to this 
government’s attention that are very real. And the real thing is 
we have a bed crisis, we have a shortage of beds, and that was a 
way that the doctors themselves are letting us know about 
what’s happening. 
 
It certainly appears now, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 
Health is looking for a scapegoat. The minister and his 
government are trying to make an example of Dr. Javier so 
other physicians will get the message — don’t speak out or else. 
We saw the same strong-arm tactics that this government used a 
few weeks ago when the NDP went after the chairperson of the 
Save the Plains Committee. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don’t you spend your time trying to address 
the real issue here — it’s a bed crisis — instead of conducting a 
witch-hunt. Why don’t you take the responsibility and admit 
this patient died because there were no critical care beds 
available at the Plains hospital, instead of trying to find a 
scapegoat? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I say one more time to 
the member that as long as I occupy this chair, I take the 
responsibilities of the people of Saskatchewan and the 
functioning of the Health department and the services that we 
received around the province very, very seriously. 
 
And when in this House, it’s raised publicly and politically that 
an individual has lost their life, I think it’s incumbent upon the 
ministry and the Department of Health to examine the process. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, that’s exactly what we’re 

doing today. We’re not laying any blame or any fault or making 
any accusation towards anyone, as you point out. We’re 
examining the process to get a full understanding and 
appreciation of what happened here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Commemorative Markers on Highways 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, on September 27, 1997, Kelly 
Paradon and Rhonda Wright and their two-and-a-half-year-old 
son, Cody, were driving just outside of Milestone on Highway 
39 when the vehicle they were in was hit head-on by a truck. 
The vehicle then rolled down an embankment and young Cody 
died at the scene of the accident. 
 
What the family would like to do is place a cross at the scene of 
the accident. They would like to place a small memorial at the 
site of such a tragic loss. 
 
Madam Minister, your government does not allow roadside 
crosses to be put in the place where a loss of life has occurred. 
It seems your department views this as a roadside nuisance. 
Madam Minister, do you agree with your department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to address this issue. First, I do understand and 
appreciate the desire of family members and friends to be able 
to grieve for a lost life that’s been tragically taken. Actually our 
department is reviewing the signing policy, both private signs, 
commemorative crosses and part of that, and during this review 
what we’re doing is looking at each on an individual basis, on 
an individual request. 
 
And my understanding is, and I’ve actually seen the crosses, 
that the cross has been placed in the ditch there and it’s been 
left in the ditch at this time. One of the things that we have to 
consider any time in these kinds of issues is to make sure 
whatever’s being placed is small enough, that it’s not another 
safety hazard for the motoring public. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s exactly our point. Let’s make it law. We have the 
regulations in place and everybody knows what size a sign has 
to be, where it has to be placed. 
 
The family of Cody is in the gallery today and they brought 
with them a number of petitions to give them support asking the 
government to reconsider this, and I’m glad to hear that you are. 
 
Just for your memory, memorials serve two purposes: one, they 
provide a memorial to family that has lost a loved one; and 
secondly, they serve as a reminder to all of us who travel these 
precarious roads that life is precious and speed kills. 
 
Madam Minister, the Liberals have prepared a private 
members’ Bill allowing the families to place a simple cross on 
the spot where a loved one was killed in a traffic accident. The 
crosses will not interfere with traffic nor will they be distracting 
to drivers. 
 
Madam Minister, will you support the opposition and allow the 
families an opportunity to provide a memorial to their loved 



June 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1581 

ones, and a reminder to us all, and support the placement of 
roadside crosses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we are currently 
reviewing the whole policy on private signs, on commemorative 
crosses. And so that we will certainly look at the information 
that they will be providing for us. And as I said, we are 
allowing, as people come forward, to evaluate each case. And if 
it looks as though there’s not a safety hazard in it, that we have 
proceeded with signs at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Development in South-west Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, my 
question today is to the Minister of Economic Development and 
has to do with the natural gas fields. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you will recall, the town of Burstall is on the 
west side of the province, just a stone’s throw from the Alberta 
border. And they are experiencing something of an economic 
boom just now. Unfortunately that economic boom is mostly 
happening in Alberta. I had a call from a contractor who 
informed me that upwards of $5 million is scheduled to be spent 
in that area over the next five years. 
 
They are planning to build three new gas plants. They are 
rebuilding the old plants. The new pipeline will extend to the 
United States. And all of this is going to happen just a couple of 
miles across the border in Alberta. 
 
My question to the minister is very simply this: Madam 
Minister, what are you doing to attract some of these structures 
into Saskatchewan so that we can enjoy having the tax base in 
our province and not just watch Alberta walk away with all the 
profits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
from the Maple Creek area, Cypress Hills area, will know that 
the south-west part of the province is booming as we have 
record number of wells drilled . . . last year record number of 
oil wells drilled in that area. And if you go to your home town 
of Maple Creek or Eastend or Shaunavon, you will find that 
housing is very, very difficult to get in large part because of the 
booming oil industry. 
 
While the price of oil has meant that there’s been some 
reduction in the number of wells drilled in the oil patch, 
obviously natural gas prices being up has meant that that area 
north of the Trans-Canada Highway in the Cypress Hills 
constituency will see extra activity as it would relate to gas 
drilling. 
 
I say to the member opposite that the Department of Economic 
Development, Energy and Mines, along with CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) are working with all 
of the companies to see what we can do to make sure that the 
maximum amount of economic development take place in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 

And finally I would say, with the many tax reductions including 
the 2 per cent tax reduction of the E&H (education and health) 
tax, reduction of income tax in this budget, we’re moving in the 
right direction. And with your support and cooperation I’m sure 
we can go even quicker at that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental to the same minister. Well, Mr. Minister, I’m very 
happy that we have an economic boom in our area and all of the 
residents are as well. Unfortunately these gas plants are all 
being located in Alberta and that’s where a big part of the tax 
base is going to come from. It’s unfortunate that for some 
reason we keep on losing that. 
 
But we are happy with what we are getting, Mr. Minister, and 
of course that is the housing and the need for housing. Upwards 
of 250 to 500 more workers are expected in the Burstall area in 
the next few months. We also of course already have reports 
from the town that 125 persons have already booked into 
Burstall and you couldn’t rent a closet any more. 
 
I guess what I’m asking you now is, what is the government 
going to do to assist these small towns in the area, like Leader 
and Richmound and Burstall, to put in water facilities and sewer 
facilities and that kind of infrastructure to be able to keep those 
workers in Saskatchewan rather than have them locate in a 
camp across the border in Alberta, which is the next alternative 
that they’re now considering. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite what difference a question makes. You’re now saying 
that there are so many people coming into that area that we have 
need to improve our funding for municipal infrastructure. 
 
And I say to you at a very serious way that these are the kinds 
of problems we like to have as compared to previous 
administration when we saw record numbers of young people 
leaving the province. This cycle has changed very much since 
the era of the Devine administration. We now have many rural 
communities, whether it’s Humboldt, or your friend, Mayor 
Clary, in Leader, or the mayor in Meadow Lake who are talking 
to us about ways and means of helping them with 
infrastructures. 
 
I’m not saying we have all the solutions. Obviously we don’t. 
But with the comparison, Mr. Speaker, of the out-migration of 
record numbers during the 1980s, the opportunities we now 
have of building communities is a very pleasant challenge for 
all of us and I appreciate you bringing this to our attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 752 — The Highway Fatality Marker Act 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of Bill No. 752, The Highway Fatality Marker Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 



1582 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1998 

(1445) 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
MOTIONS 

 
House Recess 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That we recess for tea and return to orders of the day after 
the tea at the time designated by the Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — The House will now stand recessed for a 
Speaker’s tea in honour of the 125th anniversary of the RCMP. 
I’ll ask that the Sergeant-at-Arms will have the bells ring at 
3:25 and that the House will resume with government orders at 
3:30. This House now stands recessed. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It’s my privilege to introduce my 
staff from SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) who are 
with us today, Mr. Chairman. Seated to my right, Larry Fogg, 
president of SGI who members opposite will know. Seated in 
the back is Bob Lundy, he’s the assistant vice-president of 
claims; and behind me and to my right, Anna Lapierre, the 
manager, underwriting services. And directly behind me 
Elizabeth Flynn, legal assistant. And we are looking for an 
opportunity to answer questions that members of the opposition 
might have. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, Mr. 
Minister, to your officials. I just have a few questions to ask 
today about this Act. 
 
I think that we all realize that there’s been trouble in the city 
with youth well under the age of 16 stealing and vandalizing 
vehicles. I guess I have a problem believing that this is really 
going to put any stop to this problem. And I’m wondering if 
you . . . how you feel this is going to actually help in the crime 
prevention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite that 
while she may be right that this will not act as a deterrent to 
young people who are involved in theft of cars, but our view is 
that in Manitoba where this has been done, some of the reports 
. . . This is from a May 25 article, 1998, which says: “driving 
suspensions biggest deterrent for auto theft MPI says in wake of 
charges”. 

It seems in areas where they have introduced this kind of an 
amendment there is a psychology that occurs with young 
people. Because as you will know — having young people in 
your family who wait with great anticipation for getting their 
driver’s licence, and having two 13 year olds in our house and 
realizing already at 13 years of age one of the big highlights in 
the future that they look forward to is turning 16 and getting 
their driver’s licence. There’s a psychology about anything that 
might take away the opportunity to drive or a driver’s licence. 
 
The thought is, and the recommendation from our officials is, 
that this is something we should try to see whether or not there 
isn’t the same kind of deterrent that has occurred in other areas. 
We believe it will help. Obviously it’s not a panacea for ending 
car thefts. That’s not what we’re saying. But we think anything 
we can do to make our property and homes and communities 
safer, if this is part of that full-meal deal that we’re looking at, 
then we should take an opportunity to try it. 
 
And I know that the member isn’t arguing here that we not 
make this amendment. He’s questioning how it will work. I 
think we should all wait, see, and judge it once we have 
implemented it for some months and years. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and you are right. 
It’s not going to hurt anything but the question is, is it going to 
help anything? Of course my children are considerably older. I 
can hardly remember the days when they were worried about 
getting their driver’s licence. And perhaps the kids right now 
that are thinking about this aren’t the types of kids that are 
going to be worried about . . . thinking about stealing a vehicle 
anyway. 
 
But in terms of paying restitution to SGI, do you foresee a time 
limit for such restitution orders? Presumably you won’t be 
withholding their driver’s licence forever. So can you tell me 
what time frame you’re looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — That’s an interesting question but in 
fact we have the option of holding the licence indefinitely until 
restitution is made. So this is I think a powerful tool that the 
people who enforce this Act will have in making sure that 
restitution takes place. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Will SGI be going after the parents of children 
if the children don’t pay the restitution . . . don’t pay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No. At this time parents aren’t 
included in the formula. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is there anything in this legislation regarding 
paying restitution to people for the cost of their deductibles? Or 
is it really only going to benefit SGI? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes. It could potentially include the 
deductible if SGI has a claim as well that the opportunity — 
when there is a position put by SGI that restitution should be 
made — the deductible could be included in that as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Just to clarify, does it mean that only if SGI is 
involved; it won’t help anybody if SGI isn’t involved in it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If only the deductible is at stake 



June 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

then there isn’t an opportunity because the Act affects SGI. And 
so if you think about it for a moment there’s great logic to this. 
If SGI can’t be the entry point, then there isn’t an entry point on 
the deductible only. So SGI would have to be involved in the 
restitution process. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s all the 
questions I have. Thank you to your officials. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — With us today, Mr. Chairman, I 
have John Malcolm, v.p. (vice-president) of regulatory affairs 
and corporate counsel in our corporation; as well as Wendell 
Anderson. Wendell’s seated to my left, he’s manager of 
treasury. Seated behind me, Ted Boyle, who’s one of our 
officials at CIC (Crown Investments Corporation). 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, 
Mr. Minister, to your officials. And while you have your 
officials here, I would like to ask a question that . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would ask to have leave to move 
to the SaskTel Bill, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The SaskTel Pension 
Implementation Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a couple 
of questions and welcome to your officials, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’m wondering how the changes introduced in this Bill will 
affect the former employees under the defined benefit plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — My officials tell me that it will not 
affect former employees. 
 
Ms. Draude: — How will these changes affect the amount 
contributed by taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to make it clear that 
these funds that are being put in don’t come out of the tax or 
General Revenue Fund of course, they come out of the Crown 
corporation, SaskTel. And so therefore to save tax dollars, 
money, I would compare it to a pension plan in AT&T or a 
pension plan in Bell. But the contributions will be in fact fully 
funded so the principle of how the pension plan will work, it 
will be in fact fully funded through our contribution along with 
the employees. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Then can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what the 
total cost will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — This is much to do with 
administration, not to do with cost. There’s no additional 
change in the cost of the plan. It’s simply a matter of 
administration of bringing it in to the system. 
 
(1545) 
 
Ms. Draude: — With the new pension plan will it allow more 
funds, more money for retiring SaskTel employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, at the present time no. There 
will be no change, but it does give the flexibility within the plan 
to make the modifications as the fund increases, decreases, 
changes. It gives more flexibility to the plan but at the present 
time no change in the amount that will be paid out. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Do you foresee that similar changes will be 
made to other plans within the Crown corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well no I can’t say that today 
because it was part of a long system of negotiation requests by 
the employees, and something that ended up being part of a 
signed agreement, a negotiated agreement. So for me to say that 
somehow the other unions will negotiate or that there will be 
successful negotiation I can’t say that. But what I can say is that 
this is an arrangement whereby the employees and management 
came to an arrangement on the pension plan that I think works 
in both of our interests. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank you to 
your officials. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I move report the 
Bill without amendment, and also if I could, thank my officials 
for being here today. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — To my left, I’ve already introduced 
Ted Boyle, and I take the opportunity to introduce Catherine 
Wall, with SaskPower, and Catherine you’ll have to tell me 
what your official title is . . . legal counsel for SaskPower. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the 
opportunity to ask a question with respect to SaskPower. It may 
or may not be directly related to what this specific Bill is before 
us, however it may have some implications as it applies to some 
of the facilities that SaskPower services. 
 
I raised an issue sometime ago — and because you have your 
legal counsel here that perhaps I would like to have it on the 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1998 

record and hear it directly — where an individual business pays 
for power that’s supplied to their business and the outside 
facility, the outside line or power pole or whatever has a 
breakdown or is damaged in one way shape or form. 
 
And it’s not — not — the fault of the person who is buying that 
power, but it’s a breakdown in the equipment whether it’s 
accidental or otherwise. Why does that individual not have any 
recourse for any indemnification for equipment that is 
ultimately harmed by this power failure, power surge that 
occurs under any circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I say to 
the member opposite that we are responsible for the happening 
or the situation from the meter into the household or into the 
business. And on some occasions where there could be the issue 
of negligence outside of that — say you’ve got the meter here 
and your business here — we’re responsible in this area, could 
be responsible out here if there was an issue of negligence 
somewhere along the line that caused the surge. 
 
Let me use the example of the case that happened recently in 
Elphinstone. The initial comment from the Power Corporation 
was that because the problem happened outside of the meter to 
the residence, that the power company wasn’t responsible. And 
then in checking they found that actually an insulator that 
should have been removed when the pole was changed, was 
actually left hanging on the power line unsuspended, bouncing 
up and down which caused a break in the line that then caused 
the surge. 
 
It was decided in that case, because of the issue of negligence, 
that the leaving of that insulator caused the break. We then took 
responsibility for the surge in. Now this is common standard in 
the industry across Canada, as I understand the responsibility of 
power companies. That if there is an issue of negligence on the 
power company’s front outside of the meter to the home or the 
meter to the business, the power company will pay damage. If 
there is no negligence, then damage is not paid. 
 
And I say again, that we have a great deal of obvious concern 
about surges that occur. We do here, I’m sure they do in 
Manitoba and Alberta. We do what we can to mitigate that. 
 
We encourage homeowners and businesses to put in place 
equipment that will avoid those kind of surges. Because if you 
look at your computers nowadays, many of them have this kind 
of equipment and people buy that as an insurance against these 
surges occurring, because there’s no way, with electrical 
lightning strikes and this kind of thing, that you know when this 
might happen. 
 
But we urge our consumers to protect themselves as best they 
can by becoming involved in equipment that might protect 
against those kind of surges. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I guess what you’re saying then, equipment 
failure then is not a responsibility of a company. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I say again that if it’s an issue 
of negligence where someone could say we knew the power 
pole was going to fall down and there was a problem with it, it 
was leaning, or some problem that was identifiable where it 

could be said that negligence was involved, then there would be 
an argument that payment should be made. 
 
But let’s say a tremendous storm comes through an area, 
Quebec for example in the ice storm; or in this case in our 
province, a lightning storm; an act of God in some way came 
and created the problem, in those cases there is no responsibility 
to the power company. 
 
Now obviously then at the end of the day you would say, well 
what happens in the case of a huge disaster where a hurricane or 
a tornado would come through and wreck a whole lot of 
equipment? Obviously then, through the General Revenue Fund 
at the federal and provincial level or the municipal level, you 
would have the option of saying yes, we’re going to move in 
and we’re going to take responsibility for that. 
 
But under the Acts that regulate power companies, this clause 
— defining cause — in terms of paying out settlements as it 
would relate to surges is a very standard clause my officials tell 
me. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, just a couple . . . just to clarify 
again. We really want to clear this up because it’s kind of 
distressing to an individual that appears to suddenly be left to 
hang out to dry. Where through no fault of his or her own — 
whether it’s a woodpecker or a bird or somebody that cuts 
through the wire, or the wire gradually, as a result of the 
weather, being weather beaten, wears out and causes a spark 
and causes such a spike or a surge — and somebody gets their 
equipment fried to the tune of lots of money and they have no 
comeback and no help. Now where do people go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — In areas where they have 
competition, for example in Alberta where you’d have two or 
three different companies, you can change companies, but I 
would argue the policy’s the same in all of them. 
 
And so therefore what the public do in those circumstances in 
Alberta where there is competition — and will in 
Saskatchewan, competition eventually will come — what they 
do is buy insurance by getting surge restrictors and equipment 
that will protect their . . . And this is left up to the individual 
because some people will worry about it because they have 
technical equipment that’s very valuable and they want to 
protect it. And the responsibility then rests with the individual 
business owner or individual household in order to make that 
decision whether to invest in this kind of protective equipment. 
 
I think what’s important for the Power Corporation is to explain 
to the public in advance, in the promotions that they do, as to 
the need for this kind of protection so it doesn’t come as a 
shock, as I think it did in my constituency in Elphinstone, when 
a block had this kind of a surge. Equipment was hurt and the 
public thought they were protected and in fact weren’t because 
the surge occurred outside of the meter to the house. 
 
Now in the end there was a settlement because negligence was 
established that the conductor was left hanging on the wire. Had 
that conductor not been left and a wind storm had knocked the 
line down, those residents would have found out that, I think, 
that they weren’t able to collect. 
 



June 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

And part of our issue is that we have to do a better job, I think, 
of explaining what responsibility our power company has in 
terms of these kinds of surges. Because, I think, the element of 
surprise and shock is really what you’re talking about, sir, and 
what we should try to avoid by talking to people if they’re 
buying expensive equipment. If they have hog barns and these 
kinds of things, we should be telling them clearly when we do 
the hook-up of what is our responsibility as a power company 
and what is their responsibility as an individual business person 
or an individual householder. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. Since that occurrence in your 
constituency, has there been a promotion to inform and advise 
people? Or is it just a matter of, well, I hope people have 
learned from this unfortunate incident and that everybody else 
now knows what they have to do because we won’t protect 
them unless there is some negligence. And the negligence . . . 
well, however, you discovered that there was negligence. But it 
still happened and people were subsequently compensated. 
 
So has there been any advertising done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, we’re doing a bit of a 
promotion now, and with your comments, we’ll look at doing 
even a better job of that. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, and I don’t want to belabour this. 
And it’s fortunate for those people that it was found that there 
was negligence, so now we’re going to inform a lot of people. 
But it’s unfortunate for those people that were not properly 
informed previously, that faithfully paid their bills with a high 
cost of power for their businesses, and this happened as a result 
of something they had no control over whatsoever. 
 
And now they’re told, well it’s too bad, you know we’re not 
responsible. It had something to do with bad equipment and 
equipment’s not our problem; it’s your problem, and you should 
have protected yourself some other way for something that 
we’re supplying you, for power we’re supplying you. 
 
It just bothers me that someone is now out of pocket and there 
isn’t anything going to be done for that individual. And there 
was some serious dollars. And it just does not seem quite right 
to me that that person should be out because of, through no fault 
of his own, he suffered this loss. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I think you’ve done an 
excellent job of making your point. And one thing we’re finding 
as we move from a monopoly, where we don’t have to do a lot 
of communication I think because your customers are there, that 
when we get into a competitive market-place communication 
becomes much more important. 
 
So I think you’ve made your point in a very able manner and 
we’ll certainly take it into consideration. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank you to your 
officials. 
 
(1600) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chair, I would move we report 
Bill No. 55 without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chair, seated to my left, Ted 
Boyle, who I introduced earlier; and to my left, Myron 
Gulka-Teichko, legal counsel for CIC. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
welcome Minister and officials. Minister, I know that one of the 
huge issues that is circulated around the Crowns, going back to 
the task committee and a lot of those issues, the whole issue of 
appointments on board of directors and who should be there. 
 
Minister, this Act goes part of the way at least in terms of 
saying that the requirement of cabinet or CIC to appoint 
ministers on individual Crowns is removed, is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — What it says is that legally you do 
not have to have ministers as Chair of the boards. It does not 
say that you have to have them off, but it would be our intention 
to remove ministers. But it gives a flexibility under the Act to 
be able to manage your Crown corporation boards without 
ministers on the boards. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So it is solely enabling and is not 
necessarily a commitment on the government’s part. Minister, I 
think in some of our conversations in the past — I gathered the 
clear impression from yourself — is that it was your intent as 
the Minister responsible for CIC, I think your words were, “to 
depoliticize” the appointment process on the Crowns. Did I 
understand your comments and commitment correctly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — We believe that the perception that 
the public may have — and this was during the 1996 review 
that my colleague from Rosetown so ably conducted across the 
province — indicated that there was a wish to have less political 
involvement on the boards of our Crowns. Our response to that 
was, in June of 1997, to announce that we would be moving this 
amendment that would give the flexibility to government to 
remove ministers from Crowns. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I recognize that you’ve now created the 
flexibility to do it, what I’m asking from you is that . . . your 
commitment to indeed do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes it is our intention. Various 
members of our cabinet have spoken to this issue, including the 
Premier, that we intend to remove officially ministers from the 
boards of directors of Crowns. And in a balanced way though, 
keep ministers on the umbrella holding company, CIC. 
 
And so this is an attempt to strike balance between the needs of 
having influence in the direction which we believe because we 
are the people elected to run the Crowns, but not in a day-to-day 



1586 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1998 

operation or local decision making within the Crowns. 
 
So it’s tried to achieve the balance of direction in a general way 
within our Crowns which we believe we have the responsibility 
for. But on a day-to-day operation of buying computers, or 
looking at who’s staffing and sitting at which desk, I feel quite 
honestly no responsibility for that once you get below the level 
of CEO (chief executive officer) of each of the corporations. So 
it’s an attempt to remove any perception or reality that there 
may be political influence within our Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, we could 
speak probably at great length on accountability and 
responsibility and how those different, various lines flow. 
 
From what you’re telling me, you are clearly saying that CIC, 
as the umbrella body if you like, representing the ownership of 
the Crowns still clearly intends to exercise its responsibility and 
you as the Chair would be ultimately responsible for the 
operation of the Crowns. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Ultimately we are trying to move 
towards industry standards. For example, there are many large 
corporations, billion-dollar corporations that will have a holding 
company that will have responsibility for setting direction for 
the subsidiary corporations. And in reality, the holding 
company has responsibility overall for the corporate structure of 
the companies that fall under their mandate. But it’s a very 
narrow function. 
 
It’s very narrow in the sense that you will set direction. The 
other corporations will appear before you to give direction, 
design, the vision for the future, but when it comes to the 
day-to-day operation — general operation — of the corporation, 
the holding company does not have responsibility for that, 
except to monitor and make decisions on a regular basis as to 
whether the direction, the performance, the profit margin, the 
rates are set in a proper manner. 
 
So I would expect when the shareholder meetings are held, 
which we intend to start doing in the near future within our 
Crowns, there will be still the responsibility of the minister who 
needs to explain some small portion. But the vast majority of 
explaining and working with the public, if the corporation is 
running right — and I say this whether it’s a public or private 
corporation — should come from the managers and the officials 
from within that particular corporation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. In trying to separate 
the lines of authority and responsibility and I clearly hear you 
saying you’re . . . CIC and the ministers are not going to be 
involved with minute types of decisions. 
 
The board of directors of each of the Crowns that you’re 
envisaging will they be responsible for more serious — solely 
responsible I should ask — for, for example, the appointment of 
the chief executive officer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Under the scenario we’re working 
under now — and of course this is our mandate as the 
government in charge of the corporations — would be that our 
responsibility would end at the level of CEO (chief executive 
officer). 

So if someone says what about the individual who sits in the 
vice-president’s chair at Power. I would say with legitimacy 
that under the management scheme that we have, that is the 
responsibility of the CEO and the board of directors of 
SaskPower; that would not be the responsibility of cabinet or of 
a cabinet minister. 
 
When it came to the performance of the CEO, that’s my job to 
explain and give them bonuses on the occasions that they do the 
very good job that they generally do. On those rare occasions 
where you have to deal with a CEO that may not be living up to 
the performance expectations, that would remain the 
responsibility of . . . to use that as the example. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So clearly then, you’re going to retain as a 
function of cabinet — as you said the majority of members of 
the CIC board are going to be cabinet members — you’re still 
going to retain within that body the appointment of the CEOs of 
the individual Crowns, that’s correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, we will retain that authority 
and the appointment of the board of directors. And some will 
argue that government that is elected should give that authority 
of the appointment of boards or CEOs to somebody else. But 
quite honestly I believe fundamentally in our democracy, and 
this is true at the federal level as well as any provinces I’ve 
checked into, that the appointment of boards of directors is done 
at the cabinet level, and the check and balance on that of course 
is the election every four years. 
 
Now there may be a more perfect system and obviously there 
are many changes that have to go on because this process never 
ends. But at the present time our responsibility is the 
appointment and the final sign-off on CEOs, the appointments 
of boards of directors. 
 
However, in approving the appointment of boards of directors 
we are making sure they have proper training. We have 
contracted the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon now 
where board member appointments and those people appointed 
go and take training as to what are the fiduciary responsibility 
of a board member. And this is a huge improvement. Also 
picking people with industry-specific backgrounds as much as 
possible to make sure, and strengthen the boards of directors of 
our Crowns. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Minister, I mean for all the rhetoric 
about how you’re depoliticizing the Crowns, you’re still going 
to retain within the authority of cabinet the ability to appoint all 
the CEOs, so you haven’t depoliticized that in any way at all. 
You’re going to still be able to appoint all the boards of 
directors. And you may or may not, at your discretion, decide to 
indeed appoint cabinet ministers as boards of directors. You 
have now at least gone a little small step in saying they at least 
have to get some training in terms of exercising their fiduciary 
responsibility. 
 
But really you’re still having all of the real authority vested 
within cabinet. What you’ve done is almost a similar move to 
what you’ve done with the health boards. You just sort of 
remove yourself; the illusion or the impression of backing off a 
bit so that when the trouble hits then you can sort of say, oh 
well, not me, not me, it must be someone else. 



June 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

And, Minister, I don’t think that that’s at all recognizing the 
needs of what the task committee had found out in their 
deliberations about depoliticizing the Crowns. I’m sure you 
would agree that there must be a better way of coming up with a 
system that gives not only the impression of a move towards 
depoliticizing it but takes concrete steps in order to do that. And 
I wonder if you’ve considered any other options? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite that 
this is exactly the debate that has gone on across the province, 
and to a large extent right here in the Assembly and in the 
committee that you serve on, the Crown Corporations 
Committee. And I think it’s interesting that this is really all 
about balance. 
 
And the member for the Battlefords would argue that we should 
leave ministers on the board of directors. That member of the 
opposition from the Liberal Party if he were here today . . . I 
know he would because he has made that statement publicly. 
You . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order, order. Now the minister 
will know that you cannot refer to whether someone is in the 
chambers or not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say that the member from 
Battlefords has taken the position that ministers should be on 
the board. And you, in a very legitimate way . . . and I believe it 
to be legitimate because that point of view is held by a number 
of people in our political party as well — that the Liberals say 
we should keep them on. 
 
Some of our party members, some of our party members say 
that they should be removed, some say they should. We should 
go as far as you are saying that we should take even bigger 
steps to remove ourselves. And I know what you’re leading to 
— you would like us to get right out of the business. And if 
you’re being honest today, you would say, yes, you should get 
right out of the business, you should sell them. 
 
And that’s legitimate. The argument of privatization is a 
legitimate, economic argument. I don’t deny that one bit; I just 
don’t happen to agree with it. And your party policy clearly 
states in your policy that if you were elected, the first thing you 
would do is privatize SaskTel. And I appreciate the honesty of 
that statement. It’s a legitimate argument — many areas have 
gone to that. 
 
The Liberal opposition has not stated their position on 
privatization nearly as clearly, but on the other hand, in Ottawa, 
they keep very clear control over Crown corporations like 
AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) that do investments 
around the world; and they’re proud of them. And so this is a 
very fascinating debate that goes on about where governments, 
through their Crown corporations, should position themselves 
in their economy. 
 
(1615) 
 
What I’m saying today is that we are moving to take the 
politics, if there was politics on the board of directors of our 
specific Crowns, by removing ministers. And you’re telling me 
that we’re not going far enough, and I understand that to be the 

case that that’s your position. But I don’t think I can satisfy 
your position because I know your position is to privatize the 
Crowns. 
 
And so I think we understand; we agree on many things. But on 
the issue of Crowns, I don’t think that the members on this side 
of the treasury benches can satisfy your needs, because in your 
own policy book, your needs are to privatize the Crowns. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
think you certainly, as you usually do, misconstrue exactly what 
we’re saying. 
 
First of all, first of all — and let me clearly put on the record 
what we’re saying — first of all, we’re saying that in order to 
even make an assessment about the future role of the Crowns, 
they have to be given the opportunity to function properly, that 
they have to be given the opportunity to exercise their 
responsibility independently. 
 
And what’s so upsetting to people in this province right now, 
they’ve come to see the Crowns as nothing more than being an 
exercise in a political arm of the government in power. And that 
isn’t being fair to the Crowns in any stretch of the imagination. 
 
So first of all, Mr. Minister, we have to give the Crowns the 
opportunity to operate properly. And that is why I think it’s so 
important that we do depoliticize the Crowns in the first 
instance so that they be given the opportunity to function in the 
service of the people of Saskatchewan irrespective of who their 
political masters are. That’s the first step in the process. 
 
And if after they have that opportunity to do that it could be 
clearly demonstrated that it be in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan people to look at the idea of privatization, we’re 
not afraid to look at that. 
 
But at this stage it’s academic because the Crowns are not being 
allowed to function as they truly have the potential to function, 
Mr. Minister. And that’s why I think it’s so important to 
depoliticize the Crowns so they can be independently evaluated. 
 
For example, in the United States their systems of looking at 
appointments that are made by Executive Council or 
nominations for appointments on boards or various things, that 
these individuals would come before a standing committee of 
one form or another in order to be questioned and looked at in 
terms of their credentials, their experience, their outlook as to 
how they would serve if appointed to the board. 
 
Would not it be a good idea, Mr. Minister, for Executive 
Council to nominate people to the board, including the CEO, 
and perhaps have the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations actually interview and visit with the people that 
are nominated to satisfy this Assembly that you’re operating 
independently? 
 
The government still has the majority membership on that 
committee, so in essence you have not relinquished anything. 
That’s why I’m asking: have you considered any other 
alternatives except this system which merely seems to be 
window-dressing? 
 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say to the 
member opposite again that we had hearings across the 
province in 1996 that came to some, I think, very positive 
conclusions about where we should take our Crowns. And there 
were many people involved. 
 
And since then I have gone out and talked to hundreds of 
people at many meetings across the province — chamber of 
commerce, REDAs (regional economic development authority), 
aboriginal people who talk about the Crowns — and I don’t find 
that their comments, while they may be legitimate to a small 
percentage of the public, that the Crowns are ill-run and are bad 
and all of these negative things, that is not the mood of the 
majority of the public at the meetings I go to. 
 
In fact, they’re very proud of their Crowns. They think they’re 
well run and they want them to run better even than they are 
now. I think that would be much more accurate about what the 
public thinks about their Crowns. They’re not your Crowns; 
they’re not my Crowns. This $8 billion or $7 billion in assets 
belong to the people of the province. 
 
And whether I was here or not, we would still have Crowns. 
Why is that? Because the vast majority of the people have said 
they want their politicians to keep the Crowns. In fact the party 
you now belong to, the Conservative Party, was defeated on the 
very issue of attempting to privatize. 
 
So politically, I think you’re on the wrong track. But I do give 
you respect, for even though you’re wrong in relation to the 
public of continuing to state that you want to privatize the 
Crowns, that deserves respect because at least you speak your 
mind even though it’s a bad political move. 
 
But where I come to really disagree with you is this idea that 
many people in the right wing — the extreme, radical, right 
wing — of this province believe, and I’m surprised that you 
reflect that view, that somehow a model from the United States 
is what we should be doing here. 
 
And whether it’s medicare or whether it’s Crown corporations, 
you want to go to the American system. I have great respect for 
our American cousins. I worked as a customs officer on the 
border for many years. I understand the American system and I 
much respect what they do. 
 
But I do not want to change our system that we’ve spent a 
whole century building to go to the American model. And we 
had those kind of people in the House. At one time when I was 
a member sitting here in the treasury benches, Dennis Ham 
from Swift Current and Dick Collver said legitimately we 
should go to the American system. 
 
He went one step further than you. He said we should give up 
Canada. He created a party called the Unionest Party — maybe 
that’s what you’re referring to here. Maybe you’ll jump from 
the Liberals to the Conservatives and then to the Unionest 
Party. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, that will not be 
accepted by the public of Saskatchewan either. And it’s not 
far-fetched because we had people leaving the Conservative 
Party before while I sat here in the House — Dick Collver and 

Dennis Ham going to the Unionest Party. And so I say to you 
your argument does have merit with a small cluster of people 
but it’s not mainstream. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Mr. Minister, you, Mr. Minister, may 
seem that you can get away with exaggerating the truth and 
misrepresenting what is obvious what I have just said, but 
fortunately I have a great deal of faith in the vision and the 
wisdom of the people of Saskatchewan out there who are 
probably watching this performance today. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know that everything you said is a total 
misrepresentation and the people out there know, so I’m not 
really worried about your allegations. What I’m seriously trying 
to do is offer constructive alternatives and ideas for how our 
Crowns can be made better. 
 
That’s not to say they’re performing at an abysmal rate. It 
means that any organization, if it’s willing to throw off the 
shackles of your political nonsense, can probably do better. If 
we allow them the opportunity to do better, they probably can 
do better. 
 
And that’s what I’m challenging you to do, Mr. Minister. The 
people out there know that’s what I’m challenging you to do. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you know that this hasn’t gone far enough. 
It’s a step in the right direction, I’ll grant you that, but it is not 
enough. It will not address the concerns that people have of the 
way you and your party politicize the Crowns and it still leaves 
that suspicion that the Crowns are not able to function 
independently, Minister. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I was attending some 
correspondence in my home constituency when I heard the 
Deputy Premier desperately wanting the benefit of Liberal 
views on our Crown corporations, and I couldn’t resist 
accommodating him. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at this Bill I can 
understand why the Deputy Premier needs some Liberal input 
into our Crown corporations. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I 
look at this Bill this explains why we have a Bill on the order 
paper to forbid foreign adventures and taking equity positions 
around the world without a full debate in this legislature and a 
full public debate. 
 
So we already have that Bill before the legislature. We also 
have an amendment coming up this afternoon which I will read 
into the record, that this Act will come into force, that is the one 
now before this House, after the Government of Saskatchewan 
establishes a fair and impartial rate review mechanism with 
authority to regulate electric power rates under Saskatchewan 
Power, telephone service rates established by SaskTel, and 
natural gas service rates established by SaskEnergy. 
 
Now I think I can very simply state the Liberal position on our 
Crown corporations and it is this, Mr. Speaker. Well, you can 
often find it’s best to explain your position by explaining what 
it is not. What do we not agree with? 
 
Well one, we don’t agree with using the Crown for back-door 
taxation, building up large slush funds to do whatever with. We 



June 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

do not agree with using our Crown corporations to finance 
forest boondoggles. We do not agree with a fire sale of our 
Crown corporations, as some might suggest. We do not agree 
with using our Crown corporations in the way of finding a safe 
landing and a job for someone’s campaign manager. 
 
We would say if we are going to have multi-billion dollar 
corporations they must be run by people with an expertise in 
these utilities. And I am not sure that having expertise and 
running NDP campaigns or expertise in raising NDP campaign 
funds — impressive and all that that is — I’m not sure that’s 
experience for running a major utility. I mean my hat is off to 
anyone who is able to convince the people of this province to 
vote NDP. They must have a lot of talent, but whether that 
talent and ability is the talent and ability we need to run a power 
corporation, I suggest is another matter. 
 
So I say, Mr. Chairman, that I hadn’t actually planned on 
entering this debate but the invitation from the Deputy Premier 
was simply too much to resist so I thank him for asking me to 
come. And I say if he wants to know the Liberal position on the 
Crown corporations, it is to get back to why Liberal 
governments in the early days of this province established the 
Crown corporations in the first place — and that is to provide 
service to the people of Saskatchewan at reasonable cost; it is 
not to find jobs for party supporters, it is not for back-door 
taxation, it is not to finance foreign travel, and we do not favour 
dismantling them in a fire sale at the first available price to the 
first available purchaser, whoever that may be. 
 
We do submit, however, Mr. Chairman, that if we want 
confidence by the people of Saskatchewan, we’d need two 
things. One, there will not be foreign equity investments 
without a full debate in this House. And two, all rate increases 
will be subject to some mechanism that will assure us that the 
rate increases are fair and equitable. Some mechanisms such as 
every other jurisdiction in this continent has, but not 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I had talked to some of the officials especially of 
SaskEnergy, and I agree that sometimes rate increases are 
necessary. It’s simply a matter of passing through changes in 
the price of natural gas. I think we appreciate that. But the fact 
remains, Mr. Chairman, until there is a rate review mechanism, 
suspicion will remain and cynicism will remain. 
 
And when we see a rate increase followed by announcements of 
record profits followed by announcements that we’re going to 
invest 31 million in some country nobody ever heard of before, 
this feeds cynicism and this cynicism can only be met by a rate 
review mechanism — and that will restore confidence in our 
Crown corporations. 
 
So I really encourage the Deputy Premier that, when we get a 
new permanent head of SaskPower, it isn’t some former 
campaign manager. I really encourage you to accept my 
amendment that there be a rate review mechanism, and I really 
encourage you to vote in favour of the Liberal Bill that says, we 
won’t have foreign equity investments without debate in this 
House. 
 
And finally, I assure the Deputy Premier that the Liberal 
opposition continues to believe that our Crown corporations can 

serve public policy goals, can serve the continued development 
of this province and the future, as they have in the past, and we 
will oppose the fire sale of our Crown corporations. 
 
And with that, I thank the Deputy Premier for inviting the 
Liberal Party to join this debate. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wish to move an 
amendment to clause 13 which reads as follows. We: 
 

Amend clause 13 of the printed Bill by deleting everything 
after the phrase: 
 
“13 This Act comes into force” and replace it with the 
following: 
 

“after the Government of Saskatchewan establishes a 
fair and impartial rate review mechanism with 
authority to regulate: 
 
a) the electric power rates charged by Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation, (SaskPower); 
b) the telephone service rates charged by Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications, (SaskTel); and 
c) the natural gas service rates charged by SaskEnergy 

Incorporated (SaskEnergy).” 
 

I respectfully submit that this amendment will bring 
Saskatchewan into line with every other jurisdiction on our 
continent and this amendment will go a long way to restoring 
confidence in our Crown corporations. And I encourage all 
members of this House to support this very desperately-needed 
reform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
The Chair: — The Chair would like to take a few minutes to 
look at the amendment seeing as we haven’t had prior notice of 
it. The Chair has found that the amendment is in order and will 
be put before the committee. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:34 p.m. until 4:35 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 9 
 
Krawetz Toth Draude 
Gantefoer Osika Hillson 
Aldridge Belanger Goohsen 
 

Nays — 22 
 
Wiens MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Shillington Atkinson Johnson 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1998 

Goulet Kowalsky Crofford 
Bradley Trew Renaud 
Scott Serby Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Wall 
Kasperski Langford Murrell 
Thomson   
 
 
Clause 13 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The SaskTel Pension Implementation Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

The Deputy Chair: — Why is the hon. member for Regina 
South on his feet? 
 
Mr. Thomson: — With leave, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs has corrected me to tell me my 

English was inappropriate. I would like to introduce “a guest,” 
being the only person in the gallery. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you Gwen Falconer who is joining us 
today. I noticed her actually here earlier today, just before we 
adjourned for tea, with a school group and unfortunately I 
didn’t get a chance to introduce her then. Gwen is a regular 
follower of this House, I think in part now, because her son is 
working here also as a tour guide so she takes a particular 
interest. Her son, Blair, works here. Could you join me in 
welcoming Gwen; I’d appreciate it. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 
 
The Chair: — Before I call the first subvote, I’ll invite the 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. I want to 
introduce, to my immediate right, Faye Rafter, who is the 
executive coordinator of the Women’s Secretariat. And just 
sitting behind her is Joan Pederson, the assistant executive 
coordinator. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (WS01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And welcome, 
Madam Minister, and welcome to your officials again. 
 
Madam Minister, there are a number of items we’d like to 
discuss this afternoon, but I’d like to start with the actual issue 
of gender equity. And I’d like to begin by saying that in terms 
of achieving gender equity in social and economic terms, which 
is one of the goals of the secretariat, I believe the way we’ll get 
there is not through legislation but by government setting an 
example and allowing people to actually achieve of what their 
. . . their own potential. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell me how many women there are 
currently as deputy ministers in your government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, to that answer is, there’s two 
deputy ministers. And there’s also two — would be heads of the 
Women’s Secretariat and also of the Public Service 
Commission — that are women. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, so that’s two out of how 
many — probably 60 or 70 or 80 people. Is that how many 
deputy ministers and heads do you have, of departments, do you 
have? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, there would be 13 
departments, so we’d have 13 deputy ministers, different heads 
of different agencies and so on. We don’t have all of that data 
here. 
 
What we do have as of December ’97, that women in 



June 3, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

management positions within government is at a percentage of 
35.6 per cent. And that has been improving. The number of 
women that we do have in government is 54.7 per cent. So there 
is been a gradual increase though of women in management 
positions within government. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order, order. Members, the din in 
the Chamber is getting a bit loud. I ask members to either tone 
it way down or take their conversations outside. That’s for all 
members. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. So what you’re 
saying is there’s 13 heads of departments. Actually I’m noticing 
there’s basically, there’s about 24 different departments, isn’t 
there? And out of that there’s only four heads that are heads that 
are women. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I think yes there would be, what I had 
said, there would be four that would be heads — either deputy 
ministers or heads of departments, or like I said, the Women’s 
Secretariat. I think the one piece here on it is that women are 
moving into more management positions within government. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, if we’re going to look 
specifically at out-of-scope employees making greater than 
$50,000 a year, what proportion of these employees would be 
men and what proportion would be women? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on that question we would 
have to get back to the member on that because we just don’t 
have the information on it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Okay, Madam Minister, just so that . . . then so 
I can clarify this. I know there are 24 departments and there’s 
deputy ministers and there’s heads of departments, and out of 
that we have a great fine number of four of them are women. 
And we don’t know how many of the out-of-scope employees 
making greater than $50,000 a year are women. 
 
And I’d like . . . Maybe the minister can share with the 
Assembly then any statistics she’s aware of which reflect the 
government’s commitment to advancing qualified women to 
senior levels of government. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, to your . . . to your question, I 
should say. There has been a steady increase of women, as I’d 
said earlier, in management levels. And we’ve improved from 
25 per cent in 1990 to 35.2 per cent in 1998. 
 
And since the spring of 1992 we’ve approximately 43 per cent 
of appointments to boards, agencies, and commissions have 
been women. And also 50.6 per cent of those elected and 
appointed to district health boards were women. 
 
So I think within policy, within the way we do job search, in the 
way that government is trying to lead by example, and I also 
believe the way that we’ve worked on pay equity through a 
policy framework through government departments, agencies, 
this is also a way for the government to lead in trying to address 
this issue, and we still need to continue to work on it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I hear that the word 
“appointed” comes up quite frequently. And I understand this is 

a real catch-22 how you get . . . do we have to appoint the 
women to the positions or do we have . . . Is there a way to 
make it possible for them to apply for these jobs and get them 
because of their own current standing or because of their own 
capabilities? 
 
I also have a question regarding a current initiative being 
undertaken by the Department of Labour looking at balancing 
family in the workplace. I presume that because women tend to 
be the primary care-givers, they’ll be a large focus of this study. 
I’ve been informed by someone working in one of the Social 
Services departments that the government refuses to allow some 
departments to move to a 36-hour work week, in other words 
every second Friday off. This is a normal thing to have happen 
in Crown corporations and for many department employees, 
and it gives people the opportunity to spend more time with 
their families. 
 
Why is the government launching an expensive review and then 
hindering this kind of solution? Again I’d say if it’s the 
government’s role to change the work week to assist in 
balancing families and work, they’d have to lead by example. 
My question is, what initiative has the government undertaken 
to address the difficulties some parents are experiencing 
balancing work and family? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, the government’s 
commitment is very strong on this type of initiative, on trying to 
balance family and workplace. And a lot of these are negotiated 
settlements and so that . . . I do know that through SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union), our union with 
government employees, that there is in that settlement — a 
flexible work time is allowed and I think that’s one piece. 
 
Certainly the initiative on balancing work and family — 
actually I just attended a meeting last night on that in a 
community, well in the community of Weyburn — and I think 
again there is a lot of information that needs to go out to 
employees. And people had a lot of good discussion around the 
importance of this initiative and were very, very pleased to be 
participating in it. And so I believe our government is very 
committed to balancing work and family and we should be 
leading as a government. 
 
We’ve also implemented changes in The Labour Standards Act 
to reduce qualifying periods for maternity leave, for parental 
adoption leaves. I think all of those pieces are important parts of 
trying to balance work and family, things like flex time and 
stop-times and job-sharing. Those kinds of things again are 
important things, which we think are an important part of that 
— balancing work in families. But I think this initiative right 
now is an initiative that cuts across our whole province — is a 
very important initiative for all of us — to look at what we need 
to be doing both as a government but also on individual good 
examples throughout our communities. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, this 
program that’s brought forward is — I believe that the spirit 
behind it is correct — but I do imagine that if most people were 
honest they would tell you most of the problems come from the 
fact that they don’t have enough money, they have to go to 
work. By the time they pay their taxes and pay their babysitter 
and pay for the vehicle to go to work, there just isn’t enough 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1998 

cash in their pocket and I think that that basically will be the 
root of all the problems. 
 
Madam Minister, the government allocated — Deputy Chair, 
Madam Minister — the government allocated a million dollars 
last year for special projects over a two-year period, and I 
believe that about 750,000 of it went to Internet hook-up. And 
at that time when we’ve been discussing it, it was considered 
that this program would probably benefit rural women. I think 
we’ve had this discussion earlier where we differ on whether 
this has been a great advantage for rural women. 
 
But I guess one of the questions I have first of all is: what costs 
were involved in administrating this program and having the 
minister travel around and giving out every one of the cheques 
that these different organizations that applied for a grant were 
given. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Well I think if I got — if I’m to be clear, 
Mr. Chair, on the question — is that you want to know the cost 
of my going out to present the presentations on this? I just want 
to be clear that that was the question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the cost for the minister to 
travel around, but also for her officials and the staff in her 
department and the staff in constituencies, the press 
conferences, and what it cost to actually go out and tell people 
about this program, and actually dispensing the cheques that 
were given out 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, Mr. Chair, so it’s been clarified. 
Because I wanted to say that I’d actually attended two, and one 
was in Regina and one was in Prince Albert. Overall though, on 
the cheque presentations and what was done in transportation 
costs and so on, it looks to be around $2,000, $2,300 is what 
was spent on that. 
 
I do also want to just add that this program had more 
overwhelming acceptance than what we ever, ever did think. 
And people are still writing us and letting us know of all of the 
ways in which they can utilize the connection, the kind of 
training; what it will mean to these women’s groups right across 
this province has been very, very positive. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, excuse 
me, I think we may not be on the same wave length when we 
discuss the cost. You said $2,300. Now I would think then that 
we have travel time, we have actual travel expenses for going 
out with the cheques, we have press conferences, we have 
people figuring out and making arrangements to talk . . . to meet 
with different groups to have them there. 
 
Everybody who spends time on making sure these cheques are 
sent out are working . . . They could be doing something that 
would have been their original job. Surely there must be 
secretaries and people running around, but their time has got to 
be worth something to your department. Are you figuring out 
the time is worth $10 an hour? I guess I have a difficult time 
seeing how you can administer the number of cheques that I 
have seen being sent out, for $2,300. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I guess what I could say on that is that 
we don’t have the time . . . I mean the people are doing their 

jobs in communication and those pieces are paid for that. Now 
we do not have a breakdown on how much time it took to 
organize this. 
 
What I gave you is the breakdown of what the transportation 
costs, the travel costs were, if there was room rentals, 
refreshment, anything like that had been provided in any of 
these presentations; that is in this figure, and the photographer 
and so on. So that is in. 
 
But as far as the other people that are working within our 
department, this would be part of their job through 
communications and through the work that they do. And that’s 
not broken down. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Chair, I would like to draw your 
attention to the clock — it now being 5 o’clock. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Time has been called. The committee 
will rise and report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:05 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1569 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1569 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1569 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1569 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1569 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1569 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1569 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1569 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1569 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1570 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1570 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1570 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1570 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1570 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1570 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1571 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................................1571 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1571 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1572 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1572 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1573 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1573 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1573 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1573 
  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1573 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1574 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1574 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1574 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1574 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1574 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1574 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Luther Place in Outlook 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
 Dividend for Pioneer Co-op Members 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
 125th Anniversary of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
 Nipawin Pike Festival 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1576 
 McCallum Fiftieth Wedding Anniversary 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1576 
 Economic Growth in Lloydminster 
  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................1576 
 Deep South Personal Care Home 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1576 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Voluntary Grain Marketing 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1577 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1577 
 Citizen Neighbourhood Patrols 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1578 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1578 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1578 
 



  

 Drinking and Driving 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1579 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1579 
 Referral to the College of Physicians and Surgeons 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1579 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1579 
 Commemorative Markers on Highways 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1580 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1580 
 Economic Development in South-west Saskatchewan 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1581 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1581 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 752 — The Highway Fatality Marker Act 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1581 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
MOTIONS 
 House Recess 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1582 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 45 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1582 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1582 
 Bill No. 55 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1583 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1583 
 Bill No. 40 — The SaskTel Pension Implementation Act 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1583 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1583 
 Bill No. 55 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1583 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1583 
 Bill No. 54 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1585 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1585 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1588 
 Recorded Division (Clause 13) ..................................................................................................................................................1589 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 45 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
 Bill No. 40 — The SaskTel Pension Implementation Act 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
 Bill No. 55 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
 Bill No. 54 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Women’s Secretariat — Vote 41 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1590 
 
 


