





























































Hansard: April 06, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 461 
 April 6, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the town of Redvers and Bellegarde 
in my constituency. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Lake Lenore and 
Humboldt. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition. These petitions concerns two things: the severance 
payment to Jack Messer and calling for an independent public 
inquiry about the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
Signed by the good people from Kinistino, Melfort, Beatty, 
Birch Hills. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition concerning the issue surrounding the severance 
payment to Jack Messer and calling for an independent public 
inquiry about the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
All of these signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Melfort. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Everyone that has signed this petition is from either Naicam or 
Archerwill. 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have a petition 
to present this afternoon to the legislature and I’m pleased to 
present it on behalf of Saskatchewan people. 
 
This one surrounds the whole issue of Jack Messer and Channel 
Lake, and these petitioners come from the Weldon, Kinistino 
area, and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains hospital 
may be continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by people from 
Bengough, Assiniboia, Viceroy, Rockglen, and Willow Bunch. 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the pending 
closure of the Plains hospital. And the prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities of Kyle, Gull Lake, and Swift Current. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in bringing forward petitions regarding the 
Plains hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 
the Assiniboia and Limerick areas of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add the 
voices of people from Regina and Pilot Butte as well as 
Saskatoon with a petition relative to closure of the Plains: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise to 
present a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Regina here, and I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have received the 
following prayer for relief from the people at Carberry, 
Manitoba. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And as I said, Mr. Speaker, these people all come from the 
province of Manitoba. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order a petition respecting the Plains 
Health Centre has been reviewed pursuant to rule 12(7), and 
found to be irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed 
and are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly regarding the 
twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; acting to save the 
Plains Health Centre; and cancelling severance payments 
to Jack Messer and calling an independent inquiry into 
Channel Lake. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 26 ask the government the following question: 
 

How many women and men, in total, graduated from the 
University of Saskatchewan College of Medicine in 1990, 
in 1995, in 1996, in 1997; how many of these graduates 
were men; how many of these graduates were women; how 

many male physicians and surgeons are currently 
practising in Saskatchewan; and how many female 
physicians and surgeons are currently practising in 
Saskatchewan? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Draude: — I ask all the colleagues in the House to 
welcome a young man in the gallery today. He’s my son Jody. 
He graduated from law school in Saskatchewan a couple of 
years ago and now, like his friends, he’s working in Calgary. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Tartan Day 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1992 in this 
Assembly, a private members’ Bill was introduced that allowed 
for a day of official appreciation for Scottish clans in Canada — 
Tartan Day. 
 
All members, including thee and me, Mr. Speaker, supported 
that Bill and I’m very happy to report that today is that day. 
And we celebrate the Scots and their Celtic glory in our 
province once again. Today we can recognize the long and 
ongoing contribution to our national identity of the Scottish 
clans of Canada and especially of Saskatchewan. 
 
Tartan Day was declared to do just that, to acknowledge the 
notable Scots of Saskatchewan and their notable 
accomplishments. On this side of the House we like to refer to 
Tommy Douglas, and if you look at the roll call of members 
who have served this Assembly since 1905, you will see nine 
M-A-C MacDonalds, seven McDonalds, as well as many, many 
McInnises, McIntyres, McIntoshes, and so on. 
 
It is worth mentioning that our first Premier was even named 
Scott. So in our political realm the Scots are well represented. 
In every other area of endeavour as well, their presence has 
been and still is felt. 
 
So in the words of Robbie Burns on this day and on all days, 
“may we be blessed with health and peace and sweet content.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tartan Day Greetings from Saskatchewan Party 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course today is 
Tartan Day and I’m pleased to extend the best wishes of the 
Saskatchewan caucus . . . Saskatchewan Party caucus to the 
people of Scottish descent across this province. 
 
In 1992 you will recall, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of 
introducing the legislation that allowed for a day of appreciation 
to the Scottish clans in Canada. I was pleased to have the 
cooperation of all members of the Assembly on the passage of 
the Bill, and as you know a very rare occurrence when an 
opposition private members’ Bill does pass. 
 
Tartan Day allows those of Scottish descent an opportunity to 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

acknowledge their heritage and the role it played in building our 
province and our country. On behalf of the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus, I wish all those of Scottish descent a memorable day on 
April 6. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, a very simple question was put 
to the readers of the Regina Leader-Post on the weekend. The 
question read: 
 

A coalition led by the Liberals is calling for the Plains to 
stay open as Regina’s third hospital. They say health care 
will suffer if the hospital closes as planned in October. Do 
you think the Plains Hospital should remain open as a 
hospital? 

 
Almost 15,000 people phoned the Leader-Post to register a 
vote, and almost 14,000 or 93 per cent agree with the Liberal 
opposition — the Plains hospital should remain open. Add to 
these the over 3,000 people who have contacted the Liberal 
opposition directly in the past 10 days, and the 100,000 people 
who have signed petitions opposing the closure of the Plains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time the NDP government started listening, 
and most importantly, caring, because the public is speaking 
loud and clear. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Awasis Conference, Saskatoon 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, last week in Saskatoon I 
attended the April 1 to 3, 1998 Awasis Conference relating to 
the improvement of education and aboriginal peoples. This 
outstanding conference was attended by 1,350 teachers, 
consultants, and administrators from all parts of Saskatchewan 
and Canada. 
 
Keynote speakers included Buffy Sainte Marie from Piapot 
First Nations. Her strong, powerful message of improving 
ourselves in the system was appreciated as well as her singing 
performance. 
 
She is also promoting the Cradleboard Teaching Project, which 
acts as an interacting exchange between aboriginal and 
non-aboriginal schools internationally. Topics included culture, 
language, healing, identity, and humour. 
 
Some speakers and performers were Winston Wuttunee, 
Leonard Dick, Don Bernstick, Bea Shewanda, Sherry 
Farrell-Wacette; also Sheila Pocha, Chester Knight, Ben Garr, 
Delores Pruden-Bairie, Minnie McKenzie, Josie Searson, Ron 
Mason, and Garry Oker.  
 
Special thanks to Karen Schmon, to the organizing committee 
of Awasis, for again an outstanding example of history and 
education in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Legislative Graffiti 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
was walking into the Legislative Building this morning I 
noticed a very unsightful chalk drawing on the steps of our 
Assembly. 
 
I would like to share the message contained in the drawing with 
all members who did not see it before the elements or the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) members brushed it away. The artist’s 
sentiments were: would the last person leaving Saskatchewan 
please turn off the lights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not suggesting that we condone graffiti on 
the steps of the legislature. But it was a chalk drawing leaving 
no permanent damage except in the members opposite’s ego. 
 
I believe the artist was . . . simply wanted to get a message 
through to the legislators of this province. And the message is, 
wake up and smell the roses before it’s too late. There are no 
opportunities in this province for young people, and they are all 
leaving for greener pastures in Alberta and points beyond. 
 
It crossed my mind that the artist was likely a young person — 
a young person who is ready to give up on this great province of 
ours because of lack of full-time jobs and high taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cancer Month 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Across Canada, 
April is Cancer Month. This is the month that the Canadian 
Cancer Society concentrates most of its fund-raising efforts in 
the noble attempt to find a cure for this dreaded disease. As 
usual, the Canadian Cancer Society will sell daffodils this 
month as a sign of hope in the face of this disease. 
 
We all hope that someday research will lead to cures for this 
scourge. Cancer has always been with us but increasingly it’s 
becoming a plague, connected as it is with so much of modern 
society — biological, chemical, environmental, nutritional 
conditions in society. 
 
Our government shares a commitment for those who have 
pledged to fight cancer. And to this end, we increased funding 
by nearly $2 million to the Saskatchewan cancer agency’s 
operating budget. In particular we have targeted nearly 700,000 
to fund new stem cell transplant programs for people who suffer 
from both non-Hodgkin’s and Hodgkin’s lymphoma who 
previously had to travel out of province for this service. 
 
Today I would like to recognize the tremendous efforts of both 
the Saskatchewan and Canadian cancer societies and especially 
those working as volunteer patient service people with the 
cancer society and all the many workers who will be raising 
money in the fight against cancer this month. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, the people are speaking out 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

loudly in opposition to this government’s plan to close the 
Plains hospital. People know the NDP government doesn’t care. 
They know the member from Canora-Pelly and his Tory 
colleagues feel the final nail has been pounded into the Plains 
coffin and have simply given up the fight. 
 
But the Liberal opposition will continue the fight, with people 
like Estevan mayor, John Len, adding their support. Len writes, 
and I quote: 
 

Are some people more important than others in the 
Premier’s brave new world? Do government MLAs care? I 
have heard nothing but platitudes from government MLAs 
and ministers. 
 
Unless we do something about it, we have no one else to 
blame but ourselves. The time has come for this 
government to listen to the people and serve them, not 
continue this arrogant and brutal rape of the provincial 
health care system. 
 
Our government should have the intestinal fortitude to own 
up to this massive screw-up and set about fixing up the 
problems. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition and the Save the Plains 
Committee are saying exactly the same thing. Own up to this 
massive screw-up and set about fixing the problem for the sake 
of our people and the sake of our health care system. 
 

Regina Lakeview Area Authors 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in my constituency of 
Regina Lakeview there’s a unique area of a few square blocks 
in which live five of Saskatchewan’s most distinguished and 
best-known authors — my writer’s block, I like to call it. 
 
Maggie Siggins, Kelly Jo Burke, Diane Warren, Gail Bowen, 
and Connie Gault make this area of Lakeview a ghetto of high 
creativity. 
 
Extend the radius a few blocks, still in Lakeview, and you can 
add Ken Mitchell and Pat Krause. This list does not include the 
film-makers, artists, actors and other makers of art that I’m 
thrilled to represent. 
 
I mention this class-list, Mr. Speaker, because there is a new kid 
on the block to swell the ranks. She lives two blocks from 
Siggins and around the corner from Warren. 
 
Britt Ruddick-Holmstrom will have her first novel in English 
published this fall. She has published one novel in her native 
Sweden, but this is her first in Canada. The novel is called The 
Man Next Door and will be published by Cormorant Press — 
the press, for people who follow these things, that recently 
found another first novel and turned it into a Governor General 
award winner. 
 
Britt is in good hands with her publisher and in good company 
with her neighbours. Congratulations and best wishes. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Regina Hospital Emergency Services 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Health. As we saw on Friday, the minister 
didn’t have a clue about the depth of the health care crisis in 
this province. Regina nurses have confirmed that the situation 
was nearly at the breaking point Thursday night. 
 
The Plains had only emergency room in Regina beds available. 
Yet the minister and the health district continue to bury their 
heads in the sand and say there’s no problem. Mr. Minister, this 
wasn’t an isolated incident. The nurses are saying it happened 
several times in the last four weeks and it’s only going to get 
worse after the Plains hospital closes. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you doing about emergency room crisis 
in Regina? What steps have you taken to ensure we don’t get a 
repeat of the near disaster last Thursday night? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all address 
the issue that the member talks about as it relates to the 
emergency room beds in Regina. When I read the article of 
which the member is referring from it reads this way, that the 
Nurse Schmeling who was at work as a registered nurse in 
emergency, Plains Health Centre, said that the emergency room 
was the only one, the emergency room was the only one in the 
city with a bed on Thursday. Which says that the other two 
facilities were full, but in their facility they had beds. 
 
And when we read on in the article on the second paragraph it 
says this, it says: of the 27 critical beds that were open, only 11 
of the district’s 77 critical beds were unoccupied. Which says 
that — and Mr. Evans made that comment — which says then 
that in Regina on Thursday there were 11 critical beds that were 
unoccupied for people to be served both from Regina and 
around the province. 
 
That’s what the article says, by Mr. Evans. And that’s what the 
article says of which Nurse Schmeling responded to, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly 
the point. When you close the Plains there will be no beds. And 
we saw on Friday how the minister dealt with the health care 
crisis. He grabs the Premier, they put on hard hats, and they go 
out and have a photo opportunity. 
 
And it’s a good thing they had those hard hats on, Mr. Speaker, 
because if something had fallen on his head there would have 
been no emergency room beds available to take care of him. 
Then again, maybe you and the Premier do need a good whack 
upside the head to wake you up and open up your eyes to this 
crisis. 
 
Mr. Minister, on Friday you admitted that staff in Regina 
hospitals are under-resourced. And what’s your solution? Kick 
patients out quicker, like the gall bladder patient from my area 
who spent the night at the Howard Johnson. So let’s review the 
minister’s solution. Put on a hard hat, have a photo opportunity, 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

kick the patients out of bed quicker. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to admit there’s a problem 
and start providing some real solutions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Member, Mr. Speaker, the 
member is absolutely correct and probably made one of the 
most brilliant statements that I’ve heard in this House in some 
time. If the member says that all of the beds would have been 
occupied they would have all been full. That’s right. If all 77 
beds were occupied they would have been full. 
 
But the reality is, is that there were 11 beds that were not 
occupied, and that there were 11 beds that were available for 
people from Regina and from people from southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now for the member to say, for the member to say that the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre will see a reduction in beds, 
absolutely false, not even close to being true — 675 beds today 
in the district and we’ll continue to have 675 beds in the district. 
Those 675 beds will be providing services out of two facilities 
and not out of one facility, and the sooner the member gets the 
better appreciation of that, the better it will be for the rest of the 
province and for him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
do you ever ask yourself why people all over southern 
Saskatchewan are so worked up about a Regina hospital? It’s 
because they don’t have adequate emergency services in their 
own communities. Maybe if you started working on solutions at 
the local level, maybe if you started putting more beds and 
doctors in emergency services into Swift Current and Weyburn 
and Estevan, there wouldn’t be such an uproar about the Plains. 
 
Yes, you should keep the Plains open, but the long-term 
solution is to start providing quality health care services 
throughout the province. Improve emergency services in other 
areas and cut out the $1,200 ambulance rides around Saskatoon 
and Regina. When is it going to happen, Mr. Minister? Or is 
your plan to have every single emergency patient in 
Saskatchewan end up in overcrowded ERs (emergency room) in 
Regina and Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that this year in Saskatchewan we put an 
additional $88 million into health. And I want to let the member 
know that of that $88 million, $24 million went, $24 million 
went into the physician services — $24 million went into 
physician services. 
 
So for the member to stand up and say that we don’t provide 
enough money for doctors in this province, we have an 
agreement with doctors of the province — we’ve just signed it. 
And more money for emergency-on-call for rural Saskatchewan 
this year. 
 
And I was interested in the article, Mr. Speaker, that came 
forward at the recent polls . . . or the discussion that was done 

of the three members who are running for the leadership. Now 
what does Mr. Huyghebaert say here? Mr. Huyghebaert says — 
and the member opposite says there’s not enough money in the 
system — well Mr. Huyghebaert says this: people in the 
medical community tell me that there is enough money to do 
the job right now. And the member opposite calls for some 
more money in the system. Your potential leader of the 
province says that we have enough money to do the job. 
 
Now the member from Melfort talks about two-tier care health 
system. He says not enough money isn’t the issue, the money 
. . . the issue is about how . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe if the 
minister opposite had read further, Yogi also said that the 
socialists won’t even invest in a socialist province — another 
one of his comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand the Minister of Health, the Chair of 
the provincial Health ministers, couldn’t get his conference call 
going this morning. Thousands of hepatitis C victims are being 
left out in the cold because of your government’s unfair 
compensation packages. Mr. Minister, you decide to have a 
conference call and nobody will join you. It shows how much 
pull you have in the overall scheme of things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister now knows what it feels like to be put 
on hold, left hanging because no one’s listening at the other 
end. That’s how hepatitis C victims feel. Some of them have 
been on hold for 15 years and they’re still not getting any 
answers. 
 
Mr. Minister, you now seem to be admitting that your 
compensation package is flawed. What changes will you be 
recommending when you finally get your colleagues to return 
your call? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when I make a phone 
call I don’t usually have any trouble getting a response. And 
today I didn’t make a phone call so I didn’t need to worry about 
getting a response. So when the member’s said he’s had an 
opportunity to make a call and been left holding, I’ve yet to 
experience what it’s like to be left holding, but the member 
knows that. 
 
Now what I would say to the member opposite is this: is that I 
have had a discussion with my deputies across the country and, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that there is no interest from 
any of the provincial ministers across the province to look at 
revisiting the compensation plan that we agreed on and signed 
in Toronto 10 days ago. 
 
I had a discussion, Mr. Speaker, on the weekend as it relates to 
the establishment of the new Canadian blood agency in the 
province. And the new Canadian blood agency in the province 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

. . . in Canada will be established within the next day. There 
will be a press conference going out today establishing the new 
Canadian blood service. And that’s the commitment that I made 
in the discussions that we had in Toronto when we left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well unless I 
misunderstand the newspapers last week, your cousins from 
B.C. (British Columbia) don’t agree with you, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, you like to throw a lot of numbers around and it’s 
easy to forget that these are real people we’re talking about. 
 
I have a constituent, Mrs. Rachel Pelli, who contracted hepatitis 
C in 1982 through tainted blood. She suffers every day from the 
painful symptoms of hepatitis C. She also has diabetes, and the 
combination of her hepatitis medication and her diabetes 
medication may eventually cause her to go blind. That’s what 
she deals with every day, Mr. Minister, through no fault of her 
own. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask this question on her behalf. And I’m 
going to tell you the answers. Are you going to work to ensure 
that she receives compensation or are you going to turn your 
back on her once again? What should I tell her, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Member from Saltcoats, you should 
tell her what I told her, and you should tell her what we’ve all 
told her as Canadian Health ministers from across the country, 
including Mr. Rock. Because as the member knows, when we 
deliberated for the past eight and a half weeks or ten weeks by 
individuals from all parties, including representation from 
Ontario, which is of the same party stripe as you are, which is 
the same party stripe from Manitoba, which is the same party 
stripe as you are, and the federal government, which are 
Liberal, we all agreed, Mr. Speaker, that what we would do is 
we would provide compensation for people in the window of 
1986 to 1990. 
 
And the window from 1986 to 1990 was selected, Mr. Speaker, 
because in this country, in this country we believe that there 
was surrogate testing that was available. And when surrogate 
testing was available, the Red Cross and the provincial 
governments and the federal government as they . . . regularly 
should have been testing. 
 
Because we weren’t, we made the decision that we would 
compensate people during that period of time. The amount is 
$1.1 billion for those folks who were contracted with hepatitis 
C during 1986 to 1990. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Death of North Battleford Community Home Operator 
 
Mr. Heppner: — My question is for the Minister of Social 
Services. Mr. Minister, you are now admitting guilt in the death 
of Mrs. Helen Montgomery but your commitment in taking 
responsibility is pretty underwhelming. You provided $10,822 
to pay for her funeral expenses. So clearly Social Services is 
admitting you’re responsible for her death by placing her in a 
dangerous situation without proper information or support. 
 

Mr. Minister, will you be providing further compensation to the 
family of Helen Montgomery for her unnecessary death, or do 
you think $10,822 covers the negligence of your department 
that led to that tragedy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 
member he treads on very dangerous ground in terms of an 
issue that is now before the courts. I remind that member again, 
let that member and no other member of this House put in 
jeopardy either the prosecution or the defence of that legal 
issue. I ask that member to be very, very careful. 
 
Now to the member’s question, Mr. Speaker. The department 
which I am privileged to be the minister of has provided, out of 
compassionate grounds, support to the Montgomery family for 
the cost of funeral, for family transportation, and so on — out 
of compassionate grounds. If that member should stand in this 
Chamber and criticize any government or any member or any 
ministry for compassion, that is a tragedy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, this government maintains that 
health care will not suffer for the people of southern 
Saskatchewan if it proceeds with the plans to close the Plains 
hospital, and that access is not a concern. The Liberal 
opposition has obtained a copy of an emergency room audit in 
Regina’s three hospitals . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order! Order! I will ask 
the hon. members in the official opposition — order! — to 
allow the question to be put. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal 
opposition has obtained a copy of an emergency room audit in 
Regina’s three hospitals, and it underlines why the people of 
rural Saskatchewan should be concerned. This audit shows that 
the Plains serves more rural people than the Pasqua and the 
General combined; that more patients arrive by ambulance to 
the Plains than the other two facilities combined; that more 
people are transferred to the Plains from rural areas than the 
other hospitals. And it also shows that the Plains is the most 
efficient. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you justify the closure of the Plains to 
people in southern Saskatchewan when it is the most accessible 
and efficient? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important to 
note here that when you look at the number of people who are 
served in Regina and are served in southern Saskatchewan, that 
the most number of people that are served are served by the 
General Hospital. That’s the largest server of people, health 
services, in southern Saskatchewan today. It’s by the General 
Hospital. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that today a great many of 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

the ambulatory services or ambulance services arrive at the 
Pasqua because they’re providing — or the Plains Health 
Centre — because they’re providing the trauma centre there. As 
we work at moving a large piece of the trauma service to the 
General, which is going to happen over the next six months, 
what you’ll see is that a large portion of the trauma services in a 
major way will be delivered outside of the General Hospital. 
Because that’s where the trauma services are going to be 
provided. 
 
And so to the member opposite, I want to say that when you say 
that there’s going to be fewer services that are going to be 
provided to the people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan, 
absolutely not true. That’s absolutely not true. And I’ve seen 
and heard and read your numbers over the last three weeks and 
on no . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, day in and day out this 
government refuses to acknowledge there’s a hospital bed 
shortage in Regina. Their own audit concludes that 33 out of 
192 patients who passed through emergency rooms and then 
were placed in observation experienced delays in being 
transferred from observation. 
 
Mr. Minister, the reason for the delay in 15 of these 33 cases 
was a lack of beds. In 45 per cent of cases during this audit 
period, delays in transfers from observation occurred because of 
a lack of beds. If you have any ability to care at all, how can 
you say there’s no bed shortage when this audit, conducted by 
the Regina Health District, clearly shows this to be the case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I now see the third set 
of Liberal numbers that have been presented to this House. And 
on the two other occasions, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal numbers 
were nowhere close to what the actual numbers reflect. 
 
I’m reading from the newspaper article here that was dated — 
let me just find the date here — Friday, April 3, 1998. And in 
that statement where the audits of the Regina hospital said that 
20 to 70 per cent of the acute care beds in fact were unoccupied, 
of the 675. Now that’s the audit that I provided numbers for, 
you read from. 
 
Today I provide you with some additional numbers which you 
make the note that there were not enough, sufficient, critical 
care beds available in the Regina health system on Thursday, 
which is absolutely not correct. There were 11 of the district’s 
77 critical beds were unoccupied. 
 
And so for the member to stand up and to continue to 
fearmonger about there not being sufficient acute care beds in 
the province simply is not accurate and they continue to be the 
Liberal numbers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
Regina and southern Saskatchewan only want the government 
to be honest with them. This audit demonstrates two things — 

that there’s a bed shortage and that this government has misled 
the people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan. How are the 
people supposed to believe health care will not suffer if you 
close the Plains when you’ve been less than honest about a bed 
crisis in this city? 
 
Mr. Minister, the Save the Plains Committee and the Liberal 
opposition are staging the first in a series of public forums, 
tomorrow night in Assiniboia. The people of southern 
Saskatchewan deserve an explanation. If you truly believe what 
you’re doing is right, quit ducking the people your decision is 
affecting. Will you show that you care by attending tomorrow 
night’s meeting, and for once listen to the people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that we’ve heard loud and clear from the 
Regina Health District about what it is that they need in order to 
enhance their services for Saskatchewan southern and for the 
city of Regina. And that’s why we’ve invested $94 million in 
the health care district here, to ensure that we have appropriate, 
strong, new health care services for the people of Regina and 
southern Saskatchewan — and that’s 94 additional million 
dollars. 
 
And what will those $94 million provide, Mr. Speaker, for the 
people of Regina and the district? First we say that there will be 
absolutely no bed losses and this is what we’ve been saying and 
this is what you should be saying — no more bed losses. What 
you should be saying is that we’re going to have a new MRI 
(magnetic resonance imaging) in the Regina new General 
Hospital for Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan and the 
district. You should be saying that there’s going to be a new CT 
(computerized axial tomography) scanner — spinal scanner. 
You should say that there’s going to be expanded cardiological 
services there. You should be saying that there’s going to be a 
greater integration of the emergency and the critical care 
services. 
 
Those are the kind of things that we’ve been saying. Those are 
the kind of things that you should be saying because those are 
the realities of what we’re going to see in Saskatchewan as we 
develop those new services for Regina and district. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Easter Hospital Bed Closures 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The only thing 
worse than the current bed crisis in Regina is the fact it gets 
even worse during the holiday periods. It’s bad enough that 
almost 400 beds have been closed in Regina by this 
government, but the NDP will force the closure of 73 more 
hospital beds for a 10-day period over the Easter holidays. Do 
you know how this is described by the district? It’s like this — 
as an exercise in cost avoidance. 
 
Mr. Minister, don’t you get it? There is a bed crisis. There is a 
bed shortage. Don’t you understand that the closure of 73 more 
beds during the holidays will only compound this problem and 
create a whole bunch more suffering? 
 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can hardly believe 
that the member opposite asks this question because the 
member opposite served, I believe, in the capacity of presidency 
of the Saskatchewan hospital association in this province prior 
to the conversion, as I sat as a hospital member as well. And for 
as long as he and I have sat on hospital boards, and hospital 
board associations in this province, we have always had 
shut-downs and slow-downs of beds in Easter time and at 
Christmas. This is a traditional process that has happened for 
the last 30 years and the member opposite knows it. And by 
now I would think that he would be able to know the answer to 
his own question. 
 
Now at no time, Mr. Speaker, will the emergency services in 
any facility be jeopardized — not in Regina, not in Yorkton, not 
in Saskatoon; nowhere will the emergency services to people in 
the province be jeopardized because of the slow-down, and the 
slow-down is to allow for hospital staff to take the appropriate 
breaks during Easter, to provide for physician reduction so that 
they could do the same, and allow patients who are an elective 
to go home, Mr. Speaker. That’s the reason why we’ve done it 
in this province — for ever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I hear the 
minister saying is that he’s proud of all the bed closures that he 
made. That’s what I hear him saying. Shame on you. 
 
We heard you . . . Mr. Speaker, we heard the minister say the 
same thing a few months ago before a similar shut-down 
occurred during the Christmas holiday. The Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses says at least one heart procedure was 
performed every day of the closure except on Christmas Day. 
 
And listen clearly now — the unit required workload relief 
through the slow-down period. Yes, Mr. Minister, during the 
slow-down period our nurses needed workload relief. Can you 
imagine? 
 
And do you know what else? SUN (Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses) reports that during that so-called slow-down period, 
nurses filed a number of situation reports stating that 
insufficient staff levels jeopardized safe patient care. Will you 
tell this House why you’re forcing our health care system into 
another black holiday season? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 
member, as I’ve been assured by the district health boards not 
only in Regina but by district health boards across the province, 
because as I’ve said and the member opposite knows, that it’s 
customary for — in this province and in other provinces across 
the country — to have slow-downs during Easter and 
Christmas. It’s a traditional process that happens across the 
piece. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to suggest for a moment that those decisions 
are being made in isolation without the discussion of the 
medical staff, or discussions with the professional nursing 
community, just simply false. Those discussions are ongoing to 
ensure that appropriate emergency services are provided. 

They’ll ensure that they’ll be there for anyone who requires it 
across the province. And I know that the district health boards 
and the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses are ensuring that that 
remains intact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Death of North Battleford Community Home Operator 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
again for the Minister of Social Services to see if he’ll take 
some responsibility for his department. 
 
Had Mrs. Montgomery’s home been properly licensed as an 
open custody facility for dangerous offenders, she would have 
had liability insurance and her family would have been entitled 
to compensation. She had no insurance, so it couldn’t have been 
properly licensed. 
 
You now appear to be admitting liability by paying for the 
funeral. But it’s a pretty small step, Mr. Minister, when you see 
the kind of compensation package that Jack Messer gets. 
 
Mr. Minister, your department didn’t see to it that Helen 
Montgomery had proper insurance. Your department put her 
into that dangerous situation. Your department is now admitting 
guilt. Will your department now provide further compensation 
to the family of Helen Montgomery? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, several weeks ago the 
Liberal opposition were asking the same questions. As I 
indicated at that time, quite publicly, all of the licensing 
provisions were in order and in place for the Montgomery home 
in North Battleford. 
 
What’s happening here, Mr. Speaker? The Tory Party now 
seems to be catching on. They’re finally talking about health 
care; the Liberals were talking about health care two weeks ago. 
 
I think I know what the problem here today is, Mr. Speaker. I 
think they had such a dismal event, such a dismal event at their 
leadership convention on the weekend that they’ve all just 
turned real grumpy on us here today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure that member, as I assured the 
Liberal caucus several weeks ago, that all of the correct and 
proper licensing procedures were in place in the Montgomery 
home in North Battleford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, in keeping with providing 
open answers, I’m prepared to table this document which will 
detail the answers to the question that’s been requested. 
 
The Speaker: — Answer to question no. 21 is tabled. 
 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With me 
today is the deputy minister of Finance, Mr. Bill Jones; and 
directly behind him is Larry Spannier, who is the assistant 
deputy minister of the treasury board branch. And directly 
behind me is Kirk McGregor, who is the assistant deputy 
minister, taxation and intergovernmental affairs branch. And 
behind Mr. McGregor is Jim Marshall, who is the executive 
director of the economic and fiscal policy branch. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I’d like to move resolution no. 1. And I will 
send that to you and I will distribute summaries of the interim 
supply to the opposition. And the motion is: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $357,121,000 be granted to Her 
Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 
1999. 

 
And I’ll send that motion to the Clerk, and I will ask the page at 
the same time, I will ask the page at the same time to distribute 
summaries to members of the Conservative opposition and also 
the Liberal opposition and to the three independent members. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I certainly recognize that we’re talking about a 
very significant amount of money that I would like to ask some 
questions on. 
 
Mr. Minister, I see that you’re asking for one-twelfth of the 
global budget, of the amount that’s to be voted on. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that is correct, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I want to ask you, on 
the basis of how this is allocated, I understand it’s just a 
mathematical formula in terms of one-twelfth but can you tell 
me, is that the way it’s allocated? Once the amount of money is 
arrived at, is one-twelfth allocated on a pro rata basis across 
each of the departments or is there some variation between 
departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, it is allocated as straight one-twelfth to 
each department. And actually, exactly in the numbers on the 
sheet which you have been provided with. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I think you can 
appreciate that it was just provided to us about 10 seconds ago 
so there wasn’t time for much analysis. And I take it that that’s 
the normal level of cooperation we can expect from your 
department in the future, so we will note that. 
 
Minister, in your terms of your revenue side, does the revenue 
also flow in on equal one-twelfth segments, as you seem to be 
allocating your expenditures? 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — No it does not. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — If that’s the case, is it appropriate to look at 
one-twelfth of the expenditures or for example, since in your 
budget for example you were allocating 374 million for Liquor 
and Gaming, you were going to have a special dividend of $100 
million and a further dividend from the Saskatchewan Crowns. 
Are you taking all of those monies upfront or are you taking 
them on a one-twelfth basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I thank the member for the question, Mr. 
Chair. As we all know, the interim supply process is the 
traditional means by which the government is able to carry out 
its day-to-day business during the detailed budget review period 
that we’re now embarking upon. And for example, before the 
budget is actually voted on and approved, we will need 
approval of the Assembly to disperse payments to groups like 
the Children’s Haven in Prince Albert, and Regina’s Mobile 
Crisis Services, to foster care families, and social assistance 
around the province, and many other groups and individuals. 
 
Now obviously they will be relying upon us to get them the 
allotted sum of money which will be one-twelfth of the annual 
amount, we’ll say — should be in almost every case. And they 
would suffer great inconvenience and hardship if we didn’t 
allocate one-twelfth of the annual amount to them regardless of 
whether our revenue flowed in at exactly that same rate. 
 
Because as the member can appreciate, being in business, the 
expenditure may be paid out a regular rate but the revenue may 
come in at an irregular rate, depending upon the time of year 
and arrangements with the federal government with respect to 
taxation payments being made to us, the economy and retail 
sales being different at different times of year, and so on. 
 
In addition to those immediate needs of course, there are health 
boards, schools, universities, and other institutions and 
organizations that await provincial funding generally. And the 
members will know that interim supply is calculated as total 
expense less statutory amounts, which are amounts that have 
been previously approved by the Legislative Assembly, such as 
interest payments on the debt. 
 
Once you take the statutory amounts off of the amount allocated 
to each department, then you’re left with the amount that is to 
be voted in the Assembly. And traditionally, we request 
one-twelfth of the amount to be voted, which represents the 
maximum amount that the departments and agencies can spend. 
So in other words, they can’t spend more than that, they can 
only spend up to the one-twelfth in the monthly period. 
 
The Department of Finance has been assured by all departments 
and agencies that they will be able to manage within the 
one-twelfth amount provided for the month of April, which is 
the interim supply Bill here today. And of course, as the 
member says, I’ve distributed a department summary which 
was just distributed, as the member says, and I acknowledge 
that. But the information is reasonably straightforward and 
certainly set out there. 
 
And I would remind the members opposite that the detailed 
questions about the departments, for each department, will be 
discussed with each of the ministers of the departments during 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

their estimates certainly and no opportunity will be lost to ask 
specific questions in the estimates process which the member is 
familiar with. And traditionally, with respect to this process, 
general questions are asked about interim supply. 
 
So I offer that information. I hope it’s helpful to the Assembly, 
Mr. Chair, and I thank the member for his question. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I appreciate that you have the 
commitment of all your departments that one-twelfth will do the 
job. It strikes me though that the system of one-twelfth pro rata 
may have some flaws in it. 
 
For example it’s my understanding, for example . . . and I’ll let 
my colleagues who are more specific to the different 
department requirements to ask questions in so far as to the 
adequacies of the interim supply meeting the general needs of 
the department. Because I would think that departmental 
expenditures don’t necessarily follow into equal little chunks of 
one-twelfth, one-twelfth, one-twelfth. 
 
For example probably less than the full one-twelfth of the 
Department of Highways, as an example, requirements would 
happen in this one-twelfth month of April; that more of their 
money may come into demand as you get into the construction 
season because a fair significant component of the highways 
budget for example would relate to capital projects. 
 
So I’m asking philosophically the question of the adequacy of 
the one-twelfth systematic allocation of the resource. Is that the 
best way to do it? Education for example I believe sort of has to 
look after internal financing from January 1 because the 
calendar years don’t necessarily coincide. And so are we, by 
looking at this system of allocation of resources, penalizing 
some agencies and some departments where we sort of 
artificially reward others? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I appreciate the member’s question. 
This is the traditional way that this has been done for want of 
. . . well for simplicity really, I suppose, to assume that each 
department will on average need the monthly amount of its 
budgetary allocation. 
 
But the member is quite right that not every department will 
spend all of that money. This is the maximum that they can 
spend. So that if they were able to spend the money, they would 
spend it, but there is no requirement that they spend the 
maximum amount of money. They may spend less than that but 
if the Department of Highways could get going in April, for 
example to spend one-twelfth of its allotment, then that money 
would be allocated to them, but that would be the maximum 
that would be allocated to them during that month, or that they 
could in effect pay out to third parties. 
 
I suppose that there might be some other way to do interim 
supply. It isn’t the way things have traditionally been done. 
 
I suppose what the legislature has traditionally wanted to do is 
to deal with the interim supply fairly expeditiously; just say, 
well we’re providing them with one month of interim supply so 
we’ll assume that one-twelfth, there being 12 months in a year, 

is a reasonable amount, probably so that the legislature can get 
on with the business of dealing with the detailed estimates 
which allow all of the members, but in particular I think the 
opposition members, to go into much more detail in each 
department about the spending. 
 
So I understand the member’s point. It’s not by any means an 
ill-founded point. I understand the point of view. This is the 
way it traditionally has been done in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I can appreciate that, Minister. I guess what 
I’m asking for your comments on is certainly, is there a better 
way of doing it that might more responsibly reflect the real 
needs of departments? 
 
We could have the possibility, as you indicate, where a given 
department has nowhere near the requirements of one-twelfth 
by the nature of their expenditure cycle, where other 
departments could be really crimped in terms of meeting their 
cash flow requirements. 
 
And if not the department itself, it might be the third-party 
agencies that are very dependent on third-party funding from 
the department. And they may, because of the nature of their 
fiscal year being quite different than the Assembly’s fiscal year, 
could be ending up in a situation where they are very severely 
penalized with carrying charges on money they’ve already 
expended. 
 
For example, once the budget is approved, I believe . . . or once 
the expenditures are approved, the general expenditure pattern 
for the Department of Education for example is there’s a 
catch-up process where more than one-twelfth is allocated to 
school boards, so that they can recover the fact that their 
calendar year is different than the Assembly’s calendar year. 
 
And so what I’m asking as a question is, could we be doing this 
in a better way that would actually meet the needs of the 
third-party people that you mentioned as a practical reality 
rather than just sitting there saying, well this is the way it’s 
always been done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well it’s not that this has always . . . it’s 
not just that this is the way it’s always been done; it also is the 
most simple, straightforward way to do it. 
 
But I will say to the member that if the members opposite wish 
to have two months interim supply at the same time for example 
because you feel it may be more convenient, I believe we would 
be agreeable, subject to a discussion between our House 
leaders, to having interim supply where we would approve 
one-sixth of the amounts to be voted. I don’t think this is out of 
the question, and the Department of Finance certainly would 
work with anyone who has a problem, and that is what we do. 
 
But we haven’t had a lot of problems indicated, I’m advised. 
This is the most simple, straightforward way to deal with the 
matter. I believe that if the opposition insisted that we do 
interim supply for two months instead of one month, that we 
would be amenable to doing that. 
 
And so I invite the member to indicate whether that is indeed 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

your position because certainly we would be amenable to doing 
that. Perhaps not today, but in the future. I don’t think there’s a 
problem with that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I think, Minister, I was asking that the 
process be more sensitive to the needs of individual 
departments and their spending patterns or their spending 
requirements because they’re not just all flat lined as equal 
one-twelfth. And where some departments may need very little 
on their interim supply because of the nature of the expenditure 
requirements for that department, other departments at least 
philosophically could well use two or three months supply on 
that basis. 
 
And I’m asking, has the department done any analysis to the 
actual requirements of departments, and particularly third-party 
agencies that are very dependent? As the minister indicated, 
there are people that are looking for the third-party funding that 
is required for their agencies and the services and jurisdictions 
that they represent to require funding. 
 
Has the department done an analysis about the impact of this 
standard, traditional methodology of providing funds to analyse 
what the real impact on sticking to this system is . . . is the 
impact that’s having on third-party agencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well certainly the system works well if we 
pass interim supply in a timely fashion. This is certainly a 
straightforward way of dealing with it. The member offers 
another suggestion. Certainly we’re quite willing to look at any 
suggestions, including that one. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, irrespective of the fact that the 
members of the opposition, indeed the members of the House 
generally, are going to have much more opportunity in which to 
look at the details of individual department’s expenditures, etc., 
down the road, the bottom line is, is what the interim supply is 
asking us to do is not sort of a simple, quick pass of the tongue, 
one-twelfth of the expenditures. We’re being asked to approve 
the expenditure of $356 million. And for the people of this 
province and for the people of the Assembly, I think that that is 
an important and significant amount of money that it’s quite 
appropriate to ask some at least general questions about before 
they’re expended. 
 
And the answer of saying, well it just represents a mathematical 
one-twelfth, really doesn’t do much justice to the issue in terms 
of saying, well that’s indeed a mathematical formula but it 
doesn’t necessarily reflect meeting the needs of Saskatchewan 
people and the agencies that perhaps are administrating 
programs on their behalf. 
 
And that’s why I appreciate your willingness to look at it, and I 
assume by the fact that you’re saying you’re willing to look at it 
into a future tense, that the department has not done any 
analysis about the impact on third-party agencies and agencies 
that have a different cash flow than a mathematical one-twelfth. 
 
I’m asking you, has the department in the past done any 
analysis of the cash requirements of third-party agencies who 
may indeed be really strapped for cash and may have to be 
looking at lines of credit or banking arrangements in order to 
meet their cash requirements, which incurs potentially a very 

extra serious cost on their operations that they may not 
otherwise have if we looked at interim supply in a more 
responsible manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think we do deal with interim 
supply in a responsible manner. It’s just a question of whether 
we should do it in the way it’s always been done or whether 
there should be a new way. 
 
Certainly we’re very open-minded to looking at any suggestion 
the hon. member may have, and will do so. I can assure the hon. 
member that with respect to the convenience of third parties, the 
Department of Finance is constantly talking to third parties and 
ensuring that their financial means are dealt with in a 
convenient way. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — As part of that discussion, for example, is 
there discussion about the impact in terms of carrying charges, 
interest either expended or interest potentially lost, for agencies 
like the boards of education to carry forward the operating 
expenses of three or four months of operation before any supply 
is granted to them. 
 
Has there been an impact study done by your department using 
that as a specific example but not limiting it to that, to any 
agencies that are in the situation of having a different fiscal year 
than the government and the impact that they have on their 
budget of carrying their total operation for three, four, or five 
months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well certainly carrying charges are always 
a consideration in any discussions. And if any third party has a 
problem, then that’s discussed with the Department of Finance. 
But in the main, the third parties simply want to be assured that 
they will in fact get funding on a timely basis. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well certainly I can see where an agency 
would be happier with one-twelfth than no-twelfths; that’s a 
pretty easy logic to follow. What I am getting at is because of 
the fact we seem to be stuck in doing things like we always 
have, we hear that health boards for example, some of them and 
many of them, are carrying fairly large operating deficits. 
Somehow that reality is not just a theory; it’s a reality that 
either they are using reserve funds of their own which means 
that they do not have the interest-earning potential, or they 
actually are making financial arrangements with lending 
institutions. The same thing is true of boards of education. 
 
All of those issues are increased expenditures that may not 
necessarily have to be expended by those agencies who are 
looking for every last penny to save, and order their operation 
costs for the purpose that they really intended to do instead of 
because of our inability to respond to the real requirements, are 
stuck in a situation where either they have a diminished interest 
revenue potential or indeed are, because of the way they have to 
deal with their lending institutions, having to borrow money 
and paying interest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well if the member . . . As I said before, 
Mr. Chair, if the member wishes to make a House amendment 
to make the interim supply for two-twelfths or one-sixth of the 
budgetary amount to enable us to release more money to the 
departments so that they can in turn release more money earlier 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

to the third parties, if the member wants to do that we certainly 
are amenable and agreeable to such a House amendment, and I 
invite the member to make it. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I don’t know why you’re so 
blinded by the traditional methodology. By doing two-twelfths, 
you just expend the money twice as much and you still don’t 
address the issue that I’ve outlined here and it sort of indicates 
your inability to think creatively and reasonably about the real 
situations that are happening inside the expenditure side of the 
departments. 
 
Clearly what happens then, you just make the problem worse 
for departments that don’t need even one-twelfth, now you give 
them two-twelfths. And the departments that have different 
expenditure patterns are no better off than they are now, or I 
guess they are, because you’re just throwing more money at the 
problem. Just indicates your inability of your government to 
sort of really understand the realities and the challenges that are 
happening out in the province where people have some real 
issues about what’s going on in their department. 
 
I simply asked the question — and I haven’t got an answer yet 
— has the department done an impact study about this 
traditional methodology of dealing with interim supply and with 
specific focus on the impact on either interest revenue that they 
have to forgo because they’re using their own capital resources 
to fund operations for three or four months, and/or that they’re 
expending money while they deal with their local lending 
institutions for lines of credit or things of that nature. Has the 
department done a study on this methodology of interim supply 
of strictly taking a mathematical formula as it relates to the 
whole amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the department does a study of this on 
an ongoing basis because that is one of the main functions of 
the Department of Finance to see if departments and third 
parties are receiving funds on a timely basis. If the member is 
saying, has some document been produced that is called a study 
of this — no. This is common sense and knowledge that people 
in the department have from working on a daily basis, and they 
study these things every day in their jobs because that is indeed 
their job to do. 
 
But I want to say to the member as I said before, that the 
Department of Finance has been assured by all departments and 
agencies that they will be able to manage within the one-twelfth 
amount provided for the month of April. They have been 
assured that that is the case. The member said a few minutes 
ago that he was concerned that maybe some of them would 
need more money. I said to the member, if the member wishes 
to make a House amendment to give the departments more 
money at this time under interim supply, we are willing to agree 
to such an amendment. 
 
(1445) 
 
The member says that I lack creativity, but I actually came up 
with a solution to the member’s problem which I’ve also 
indicated is not a problem. The member does not have any 
amendment to the motion to offer. I say these in . . . trying to be 
very helpful to assure the member that the department has been 
assured that the departments and agencies can manage within 

the one-twelfth amount provided. 
 
If the member feels that this is not correct and the member 
wants to say we should be giving more by way of interim 
supply, we can do so. But I take it the member has no motion to 
. . . or amendment to the motion to offer. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The minister’s obviously too confused by 
the simple logic because I said, and you admitted, that there are 
departments who do not require one-twelfth of the supply, 
never mind two-twelfths of the supply. And what we have done 
is just take this very simplistic system of a mathematical 
formula that cranks out an expenditure of $356 million and 
expect that that’s supposed to meet the requirements. Obviously 
we can spend a lot time trying to get you to understand that, and 
I don’t think that you do. 
 
Can the minister give us an outline about how many agencies 
that you fund as third-party agencies that would have the same 
fiscal calendar year as the government as compared to other 
agencies that may have a January to December 31 financial year 
end. How many agencies . . . do you have those kinds of 
proportion at least . . . I’m not asking for the exact number, but 
would you have a sense about how many of your agencies and 
what percentage of this interim supply would be funded to 
agencies that have a different financial year than what the 
government has? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well there are hundreds of agencies and it 
would vary across the piece. That kind of detail about agencies 
funded by particular departments certainly could be provided 
under Estimates. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Would you have a general sense — would 
there be a 50/50 balance between agencies that are on a 
different financial year, or 70/30, or would you have a sense as 
to what the proportion would be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well no I wouldn’t, but it wouldn’t impact 
upon an organization or agency in any event in the sense that 
whatever their fiscal year is — whether it’s ending January 31 
or March 31, or June 30 — they would need on a monthly basis 
roughly one-twelfth of the annual amount and certainly they 
could be provided with that under this method of doing interim 
supply. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
questions I guess I have are more with the departments that I’m 
critic for and that would be the first one I’d like to touch on 
with is Highways. And well, I go back into where last year the 
announcement of the two and a half billion dollars over the next 
10 years, and then last year we were a way short of that. I think 
— correct me if my numbers are wrong — but it was $208 
million was put into Highways. And this year it will be 218, 
which will be another 32 million short of the $250 million over 
the 10 years. 
 
And I guess my question probably is not placed in the right spot 
because we’ll get into this later in the session, but I guess I have 
a big concern that if we don’t keep up to the 250 million a year 
for the next seven or eight years, there is no way we’re gong to 
catch up to this commitment that you made last year for 250 
million a year and I have real concern with that, Mr. Minister. 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

But what you’re asking for today I believe is one-twelfth of the 
total budget that you have come out with in the ’98-99 
Estimates, so I guess what I need possibly, Mr. Minister, is an 
explanation of each of the departments and I’d like to start with 
Highways and Transportation. And I can understand, and I 
would like your comment on this, administration I would 
imagine is very straightforward with what you’re asking. 
Probably your costs in this end would be the full one-twelfth 
every month for the twelve months. Would that be right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That would be basically right. The 
department will get one-twelfth of the gross amount as the 
member knows. And then presumably their administrative costs 
would be one-twelfth per month roughly, maybe, you know, 
some variation, and then some things would be much more in 
summer months than winter months obviously. 
 
In answer to the first part of your question about the 218 million 
not being 250 million, of course you’re right that that isn’t 10 
per cent of 2.5 billion. But what will happen is that in the first 
years we’re going up from 190 to 200 to 218 million. Once we 
get to the out years in the 10-year period, the expenditure for 
highway construction will have to be quite a bit higher than 250 
million. So I can’t tell you right at this moment what figure you 
would get to, but you would obviously be getting to a figure 
that would be closer to 300 million at some point. 
 
Part of the strategy here has to be to increase the expenditure at 
a reasonable rate so as not to increase inflation too much. And I 
won’t go into all the details right now, but I’m sure the 
member’s aware that if you put money into the system too 
quickly it might have an inflationary impact for the reasons I 
can go into if the member wants. But it isn’t his main question, 
which I have tried to address. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I guess, Mr. Minister, where I have a 
concern though is the province, as we have been told, has done 
very well in the revenue side in this last year, year and a half, 
with the oil prices as high as they were. And I realize they’ve 
gone down somewhat now. 
 
But I guess my concern is that if we can’t afford to fulfil our 
commitment of the 250 million now, how on earth are we going 
to get up to 300 or 350 million, I believe it’s going to be if my 
numbers are right, in the last couple of years of this contract? I 
agree with what you have said with the administration end of 
our one-twelfth. I can understand that being fairly evenly 
presented. 
 
But I guess where I have a problem, and being involved a bit 
with municipal government to this end where you have paving 
contracts, that probably the tenders are coming out now or have 
shortly been out and some more will be coming out, and the 
cost of those tenders probably would not be till later in the 
summer or later next fall. Unless I’m not understanding what 
we’re doing here, there would be very little cost to go with 
those tenders at this point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well that’s right. And they could go with 
the tenders at this point. There’s nothing stopping them from 
doing that, and that is indeed what they will do — 
municipalities, Department of Highways, people doing things 
all across the province I’m sure. 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I 
might need a little help explaining what some of these areas are. 
I think I understand a lot of them. But in the Highways, for an 
example, you have accommodation and central services for I 
believe $6.8 million, and you’re asking for a twelfth to fund 
that. Can you explain what exactly that is that that’s going for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m not trying to be difficult, but this is the 
sort of question that the member really should be asking in 
estimates under Department of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — We realize that, Mr. Minister, but you’re 
also asking us to okay one-twelfth of the overall budget here 
and if we really can’t understand exactly where it’s going, it’s 
really hard for us to give you an honest and true . . . our opinion 
of whether we feel you need the full one-twelfth or not. 
 
I guess my next question then would be, is one-twelfth the least 
you can ask for? And I guess what I’m saying, why I’m saying 
that, is because you’ve admitted on a number of occasions here 
you really probably don’t need the full one-twelfth the first 
month. And is that the lowest figure at the point you can come 
in now and ask for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, you could ask for a lower amount. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay. Well in the Highway and 
Transportation department then do you have any idea what 
number is actually needed? Because I think you’ve admitted, 
and I would agree with you very much on this one, that 
one-twelfth probably is not needed. And I’m not saying we 
would vote against it today because of this, but I’m trying to get 
an understanding of how many dollars probably are needed in 
the first month, second month, because I believe you’re going 
to come back. You’re probably going to be back next month to 
ask for the same thing all over again. 
 
And I guess my question is, within the Department of 
Highways, probably instead of one-twelfth, what would be a 
realistic figure that you would need? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I should point out to the member that 
the Department of Highways, using them as an example, would 
not necessarily get the one-twelfth of the money that we would 
vote for interim supply. What this would do would be to 
authorize the Department of Finance to pay them up to 
one-twelfth, but the Department of Finance would only pay 
them money that they actually spent. 
 
So that yes, I mean you could try to estimate exactly what they 
would need for the month of April and then try to vote that 
amount. But we don’t know what the weather conditions are 
going to be like in April, whether all the frost will be gone, 
whether they can get going. So what we say is they can have up 
to one-twelfth and whatever they spend up to that one-twelfth 
we will provide them with. But if they spend less than that, then 
that also is what we will provide them with. We’ll only provide 
them with what they need. 
 
So that the way that we will manage this will be in accordance 
with what the member is saying. We won’t necessarily give 
them the one-twelfth but we will be authorized to give them up 
to the one-twelfth. And some of them will spend the whole 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

one-twelfth, some of the departments, and some of them won’t. 
And if they don’t, we simply will hold back the money. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to 
move on Municipal Government because I’m a little more 
familiar with the grants and the grant system and the way they 
work there, whether we have an unconditional or conditional 
maintenance grants and so on. 
 
And I know from experience when I use maintenance grants for 
an example, which amounts to quite a few dollars, and the cost 
of, but most of those grants I think, in fact all of them, come 
through later in the fall or even in the early winter of the next 
year. And the same with the unconditional and conditional. The 
construction grants, I know for sure, come out as the contracts 
come due and then there’s a period of then when the Municipal 
Government funds the municipalities for their share. 
 
And I guess kind of the same question, Mr. Minister, is coming 
out here. Because I believe with Municipal Government, 
probably even more so than most departments, the biggest cost 
to the Finance department is far later in the year. I would 
suggest that one-twelfth wouldn’t even be within a mile of what 
you would need for Municipal Government at this point except 
for probably administration. Would you go along with that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well that’s possible. And if they don’t 
need the money, then they won’t be given the money is the 
answer. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — But then, Mr. Minister, probably next 
month you’re going to come back and you’re going to ask once 
more for another twelfth and there’s possibly areas such as the 
two that I’ve just mentioned, like Highways and Municipal 
Government, and I believe you’re probably going to come back 
and ask for another twelfth at that point. And I guess the point 
I’m trying to make is, how will we know if you really need it at 
that point? 
 
I mean, like you say, if the weather’s good and all the things 
that go along with Highways and Municipal Government and 
that are very good, then your costs will be far lower. And a 
twelfth now, approved right now, next month, or maybe 
absolutely no need of any more money at that point because 
they may not have used even 5, 10 per cent of that one-twelfth 
that you have passed on to them. Or made available to them, I 
guess, as you’ve explained. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Well as I indicated, if they don’t need 
the money, then although they will be in a position where they 
could get the money if they do need it, if they don’t need the 
money, then the money will not be paid to them. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I’d like to touch on parks and regional 
parks for a minute. And I realize funding has been cut 
drastically for these things but there still is some money for 
them. Is there an ongoing cost twelfth, one-twelfth at a time, for 
these, or is that just really a one-time grant, is it not, for 
regional parks that comes out later in the year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in some cases they’re one-time 
payments and in some cases they aren’t. With respect to a 

question with that much detail, that is normally a question that 
would be asked when the minister for that particular department 
is here. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. But one more 
question, and I know you’re probably going to answer me the 
same, but I would hope you don’t. And the reason being that I 
don’t really understand what this part is, where I’m in 
Municipal Government in the ’98-99 Estimates if you can 
follow with me. And I realize this may not be the exact place to 
be asking this question, although you are asking us to give you 
our blessing on one-twelfth of the overall budget. 
 
And it’s to do with the gaming funds, and I’m really having a 
hard time understanding what the $16.5 million is there. I 
believe it’s 525,000 gaming funds. Can you explain what that 
would be and what the one-twelfth would be for in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That would relate to payments to the 
associated entities fund and first nations fund based on the 
estimated net profits from the Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation and the four community Indian casinos. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, good afternoon. In your responses to some of my 
colleagues’ questions, you indicated that there was a bit of a 
difference between calendar year of certain agencies versus 
fiscal year of government, etc. 
 
And again I would like to raise a couple of questions regarding 
education. I just spoke with a number of administrators of some 
school boards who’ve indicated that, even though this is April, 
that not a single dollar has been received yet for the 1998 
calendar year, which of course boards are operating on. 
 
So when we start to look at your interim supply Bill of 
one-twelfth, can you explain to boards of education how they 
will actually receive the monies that have been expended by 
them thus far? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well what we want to do is get interim 
supply through so that we can start paying some money to the 
school boards. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I’m glad to hear that, Mr. Minister, but that 
doesn’t answer the question for boards of education. We look at 
a board of education who has now completed their costs for the 
month of March, three months of 1998, which is basically 
three-tenths of their expenses, not even three-twelfths. You’re 
indicating that you’re wanting to come up with a one-twelfth 
supply. 
 
If a board of education is not in a very good financial position 
then they’re operating on their line of credit. Their line of credit 
costs interest dollars, and as result they’re going to be incurring 
larger and larger interest costs. I think that you need to put 
before this House a plan that will indicate to boards of 
education that they’re not going to be in a financial pickle 
because you’re not willing to catch up to the expenses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well we’ll certainly do our best to catch up 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

to the expenses once the budget is passed. But at the present 
time, without the detailed estimates being gone through in the 
House, the practice is that we do interim supply to allow them 
to be paid some money. And that’s the process we’re engaged 
in at the present time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, though, you are very aware I’m 
sure, from understanding the educational process, that about 70 
or 75 per cent of a school board’s expenses are salary. They’re 
monthly costs; they were costs that were paid out in January 
and in February and in March, and in fact we are now into 
April. 
 
So we are in a situation where boards of education are 
experiencing increased costs because of a lack of a plan from 
your government. And I would, I would question you on the 
fact that boards of education need to know that long before the 
budget is passed — and we may not be through budget until 
June — that you’re prepared to indeed catch up to the expenses 
of boards of education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as the member knows . . . I mean I 
don’t want to get into a lot of detail about the . . . that should be 
properly dealt with in estimates with the Minister of Education. 
But my understanding is that what the member says is correct, 
that expenses are incurred in January, February, March, and the 
school boards don’t have their money yet, but that at some point 
once the budget is approved in the legislature, they receive their 
funding from the province, the provincial share of their funding, 
and then they’ve got a gross amount which they haven’t 
expended, which they will spend throughout the rest of the year. 
 
If that’s correct, then they would make up some interest on that 
money with . . . to counterbalance the interest they would lose 
at the beginning of the year. Now the member may disagree 
with that, and I’d be pleased, if I’m wrong, to have the member 
correct me or make whatever comments. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t know 
whether that’s wrong in terms of what your new plan might be. 
But that is a new plan, because traditionally, by the end of June, 
boards of education probably could have expected to receive 
six-twelfths, which is a little bit ahead of the game because, you 
know, the six months haven’t, you know, transpired. Some 
teachers are paid on a 10-month plan and some teachers are 
paid on a 12-month plan. But there is definitely no scenario 
where they are actually going to be able to catch up because 
they are going to have money on deposit. I have never been 
aware of that, and if that is the change that you’re going to be 
implementing in the months of June and July and August, I’d be 
very appreciative of that. And I think not only myself but I 
think boards of education would be glad to hear that they’ll 
have a chance to recoup some of those interest costs. 
 
As I’ve indicated, you know, when you have boards of 
education that are expending their monies now, they’re doing so 
on a contract that is provincial in nature. They have to pay the 
money. Similarly, I think you’re very aware that boards of 
education rely on two sources of revenue. One is government 
grants and the second one is taxes. 
 
Tax notices and, sure, I imagine there are some people that take 
advantage of rebates to pay their taxes up front, but not very 

many. As a result, boards of education are in a financial bind as 
a result of not having that available revenue. 
 
So my question then — and I know I heard you respond to one 
of my colleagues that said well one-twelfth is just an arbitrary 
number — what we need to see now is what is the actual cost 
that boards of education have incurred up to the end of March. 
If that cost is far greater than one-twelfth, then we need to look 
at it, I think, in a sense of making sure that we’re not passing 
on, government is not passing on an increased cost to the boards 
of education because your department is not dealing with the 
finances in a correct fashion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Well one of the things that we have 
tried to do in the budget is to provide some actual more 
assistance to the boards of education through increased 
operating grants as well as some increase on the capital side. 
 
So I appreciate what the member is saying and we want to be 
very cooperative with the school boards. This is an issue that 
certainly, I think, could be discussed further and I would invite 
the member — and I’m sure he will — when the Minister of 
Education is going through her estimates, to revisit this 
question. And I think it’s a good question that should be looked 
at. 
 
And if the way that we’re funding the school boards in terms of 
the timing of payments creates some problem that perhaps 
should be examined, then what I’m saying is let’s examine it 
and try to do the right thing. And certainly over time we want 
to, as indicated by the budget that’s before the House, work 
more closely with the school boards, do more over time. That 
commitment was made in the budget. It certainly is a sincere 
commitment. And so we undertake to certainly examine this 
question which, I think, is a good question to be examined. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. And 
indeed I will take that up with the Minister of Education. One 
other question in the area of K to 12 education; as you’ve 
indicated, a portion of monies are granted of course for capital. 
I know from talking with officials in the facilities department of 
the Department of Education that there are many, many 
applications. Will the interim supply of one-twelfth allow the 
department to continue with its allocations of capital projects, 
or indeed will this be delayed until the budget is passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, I think that they will simply proceed. 
As I said in answer to the member from Saltcoats, the fact that 
the budget isn’t passed or interim supply is only one-twelfth 
etc., will not stop anyone from doing their planning and sending 
out any invitations to tender, for example, that they may want to 
do. They will get going with those things I think because it’ll 
. . . the process will take some time and it will be some months 
before they will actually make any payments. So no, I don’t 
think they’ll have any difficulty in that regard. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as far 
as the post-secondary area and skills training, I’m not familiar 
with how grants are allocated to the post-secondary institutions, 
whether they be the University of Regina or the University of 
Saskatchewan or SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology), for instance. Could you indicate how 
this one-twelfth share will be allocated to meet the . . . I’m sure 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

they are also on a calendar year. They’ve incurred costs since 
January — salaries etc. How will the areas in post-secondary be 
funded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Really the answer is quite similar to the 
answer with respect to the school boards — that the department 
itself will get the one-twelfth or up to the one-twelfth. And then 
they will decide how to allocate that, I mean to their own 
administration, their rent and so on, but also with respect to any 
grant funding they need to do with respect to third parties. 
 
I don’t know, for example, that they would necessarily be at this 
time making grant payments to their third parties, which are the 
universities and SIAST and so on, the regional colleges. I’m 
really not sure. 
 
But if there’re some payments they’re are required to make they 
will make them. If they’re not required to make them during 
this interim supply period then they won’t. And if they don’t 
make a grant to a third party then certainly they won’t be given 
the money to do so. They will have their own arrangements 
with the universities, SIAST, regional colleges and so on as to 
when the money is to be received. 
 
And I have to say to the member I’m sorry I don’t know what 
those dates are. But those dates certainly would be provided in 
estimates when the Minister of Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training is here to answer those specific questions. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in the 
area of post-secondary, as a follow-up, do you have a request 
from the post-secondary area through the Post-Secondary 
minister’s department that said this is the amount of money that 
we require right now? Or are you indicating that the process is 
exactly the same as the K to 12 system that will mean that there 
will be a catch-up somewhere along the course of months in 
1998? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I’m not really aware whether the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education has such requests or 
not. I am aware that the Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training has indicated to the Department 
of Finance that it can meet its obligations and manage with 
one-twelfth of its appropriation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — They have indicated that they can meet those, 
those responsibilities as one-twelfth, of one-twelfth is what I 
heard you say. So therefore I would assume that they’re not 
having to dip into reserves or anything like that. Obviously their 
scenarios are a little bit different than the K to 12. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the area of post-secondary as well, there’s 
similar capital monies. We’ve heard about a number of 
concerns, especially at the campus in Saskatoon with the 
University of Saskatchewan where there’s, you know, buildings 
that have been destroyed because of safety conditions and the 
fact that the board of governors is dealing with this problem of 
how to arrive at capital construction and to determine priorities. 
 
Is the Department of Finance involved in that type of 
discussion right now with the University of Saskatchewan for 
instance? Or more so even, let’s look at the expenditure for the 
SIAST campus, the proposed SIAST campus. Is the 

Department of Finance involved in that at all right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With respect to the universities it is — and 
SIAST, — it is mainly the responsibility of the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training in the case of the 
University of Saskatchewan. They have ongoing discussions 
and an ongoing process about the capital needs of the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan). And I’ll say a word about that. 
 
I’m advised by the Department of Post-Secondary Education 
and in personal discussions I’ve had with officials from the 
University of Saskatchewan, really on an informal basis, just 
when I have happened to see them, that they believe that they 
can deal with the capital problems that they have — the ones 
that are most well known are the laboratory in the Thorvaldson 
Building and the physical education building — with the level 
of funding that they have been provided with. So my 
understanding from Tony Whitworth, who’s the financial 
vice-president at the University of Saskatchewan, is that they 
see no problem in proceeding to deal with the things that they 
feel they need to deal with. 
 
Now having said that, I also understand that in any event, by 
the time they do the planning and work required to fix these 
buildings at the university, or in the case of the physical 
education building to add on, rebuild, or whatever it is they’re 
going to do, because I don’t think that’s been quite determined, 
by the time they get through all of that, that it probably will 
take them three or four years. But that has not so much to do 
with the level of funding, it’s just the fact that that’s how long 
it will take to do the planning and make the necessary 
arrangements. 
 
I had occasion yesterday as a matter of fact, at a church I was 
present at, to speak to someone from . . . who works in the 
Thorvaldson and in the pharmacy building, who advised me 
that you know it will be a difficult process to redo the lab 
because they will be taking students and academic staff out of 
the lab, having to put them somewhere else while they renovate 
the lab, but that they realize that will take some time. But they 
feel that the problem will be dealt with as expeditiously as 
possible. 
 
So the universities are quite pleased with the budget. They feel 
that it’s a very good budget for them and that their problems 
will be largely dealt with. Of course I’m sure they’ll still have 
some problems; we never get to the situation where all the 
problems in the world are dealt with, but generally speaking 
they’re very pleased, both the students and the administrators. 
 
With respect to the SIAST, that is a matter that is being handled 
by both the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
— because I believe it is the owner of that facility — and the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education. They have been 
working in consultation with SIAST to arrange the 
consolidation of SIAST in that facility. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, in the last few days there has 
been some discussion, I know, in the media regarding the 
provincial government’s participation with the federal 
government in the federated . . . Indian federated college and 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

the possibility of that type of construction occurring here in 
Regina. I would guess that from the estimates of course they are 
. . . there was no additional monies allocated for that. 
 
Is your department involved in discussions right now and 
indeed will interim supply be necessary to actually effect a 
possible agreement with the federal government regarding the 
Indian federated college? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, not directly. As I said to the media on 
budget day, we will — contrary to some reports in the media as 
to rumour and speculation — we will not be participating in the 
capital cost of the new building of the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College. We take the position, and always have taken 
the position, that education for treaty Indians is the 
responsibility of the federal government. And we believe that 
it’s better for the province as a whole, as well as for treaty 
Indians, that the federal government live up to that obligation. 
So we have said, and we continue to say, we will not put money 
into the building for the Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College. 
 
However as I indicated to the media on budget day — and this 
is what we intend to do — we are willing to recognize that the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College does not just educate 
treaty Indians. It provides some education for people who are 
not treaty Indians, and therefore with respect to whom we can’t 
really take the position and shouldn’t take the position that this 
is solely a federal responsibility. And we have some 
responsibility there, which over the course of time, going back I 
don’t know how many years, we have met in the sense that we 
provide some operational funding to the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College to compensate them for the educational 
services they provide to non treaty-Indian people. 
 
The amount of money that we have been providing to them to 
compensate for the service they provide is disproportionate to 
the number of services they have come to provide. So we will 
more fairly and accurately compensate them in that regard and 
we will increase the amount of their operational funding. That’s 
what we’ll do this year. And the details of that will be provided, 
you know, at the time of estimates for Post-Secondary 
Education. 
 
But the main point is we will not participate in capital; we will 
improve their operational funding from the province, and the 
result of that we believe, will be that they will then be able to 
access capital themselves to get this project going. 
 
And so in as straightforward way as I can, that is what we 
intend to do, and that I anticipate will be part of the 
announcement that will be coming out. And the reason I’m 
answering the question like this in detail, is I have already given 
that answer to the media sometime ago. So it’s certainly more 
than fair that we discuss it honestly and fairly here. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I do appreciate your answer, Mr. Minister, 
because I think it’s very important that we arrive at some type 
of an agreement with the federal government. And I know 
you’ve indicated that the provincial government is adamant that 
it will not participate in the capital projects. And I believe that 
once we get into estimates with the Minister of Post-Secondary, 
we’ll indeed be able to talk about those kinds of things, because 

I think there’s more to just capital and you’ve indicated that this 
government is willing to look at operational costs, and those 
kinds of things are very, very important if we’re to ensure that 
there is a quality education provided for the aboriginal peoples 
that reside in Saskatchewan, not only here in Regina but 
throughout the province. And I look forward to hopefully your 
success at negotiating something with the federal government in 
terms of ensuring that this type of education gets going. 
 
One question, Mr. Minister, if I could just turn to a little bit to a 
different topic, something that you mentioned a few minutes 
ago, indicated that universities on the whole were happy with 
this budget, that students were happy. Well if we look back 
about two weeks ago I think you saw a very negative reaction 
from students when they found out that indeed there was a 
possible tuition fee increase. In fact both universities have 
indicated there will be — and I think the opposite is true. 
Students were expecting that this budget was going to be able to 
balance costs at the university level and to indeed prevent 
tuition fee increases. 
 
I know listening to a quotation and an interview from Marjorie 
Brown, the president of the U of R (University of Regina) 
Students’ Union, she was very upset that indeed there is a 
tuition fee increase. And I think students right across this 
province, they’re you know a couple of week away from exams 
and then heading back out into the work world to look at getting 
some type of employment, are now going to have to look at 
tuition fee increases and say I’d better be able to save X number 
of dollars more because on the average I think tuition fee 
increases may be in that 2, 3, 4 per cent. For students on limited 
incomes during the summer that’s going to be a significant cost, 
and I don’t think that they were expecting that. 
 
How do you balance that with your comments as saying you 
know, everybody is fine out there in post-secondary land when 
indeed students — I don’t think students are very happy with 
what has happened. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think I can fairly say that students 
from the University of Saskatchewan and the University of 
Regina are very happy with the provincial budget, which goes 
much, much further that the federal budget did, for example. 
And let me tell you why. First of all I should say that the 
decision whether to increase tuition or not is not a decision 
made by the province, it’s a decision made by the University of 
Regina. They were proposing a 6.5 per cent increase to tuition. 
As a result of the budget and their own other consideration, 
they’re now talking about a 2 per cent increase through tuition. 
So obviously that’s an improvement. 
 
An important point here is that I believe that they feel that this 2 
per cent increase will bring them to a point where they have a 
sustainable level of tuition and that they don’t anticipate 
increases in tuition in the foreseeable future. I don’t think 
there’s any freeze but I think that’s their hope. But what I would 
say is that what the budget does in a very significant way, 
actually quite a dramatic way, is this. 
 
It says that you take the students that are most in need, and 
there will be 6,000 — 6,000 students starting this next academic 
year, 1998-99 — and we will be providing 6,000 students with 
bursaries of up to $3,100 if they have no dependants, and up to 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

$6,100 if they have dependants. So that’s a very significant 
change, because that used to be money that was loaned to them. 
Now they will get upfront bursaries, the students most in need, 
who are the ones that need the help that they didn’t used to get. 
That will be a major, major difference in the lives of 
post-secondary students who rely upon student loans and who 
have a big need. 
 
The second thing we will do is, for students with children, we 
will increase the living expenses that they are allowed quite 
significantly. And I’m sorry that I don’t have those numbers in 
front of me, but it’s a significant increase and they’re very 
pleased with that. That will impact thousands of students in the 
province. 
 
The third thing we will do for post-secondary students — and I 
should say these aren’t just university students, some of them 
might be SIAST students or perhaps regional colleges in some 
cases — the third thing is that we will allow the students to 
have a tax credit for the interest that they pay on student loans, 
because there are some students that cannot benefit from the 
bursaries that are being brought in. And I would remind 
everyone that what the federal government has done, I say 
incorrectly, is they have decided to do a millennium scholarship 
fund which will benefit up to 3,000 students — not 6,000 like 
our program — but 3,000 students up to $3,000 starting in the 
next century. Not starting until the year 2000, which I think is 
wrong. 
 
We will start in 1998. We will start today. And we will provide 
not up to 3,000 but up to 6,000, and not 3,000 students but up to 
6,000 students, for the bursaries. Many, many more thousands 
for, if you include the family living expenses and the deduction 
of interest, that’s up to 29,000 students. 
 
I was talking to an official from the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education last week and he told me that our 
commitment to post-secondary education, helping the students, 
was roughly in the realm of 10 times as much as what the 
federal Liberals were doing. So we haven’t seen a lot out of the 
federal government. We’re trying to really help the students, 
and we have had a lot of enthusiasm, notwithstanding the 2 per 
cent tuition fee increase that the University of Regina proposes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You raised a couple of good points there, Mr. 
Minister. And I know that a lot of time has been spent both 
provincially and federally talking about placing education as a 
priority, and the student loan plans, etc. 
 
I guess when we, when we do look at a tuition fee increase 
though — I guess I use the word expectation — and I think 
university boards, boards of governors, and the administration 
at post-secondary levels all around were maybe expecting more. 
And as a result they’ve now had to lower those expectations, 
and as a result pass on that cost to the students. 
 
And I don’t think students were anticipating any increase in 
tuition or in fees. And I think what we’re seeing is across the 
board there’s going to be at least a 2 per cent increase for all 
students. Those are some of the things that I want a further 
comment on. 
 
One other thing, Mr. Minister, though, when we take a look at 

student loans, and I’m sure you’re familiar with the document 
that was produced as a result of . . . in fact it was the former 
Post-Secondary minister who initiated a task force to make 
recommendations on student loans and student assistance and 
all those other things that fall into that category — I think 
you’re aware that less than 50 per cent of students who attend 
post-secondary institutions in fact take out student loans. 
 
So while I commend you for the kinds of things that you’ve 
instituted for students with loans, those students who have 
families, who have dependent children, those kinds of things I 
think are going to benefit them directly in that there will be 
bursaries versus loans. And in the end the debt that probably 
could have been 35 or $40,000 at the end of a full program may 
now be down to 20 or, or whatever. 
 
But the other question though, Mr. Minister — and I think this 
is where the 2 per cent tuition fee proposed increase comes in 
— is that students who don’t take student loans, who try 
through summer employment, through support from parents or 
other family members, attempt to pay for their education 
without accessing the student loan program, they may also do 
so by the fact that they do not qualify for student loans because 
of incomes of, of parents or whatever. 
 
Those are the students I think that we have to be careful of as 
well. Because when you indicated that there is going to be an 
interest rebate program for people who have the student loans, 
we’re talking about a group that’s less than 50 per cent of all 
students who access post-secondary education. 
 
I think what we have to be aware of is that there are other 
students there who are either incurring their own personal bank 
loans, supported by family members, or they’re, you know, 
working harder than usual to try to get the monies to ensure that 
they don’t have to access student loans. What kinds of things do 
you see happening to that group if we’re allowing tuition fee 
increases to increase to them 2 per cent and in the end they will 
incur higher costs? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well that is a very good question which I’d 
be pleased to respond to. First of all, with respect to the 
member’s question about, were the universities expecting 
more? No. Most decidedly not. They were not expecting as 
much as they received in the budget. 
 
Dr. Wells, the president of the University of Regina, said, this 
budget is the most positive I’ve seen for a university in 30 
years. They were very, very pleased and I think pleasantly 
surprised. Laura Kennedy, the assistant vice-president of 
finance and administration at the University of Saskatchewan, 
said she was almost euphoric when she heard the news about 
the budget. This was very good news for the universities and 
that’s what they said. 
 
Secondly, with respect to the recommendations about student 
loans, those have been largely implemented. And with respect 
to one or two that have not been, those are being worked on. 
We are following the recommendations made with respect to 
student loans. 
 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

With respect to the third aspect of your question, which is, what 
about the students without loans, this is where the difference is 
so marked between what the province is doing and what the 
federal government is doing. Because the federal government is 
going to give students some assistance starting in the year 2000, 
but nothing for the universities themselves on the operational 
side or the capital side. 
 
We’re taking a two-pronged approach, not just a one-prong like 
the federal government is going to take in the next century. Two 
prongs. The first prong is to really boost the position the 
students are in that have financial needs. That’s been done by 
the budget. That’s great news for the students. 
 
But the other part of it is, which the federal government 
continues to ignore, we’re giving more money for operations 
and capital to the universities. We’re really injecting a lot of 
money on the institutional side that the University of 
Saskatchewan will receive, the University of Regina. And that 
will assist all students. Because the fact that the universities get 
more money is why tuition fees at Regina don’t have to go up 
6.5 per cent. They might go up 2 per cent and then stay there. 
 
What will happen at the University of Saskatchewan, we don’t 
know. But there was a major injection of new money to the 
universities for both their operations and their capital to fix the 
buildings. Tremendous news for the universities. They’re very 
happy about it. 
 
And that will be of assistance not just to institutions but to the 
students, because those are the people that are most important at 
those institutions. Those are the people that are served at the 
institutions. Those are the people, whether they have student 
loans or not, that will benefit directly from the massive increase 
in post-secondary education funding that results from this 
budget. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister — a couple of final 
comments. When we do take a look though at post-secondary 
education, especially the universities, and we look at the fact 
affiliated colleges, the universities, etc., that the increase in their 
grants is about $8 million, and we take a look at the inflationary 
costs, salary costs, all of those other things that universities are 
gong to incur this year, I don’t think that they’re . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well you use the word euphoric . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, it’s their word. It’s not my word. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well I would suggest that some of them are 
going to be looking at program cuts and they’re going to be 
looking at trying to ensure that they can still offer the type of 
program that they’re doing. I understand also that universities in 
fact are looking at early retirement packages so that they can 
lower their costs by hiring professors that will have less 
experience and of course a smaller price tag. 
 
One comment that I do want to make — and I agree with you 
totally regarding the federal bursary program — when we take a 
look, and I haven’t taken a look at the numbers in terms of 
numbers of students in Saskatchewan versus other provinces, 
but if we just take a look at the 30 million population, more or 
less, in Canada, and the 1 million population, more or less, in 
Saskatchewan, and just randomly say one-thirtieth allocated to 

Saskatchewan, I think it works out to about 3,000 students — 
3,000 students will benefit by a maximum of $3,000. 
 
That, I don’t think is going to go a long way. And I think you as 
Finance minister and this government has to look at that very 
seriously, because when this kicks in I think students have been 
led to believe that this is going to be a great program in terms of 
ensuring that they’re going to have access to education. When 
we take a look at a maximum of 3,000 students being served — 
if that’s the kind of numbers we can use — I don’t think it goes 
a long way. 
 
So I would think that you should be stressing with your federal 
minister responsible for education in Canada to look at the 
kinds of systems that we’re putting in place. Because we’re not 
only talking about students that are getting student loans, both 
federally and provincially, as far as the contributors to that loan 
plan, we’re also talking about those students who don’t access 
student loans. And there has to be a plan in place federally and 
provincially that will ensure that costs don’t continue to rise and 
escalate to the point where we prevent people from becoming 
educated. 
 
You and I both know full well that the most important asset that 
we can have in this country is well-educated, quality-trained 
people, and we have to continue to pursue that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you. I certainly agree with that 
sentiment and I also will certainly undertake to do what you’ve 
suggested in terms of making suggestions about what the 
federal government should do. And I have been doing that. I 
described the federal budget as largely window-dressing when 
it came to post-secondary education, and it is. And I’ll continue 
to describe it in those terms and also to press the federal 
government for better funding for post-secondary education, 
and better funding for health care. 
 
Every Finance minister in the country is committed to that, as 
well as every premier. And in fact there’s a lot of work going 
on about fiscal relations in the country and the fact that the 
federal government should meet its obligations to students and 
to health care. And I certainly take your words to heart and I’ll 
be continuing to raise those matters with our federal 
counterparts. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Welcome to your officials, Mr. 
Minister, and I’m delighted to hear some of the responses that 
you’re giving us this afternoon. And I’d like to tell you first of 
all that I do agree wholeheartedly with you when you talk about 
the program from the federal government as . . . regarding 
education. 
 
I do have another question on this issue, and where you talk 
about students and some of the difficulties that they have, one 
issue that I don’t think has been addressed, and that is medical 
bills and expenses for young people. For example, young 
people with diabetes that are going to university, that can be a 
considerable amount of cost for them and something that I think 
that we should be looking at. 
 
I see that in one of the, one of the press releases that’s been 
issued lately, not only from Health but from Social Services, 
it’s recognized as a big concern. And I’m wondering if your 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

department, along . . . when you are looking at program 
changes, if you’re considering medical expenses not only for 
students, but perhaps young families that are going to university 
that have children. Right now they probably are living on 
student loans, and if you’re on a student loan then you don’t get 
the help through Social Services or other programs. Are you 
trying to address some of their concerns as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. With respect to the students with 
children, one of the things that will happen as a result of the 
child benefit and the “bridges to independence” program that is 
coming in is that people who are low income — which certainly 
could include students receiving student loans — if they’re 
under a certain income and they have children and they’ve got 
those medical needs, they can get supplementary health 
coverage. 
 
With respect . . . So that will be an improvement for actually 
tens of thousands of people. I think it’s about — I shouldn’t 
give you the figure because I don’t have it in front of me — but 
it’s more than 20,000 children that will be eligible for health 
benefits they don’t get now. So it’s a lot. And I believe there are 
more than 80,000 children overall that will benefit one way or 
the other through improvements under that system. 
 
In terms of the student loans, the student loan program certainly 
is based upon need. But what — in answer specifically to your 
question — what the budget . . . what happens as a result of the 
recent budget is that assistance limits for students with 
dependants goes up from $275 per week of study to $400 per 
week of study for students with dependants. So there’s a great 
increase there in terms of being able to meet your living 
expenses. 
 
And also there’s a bursary to all students with need over $180 
per week of study. In other words, if their needs are quite high 
and over $180 per week, which would include I believe medical 
and so on — but you could actually go into more detail about 
that with the Minister of Post-Secondary Education because she 
would have those officials here — they would receive a 
bursary. So what actually what we’ve tried to do in this budget 
is deal with the exact situation that you’re raising. That a lot of 
assistance goes to students with dependants, with children, and 
these difficulties were raised by the “Student Assistance Task 
Group Report,” which looked into the question of adequacy of 
student loans. That report was submitted to the government last 
June of 1997. And what we’ve tried to do in the budget, as I’ve 
said in answer to the member from Canora-Pelly, is to 
implement all of those recommendations except one or two 
which are still being worked on. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just a short question: 
will this increase for the weekly allowances, will that take effect 
for this year’s summer classes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes it will. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I guess because I asked too many questions 
last time when I stood up, I didn’t get a response from you 
when we talked about medical expenses for somebody who 
doesn’t have a dependant family but a student themselves, just 
as one that may have diabetes. Will their medical needs be 
looked at separately? And I guess I talk about diabetes because 

it’s something that isn’t covered, all of the necessary supplies 
aren’t covered right now under our health plan. Will you be 
looking at that for students? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. What I intended to say but I don’t 
think I said very clearly in answer to the question, was that I 
believe that the needs of the students are taken into account in 
calculating the amount of loan or assistance that they should 
get. But I’m sorry that I can’t be more specific than that. And I 
would invite the member to ask the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education when she’s here with the officials because certainly 
they will go into a lot more detail than I can go into under 
interim supply. But certainly it’s a very good question and I 
think there probably is an answer that is satisfactory based upon 
the new levels of assistance that people can get. But it’s detailed 
enough that you would get a better answer in going through the 
detailed estimates with the minister and the officials here. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Before I leave this topic I’m wondering if . . . 
you said a couple of suggestions that were brought forward by 
the student task force haven’t been implemented yet, and I 
wonder if they involve student housing or day care for students 
that require help while they’re going to university, who have 
children? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m sorry I can’t answer that question; I’m 
not aware of the answer. I know that the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education certainly does know the answer and 
she will be speaking to that issue in estimates when the officials 
from that department are here. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is the minister . . . I was interested in the news 
release on the action plan initiatives and I notice that $4.5 
million is going to go to school divisions to meet the needs of 
children and youth who require additional supports. Does that 
mean . . . will children that have FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) 
or FAE (fetal alcohol effect) be involved in . . . will they be 
considered special needs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Certainly children that have the sort 
of difficulties that come from FAS as well as other children are 
children with special needs. And I should point out that the 
reference to the additional money does not mean that this is the 
only money that goes to meeting the needs of children with 
special needs. There would be money in previous budgets 
already allotted that would also go to meet their needs. But the 
amount of money available is going up. But that would include 
children with various kinds of problems and certainly some of 
those problems would arise because of FAS. 
 
Ms. Draude: — This $4.5 million that we’re discussing, that’s 
probably part of the budget right now and probably part of the 
interim supply that we’re discussing at this time. Are school 
divisions required to apply for a portion of this money, or is it 
divided up equally between the school divisions, or how is it 
actually . . . be given out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There are really two ways. The interim 
supply that the Department of Education will receive will be 
one-twelfth of the amount to be voted with respect to the 
Department of Education, but there will be other monies that 
may go to school boards or other organizations under the child 
action plan, and those funds would actually be part of the 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

money that would go to the Department of Social Services 
because they administer the child action plan. And it just so 
happens that in meeting some of the needs of children that they 
want to meet, they may sometimes be cooperating with other 
organizations which may include educational organizations or 
community organizations. 
 
(1545) 
 
So some money goes through the Department of Education that 
ends up meeting special needs of children, but other money 
goes through the Department of Social Services. So that when 
you look at the Social Services budget for example, they get 
$540 million for the whole year and we’re being asked to 
approve one-twelfth of that for interim supply. But not all of 
that money would be spent on social assistance payments to 
individuals. Some of that money would end up in schools, 
meeting various needs such as child nutrition, perhaps a 
recreational program somewhere, and so on and so on. 
 
I was quite amazed, preparing myself for the budget, to look at 
a description of what happened under the child action plan, and 
there was a list of various things that were done with the money 
that goes there. And the list was six pages of small print, 
because they work with a lot of different organizations and try 
to meet a lot of different needs. To make a long story short, 
some of the money will come from Education, some of the 
money would come from Social Services. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to go back to 
the interim supply, asking specifically, where this request right 
now is for one-twelfth of the total budget, in the same time 
though the government is collecting taxes, provincial sales tax 
and so on. How much money is taken in during this period for 
taxation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We would not know how much revenue the 
province would receive for sales tax during April, for example, 
until we get past the end of the month for April, in the sense 
that’s when people will send their remittances in for provincial 
sales tax and so on. So I can’t give you a figure for receipts to 
the province in April until, you know, the accounting is done, 
which would take place after the end of the month. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Servicing the debt is 
of course a very important part of our . . . very large part of 
what we’re spending money on. And I’m wondering, is 
servicing the debt part of the statutory money that we discussed 
or is it actually part of the interim supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is part of the statutory money. It’s 
already approved by the legislature to pay interest on the public 
debt so that it doesn’t enter into a discussion of interim supply. 
 
Ms. Draude: — How much is spent on an annual basis in terms 
of statutory expenditures that doesn’t have to be approved by 
the legislature? And can you give me idea of what they are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. It’s listed actually in a departmental 
summary that I have sent to your caucus just today so you may 
not have a had time to look at it, but it’s completely detailed. 
The member for Melfort-Tisdale had the list. 
 

And it is in total, statutory amounts are $960,959, so almost a 
billion dollars, roughly something less that 20 per cent of the 
total estimates. And they’re for the, like well for example, $725 
million actually is servicing the public debt. That’s something 
you would pay for regardless of the budget. And statute 
provides that that can be paid. That’s the biggest one of course. 
 
There’s $96 million in the Department of Finance, which I 
imagine relates to meeting pension obligations that are 
statutory, that you . . . we’ve already decided in other pieces of 
legislation that we should pay each year, 123 million in 
Education. Those are the major ones and then there are few 
ones that are quite a bit smaller. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the $310 million — that’s 
equalization money coming from the federal government — is a 
large percentage of the revenues that you expect. And I, first of 
all, I’m wondering how firm that figure is that you’ve 
estimated. And do you get paid just once year or how do you 
receive the money from the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The equalization is paid four times per 
year. And it is an estimate — the amount, the equalization we 
receive, will certainly depend upon a number of other factors. 
The equalization formula is actually quite complicated. It 
involves, I believe about 33 sources of revenue. 
 
A comparison is made of how our province is doing and how 
each of the seven recipient provinces are doing. And the 
department does the best they can to estimate it, but it also 
involves kind of a multi-year look and a multi-year kind of 
rolling average to see what equalization the provinces are 
entitled to. And if my recollection is correct, sometimes the 
amount of equalization you receive in one year may be even 
adjusted the next year, and sometimes perhaps even longer than 
12 months down the road. 
 
So it’s very much a matter of estimating it in the sense that we 
will know for sure what we get with equalization once we see 
how we do in this year. But we are estimating that equalization 
will be in the amount of approximately $310 million. 
 
In a somewhat interesting way it’s sort of curious to look at 
equalization, because when you receive more in terms of 
equalization, part of it obviously is because we expect resource 
prices to be lower than they have been in the last few years, for 
oil and so on — for oil at least is the major one. 
 
The other factor is we expect the Saskatchewan economy, and 
hope the Saskatchewan economy, will grow by 2.7 per cent 
approximately this year in real terms. But we expect that the 
Ontario economy will grow faster. And the Ontario economy is, 
to state the obvious, the largest economy in the country. And 
when it has faster growth than we do, then equalization 
increases because the amount of revenue Ontario is taking in 
goes way up. 
 
And so that you can be doing relatively well and be entitled to 
more equalization, not because you’re doing badly but because 
somebody else is doing better. And in the last five years we’ve 
had economic growth that generally surpassed that of most 
provinces. But this year, while we expect reasonable growth, 
Ontario’s economy is projected to grow faster. So that our 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

equalization goes up for bad reasons, that we expect the oil 
price to come down, but also for reasons that are good for 
Ontario, that they expect their economy to grow quite a bit 
more. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, what you’re saying is that 
they are . . . it’s not that we’re doing bad, they’re just doing a 
whole lot better. So that means that we aren’t doing good, 
because otherwise we should be doing better as well then. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re going to get . . . four times a year we get 
money from the federal government. So that must mean we just 
got a cheque at the end of March, if it’s broken up four times a 
year. And it was based on last year’s projections, which wasn’t 
a lot of money. So does that mean that the actual $310 million 
that you’re projecting that we should be getting really wouldn’t 
have been very much of that money got in this first, in this 
period now. It will be next year at this time before we actually 
receive quite a bit of money from the federal government 
because of the estimates. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I should say to the member that we 
receive payments from the federal government actually up to 
four times a month — I think I might have stated that 
incorrectly — that it may be up to 48 times a year that we 
receive equalization. 
 
But as I tried to indicate, the amount of money we receive from 
the federal government is subject to adjustment the next year. 
So that sometimes in one year you’ll receive too much money 
and then the next year they’ll take it back. 
 
This relates, by the way, to . . . I was explaining to one of your 
colleagues that . . . They were asking, well why is corporate 
income tax in our budget going down when we expect the 
economy to grow? The answer is there’s quite a reduction in 
corporate income tax in the estimates of revenue to the 
province. But the amount of corporate income tax paid in the 
province of Saskatchewan will go up this year. But they pay 
that money to Ottawa, not to us; then Ottawa pays us. 
 
And in this particular year . . . Last year they paid us too much 
money for corporate income tax; more than we ended up being 
entitled to when we looked at the tax that corporations paid. 
They will deduct that overpayment this year from the corporate 
income tax we received from the federal government. 
 
So you can get into this curious situation where actually the 
corporations will be paying more tax and there will be more 
economic activity tax in the province, but our revenue will be 
less this year because we were overpaid last year. 
 
And when you get into the area of equalization — and indeed 
you may get into this problem in personal income tax — 
adjustments will be made over time that don’t necessarily relate 
to what may be happening in any particular year because it’s 
estimated. And we largely rely also on the federal government 
to estimate the amount of money that they think they should be 
paying us at any given time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So the federal government has the problem as 
well; either they can’t read or they can’t do math either then if 
they didn’t spend the right amount of money. 

Mr. Minister, I’m wondering, when we look at some of the 
Estimates and I look at the number of full-time employees there 
were last year, and the number of dollars spent, was there 
increases given to employees last year through different union 
contracts right here within the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, well all of these numbers, I should 
point out, are estimates. I mean you don’t know until the end of 
the year what you’re actually going to have. But we’re 
budgeting at the beginning of the year so we, the federal 
government, everybody, estimates, and you’re not going to have 
exact numbers because nobody can predict the future. So that’s 
why there are estimates, and that’s why the figures at the end of 
the year turn out sometimes to be different, because you’ve just 
done your best to estimate them. 
 
In that respect, we’re no different than any other government or 
organization, or indeed individuals estimating what will happen 
on the farm this year and so on. You just don’t know until you 
get to the end of the year. 
 
In terms of the question about the union contracts, most 
employees that work for the government or for third parties 
such as health boards, school . . . well teachers are a little bit 
different, I think, in terms of their contract for ’97. But most 
employees that are unionized in the province for 1997 would 
have received an increase as a result of collective bargaining, 
and I believe that most employees for 1997 received a 1 per 
cent increase. 
 
In terms of 1998 — to anticipate what your next question might 
be — that is unknown because the government, for example, is 
in bargaining with the government employees. So they haven’t 
resolved what will happen; although there are some agreements, 
like the nurses came to an agreement last year that runs till 
1999; the doctors have recently made an agreement, and so on. 
 
Ms. Draude: — You didn’t quite anticipate the question I was 
going to ask. I was looking at the number of employees that was 
in a department last year, and the amount of money that they 
were paid. And I compared with what the number of employees 
you estimated this year and the estimation for amount . . . how 
much they were paid. In a number of cases, it was identical. 
And my question is then, how could they get an increase and 
still have exactly the same number of employees and the same 
amount of money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the answer to the question is that 
there is no — this is well-known — there is no agreement with 
the government employees for 1998. They’re in bargaining. If 
there is some agreement arrived at, then departments are 
expected to manage within the budgetary amounts they receive, 
to accommodate that kind of increase. Sometimes there are 
vacancies that aren’t filled, and other factors are brought to bear 
to comply with any agreement that is reached with the 
government employees. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Last year we were 
discussing interim supply and I heard you mention to one of my 
colleagues that every department would get one-twelfth of their 
budget or up to that if they haven’t spent that much. 
 
But last year I know the one department of, I think Aboriginal 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

Affairs, didn’t actually receive money for over three months. 
Can you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well that question could certainly be asked 
of the minister in detail, under estimates. I would assume it 
would be because they didn’t actually spend the money. They 
would have been entitled to the money under interim supply if 
they needed the money. If they did not need the money during 
that period, then they would not be paid the money. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, when we look at the Estimates 
book, we see the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and the 
Department of Northern Affairs. And I know that it obviously 
could be two different things, but at the same time when we’re 
trying to ensure that people are working together, doesn’t it 
make sense to you that these two departments should be 
working a lot more closely together when it comes to budgetary 
items and working on problems that we have in the North, or 
concerns we have in the North. 
 
Is there any thought of putting those two areas together so that 
we, instead of having administration in both of these 
departments, spending a lot of money on the bureaucracy part 
of it as opposed to actual program spending, to work together 
and have one office instead of two or three or however many 
there may be in the North? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in answer to the question, I happen to 
know that the Department of Northern Affairs does work very 
closely with the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and every 
other department. 
 
I know from my experience as Minister of Health that in terms 
of health matters in the North, we work closely with the 
Department of Northern Affairs and the Minister of Northern 
Affairs in terms of coordinating efforts. And I’m sure that the 
other department you mentioned would do likewise. 
 
(1600) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Why wouldn’t the Department of Northern 
Affairs, instead of being with Economic Development, why 
wouldn’t it be with Aboriginal Affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well it certainly would cooperate with 
Aboriginal Affairs. There’s always more than one way to skin a 
cat. And I’m sure that the Minister of Northern Affairs is 
capable of working with every department, and indeed my 
experience is that that’s what they do. They work very 
cooperatively. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And the money that is spent on treaty land 
entitlement from the provincial side, is it paid directly to the 
bands or does it go to the federal government, and dispersed 
through one payment to the bands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I think I would like you to address that 
question to the minister in charge, and his officials, in detailed 
estimates, simply because that is a very detailed question of 
accounting which I think could be appropriately answered at 
that time. It’s certainly a good question but it’s such a good 
question that it warrants detailed discussion with the Minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs. 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I guess I 
am concerned, because we’re talking about one-twelfth of the 
money that we’re spending in this department and it is a 
considerable amount of money. And I just would kind of like to 
know if we’re going to be sending a cheque directly to a band 
or if it’s going to the federal government. And I’m sure that as 
Minister of Finance you’d probably like to know where the 
money is going as well. So probably to get an answer to 
everybody that’s staying tuned, probably the sooner we can get 
the answer the better. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m very much concerned and interested in what 
happens with some of the aboriginal issues that we’re dealing 
with right now. And one of them — I’m afraid you may tell me 
that I’ll have to stay tuned again — but I want to ask you a 
question on one of the things that's happening right now with 
treaty land entitlement and dealing with imperium rights with 
the waterways. 
 
I understand right now there’s a discussion where dealing with 
land claims and what may happen if the waterways are 
considered to be part of an entitlement and having to deal with 
cities down a water stream where they may have their water . . . 
where it may be considered part of a treaty right, the water the 
cities are using right now or even the sewer system. Is that 
something that this provincial government is looking at right 
now? If it is and if the court cases and the claims that are 
coming forward right now are actually dealt with, it could have 
a serious . . . could seriously impact your budget and lots of 
things that are happening in the province. Could you give some 
idea what’s happening in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well once again that’s a very important 
question and I would not want to do disservice to the question 
or to the member by giving it short shrift under interim supply. I 
would suspect that what was really required out of respect for 
the member and the questions, is to have a more detailed 
discussion of that subject when the Minister of Aboriginal 
Affairs is present, well is here with his officials. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, then probably you’ll 
tell me this about my next request as well, because it’s also a 
very good question and you’ll probably want to respond later 
on. 
 
But I used to be working with Sask Water Corporation and I’ve 
dealt with problems that farmers have every spring when it 
came to flooding. And many in our area are dealing with a 
moratorium on the water around . . . on the eastern part of our 
province. 
 
And with the C&D (conservation and development) convention 
that was recently over, I was interested in an article in the paper 
where they talked about the provincial moratorium has only 
stopped the government’s official projects; it hasn’t stopped 
farmers from taking drainage into their own hands. And a quote 
that was given in the paper said there are hundreds and 
hundreds of people out there moving ground regardless of the 
moratorium because forgiveness is easier to get than 
permission. 
 
And I’m wondering if there’s something that this government is 
working on that will allow farmers who have . . . obviously with 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

the low grain prices right now and their concerns of making a 
living, is there anything that your government is doing to help 
move along this process of the moratorium and actually open up 
Sask Water’s very limited ability right now to work with the 
farmers that are relying on them to help them get through their 
problems with seeding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Once again, these sort of detailed 
questions aren’t really the sort of questions you get into in 
interim supply. Certainly they’re very good questions, and I’m 
confident that the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation is looking forward to having a discussion with the 
member about the detailed questions for the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation in estimates. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to welcome you and your officials here today. 
 
And I think it would be important if we discuss some of the 
things that you had in your budget on your projections for 
revenues. My colleagues have been talking about where you’re 
spending the money; I’m particularly interested in where you’re 
going to get it from. And my critic area is energy and mines, so 
I’d like to deal a little bit with the oil prices and your 
projections and what reality really is. 
 
I have your book here that says that for 1998 you’re projecting 
$17.25 for the price of oil — that’s U.S. (United States) dollars 
for West Texas Intermediate. I looked in the paper today and 
West Texas Intermediate on Friday was $15.98 closing price for 
Friday. So that’s significantly lower than what you’re projecting 
already. 
 
For this one-twelfth period of time that we’re talking about for 
interim supply, what kind of revenues are you projecting to 
bring in and what are those revenues based on for the oil 
industry? What price of oil are you projecting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We are projecting for the year an average 
of $17.25. And based upon the WTI (West Texas Intermediate), 
that’s $17.25 U.S. It was down to 13.50 or even lower at the 
time of the budget address, so it’s gone up by almost 2.50 in the 
last short while. 
 
I had the occasion to speak to . . . I mean nobody knows for 
sure what the price of oil will be throughout the year because 
that’s something that is speculative. But I did have the occasion 
on Friday evening when I was in Lloydminster to meet, for 
example, with some officials from Husky Oil in Calgary. They 
were from Calgary; I was meeting them in Lloydminster so we 
weren’t meeting about this. But I happened to say to them, what 
about this projection we have for oil? And they said our 
projection was the same as, basically the same as their 
projection which is also similar to Alberta’s projection. Theirs 
is somewhat different but it’s based upon, I think, the calendar 
year as opposed to the fiscal year. 
 
In any event, the answer to the question is, look, no one knows 
for sure what the price of oil is going to be throughout the year. 
We hope that the price of oil will be 17.25 or higher. At the 
present time it’s lower, but it has been going up. 
 
All we can do is talk to the leading analysts from across North 

America, the private sector, the public sector. And what I have 
found is that although you think our projection is perhaps 
somewhat optimistic, it’s not as optimistic as a few of them. I’m 
advised by the officials that the private analysts are continuing 
to say that this is a reasonable projection. And indeed on Friday 
evening, talking to these people from Husky Oil, they felt it was 
a reasonable projection. 
 
I hope it’s right, but none of us can predict the future. I can’t. 
You can’t. I hope the price is higher actually and I’m sure you 
do too. 
 
But in any event, all we can do is come up with the best 
estimate. But our estimate is not out of line with other 
estimates. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would have to 
disagree with you. The Royal Bank estimate is significantly 
lower than yours; TD’s (Toronto Dominion) estimate was 
significantly lower than yours. And when you even look at 
what’s happened in the last couple of weeks. You went to 
Lloydminster. I went to Calgary two weeks ago and the people I 
was talking to there in the oil industry did not feel that your 
estimation, your estimates were proper. They felt that the return 
was going to be lower — more in the $16 range, Mr. Minister. 
 
But what I’m particularly interested in is what is your estimate 
for this coming month. You’re asking us for one-twelfth of the 
supply for expenditures. What are you estimating for the 
one-twelfth of revenues coming in at this particular time, Mr. 
Minister, in the oil industry? Based on what you should be 
getting in, slightly better than $30 million for the month of 
April if $17.25 is the average price for the whole year, your 
return should be $30 million plus. Are you going to make that 
target? If not, what’s your best estimate for the return for April? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We would expect that the price obviously 
is, based upon the projection, is going to rise throughout the 
year. So we would expect to receive less than one-twelfth of the 
total amount we budgeted, you know, at the present time and 
more than one-twelfth as the year goes on. 
 
I might say that the estimates of various parties at the time of 
the budget were up to $20 per barrel in U.S. dollars. The 
average was $18.18. We went with $17.25 which was 
equivalent basically to Alberta — it was 17.50 but it’s based 
upon, I think, the calendar year and ours is based upon the fiscal 
year. But in any event we would expect less than one-twelfth. 
 
But the amount of revenue that you would receive in April 
would not be known until after the end of April, after the 
payments were made and the accounting was done. But 
generally speaking, less than one-twelfth at the beginning of the 
year; more than one-twelfth of the amount stated toward the end 
of the year. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, I agree with you, Mr. Minister, that 
you don’t have the numbers because you haven’t had the 
returns from it yet. But I asked for the estimate not the actual, 
which is significantly different. You’ve been talking about the 
estimate for the year of approximately 367 million, I believe it 
is, and that’s based on $17.25. 
 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

But what is your estimate for April? Are you basing that on $17 
oil, $16 oil, $15 oil, or $13 oil, as what the price was at when 
the budget was presented? 
 
There was talk about OPEC (Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries) making an agreement to limit production 
because of the extra production that was going to come out of 
Iraq with the arrangements that were made there with the 
inspectors being allowed to visit the various presidential sites. 
But it seems that agreement is falling through before it’s even 
signed because Saudi Arabia — and I can’t remember which 
one of the other countries — said they were not going to honour 
that agreement. They were going to continue to produce. And 
that is what’s been driving . . . well, the oil prices increased, 
they spiked, and are now dropping again. 
 
So what’s your best estimate, Mr. Minister, for the returns for 
the month of April, the month we’re currently in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the estimate is set out in the 
Estimates. The estimate is for the calendar year. We are only six 
days into the calendar year and we are confident with the 
projection that we’ve made. I believe that if you’d look at the 
estimate, the answer is that for the month of April the amount 
we will receive will be somewhat less than one-twelfth; toward 
the end of the year it will be somewhat more. But I can’t give 
the member an estimate for April nor can I give the member a 
weekly estimate or a daily estimate. 
 
The only way to reasonably do these things is on a yearly basis 
to try to estimate the amount that you’re going to receive, and 
those figures have been put forward in the budget and we’re 
quite confident with those figures. We naturally hope as does 
the member that the price of oil will continue to rise. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re spending 
one-twelfth of the supply. That’s what you’re asking for with 
this interim supply. So if you’re not getting in one-twelfth of 
your estimated revenues, how do you pay out one-twelfth? 
Where do you get the extra money from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think it’s quite natural that . . . First 
of all, I should say we’re not spending one-twelfth, we’ll be 
spending up to one-twelfth as has been explained earlier this 
afternoon, and if the money isn’t needed then, it won’t be spent. 
But I think it’s very much like a farming operation or a business 
or any other operation where you may have expenditures at the 
beginning of the year for seeding on the farm, for example, but 
you may not have your receipts until later in the year. 
 
That doesn’t stop you from spending the money you need to 
spend. And we need to get the money to the community 
organizations and the women’s shelters and so on to keep them 
going, whether or not the revenue comes in at exactly 
one-twelfth per month. We estimate on the basis of the whole 
year. We plan on — not just on the basis of a year by the way 
— but on the basis of four-year plans because we can’t plan on 
the basis of a month or a week or a day. We have to have 
long-term plans. 
 
So what is presented to the legislature is a budget for the entire 

year and that is the budget that is in front of you. We need your 
permission to spend some of the money in April whether or not 
the budget is passed. Those expenditures are important to — not 
to people sitting here — but to lots of people around the 
province. 
 
And so we’re asking for cooperation in approving that, and I 
have every confidence that you too feel that certainly the 
operations of government have to continue. And that’s the way 
the system operates. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, before we spend 
that one-twelfth we need to know what it’s being spent on and 
we need to know where the money is going to come from. Now 
you’re saying that your projections are that you’re not actually 
bringing in one-twelfth of your revenues for this interim supply, 
but that you’re allocating spending of one-twelfth, up to 
one-twelfth. So how do you make up the shortfall? If your 
revenues do not represent the one-twelfth but your expenditures 
do, what’s your program, what’s your plan to make up for that 
shortfall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I said to the member that it may be 
that we don’t have one-twelfth of the oil revenue in the month 
of April because that’s almost anticipated for the reasons I’ve 
indicated. But it’s quite possible that for other areas the revenue 
will be more than one-twelfth the amount that we expect. 
 
We don’t receive all our money the same amount each week or 
each month. Perhaps the PST (provincial sales tax) revenue will 
be higher than we estimate. These things won’t be known until 
after the end of the month when you see what you have. But 
that can’t stop you from proceeding to pay the money that 
people need, whether it’s for the Children’s Haven in Prince 
Albert or Regina’s Mobile Crisis Service, or the foster parents 
or social assistance, to those that rely on that, and many other 
groups and individuals that would suffer if we didn’t pay them. 
So I can’t worry about some argument between accountants as 
to whether we get exactly one-twelfth of some particular source 
of revenue or we get less or we get more. 
 
I know that we have an obligation to make sure that there is a 
shelter for children and there’s a shelter for battered women, 
and the Regina Mobile Crisis centre can serve the people it has 
to serve, that the foster children are fed, and so on and so on 
around the province. And that’s why I’m more concerned about 
meeting their needs as we debate the budget as we should, and 
we should get into all kinds of detail in each department about 
the estimates. 
 
But while we do that and do our jobs here, we have to make 
sure that the people around the province have the money to pay 
the staff, to put the food on the table, and so on. And that’s what 
interim supply is about. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I agree 
with you that we need to support those programs. We also need 
to support health care and highways and various other things 
across this province. But we also have to pay for it. 
 
Now that’s what I’m asking you. How are you going to pay for 
it? You’re saying in oil that you’re not going to get your 
one-twelfth supply. Are you going to get one-twelfth of the 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

income tax in during April? Are you going to get one-twelfth of 
the potash revenues in during April? Are you going to get 
one-twelfth of the fuel tax in during April? Or are you simply 
planning on counting on the people who are laid off from work 
because road bans are on, are spending their money on VLTs 
(video lottery terminal)? Where are you getting the money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in some areas we’ll get more than the 
one-twelfth. For all I know, in oil we'll get more than the 
one-twelfth because I’m advised by the officials that we have 
land sales, which is part of our oil revenue. We may get more 
than one-twelfth. We won’t know until after the end of the 
month. I don’t have a crystal ball, neither do you. 
 
None of us can predict the future. We have to estimate. We 
estimate on an annual basis. We hope that we do even better 
than we project. Certainly we expect to get roughly one-twelfth 
of our revenues. But will it be more than that, will it be less 
than that? I can’t say, neither can you. But in the meantime we 
still have to continue with the task of governing and running the 
province, whether or not I can predict the future exactly, or 
whether or not you can. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, again you’re right. I 
can’t say. But then I’m not the Finance minister, you are. 
You’re the guy with all the high priced officials sitting around 
you who are supposed to have the answers. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, do you or do you not know whether or not 
you’re going to be able to cover off the expenditures that 
you’ve outlined — $356 million worth of revenues for the 
province of Saskatchewan for the month of April. You’re the 
one who’s projecting that you’re going to have a surplus for the 
entire year. Will the revenues for April cover off the 
one-twelfth supply you’re asking for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we will meet the 
obligations of government as we always do. But I want to say to 
the member that the member is a farmer, as we all know. And 
the member knows that when you’re operating a farm you don’t 
receive your farm income on the basis of exactly one-twelfth 
each month just because there are 12 months in the year. It’s not 
how it works. 
 
The member receives some of his income in the fall. He may 
get some of his income in the spring. He gets big chunks of 
money a few times a year. He’s a farmer. But that doesn’t stop 
the member from meeting the obligations on the farm each 
month. He can’t say, I’m not going to seed in April or May 
because I’m not getting any money until June or October. He 
can’t say that. Neither can we. 
 
You can’t say, I’m not going to pay my power bill every month 
because I don’t get paid this month. The government is the 
same. We have to meet our obligations each month. The 
member says, are we going to meet them? Yes, we’ve always 
met them. We’re going to continue to meet them. I think 
probably we’ll receive one-twelfth of our revenue this month 
but will it be exactly one-twelfth or less or more? I don’t know, 
the member doesn’t know, and nobody knows. But we have to 
continue to operate the province, pay the bills every month, and 
that’s what we’re going to do. 
 

And of course I appreciate the member’s questions and we need 
the member’s cooperation to meet these obligations but we will 
meet them just as we do every single month. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I am indeed a 
farmer and I understand how the farm economy works and I 
understand how other economies work. While I don’t have all 
my income coming in on a regular basis, I have arrangements 
made with financial institutions that cover off the shortfalls in 
any particular month that are replaced with the surpluses in 
another month. 
 
That’s what I’m asking you: what arrangements have you 
made? You simply keep skirting around the question trying to 
be condescending to the people of Saskatchewan when we ask 
the questions, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now if you don’t have enough revenue in the month of April, 
what arrangements have you made to cover off your expenses? 
Very simple question, Mr. Minister. I think even a lawyer can 
answer it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as I say, we expect to receive revenue 
from several sources to meet our obligations and that’s what we 
shall do. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, if your revenues do not 
match your expenses, what arrangements have you made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, we won’t know exactly 
what the revenues are or indeed exactly what the expenditures 
are until we get through the month. But we’ll continue to meet 
our obligations as we do. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, have you arranged with 
any financial institutions to cover off any shortfalls in your 
revenues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in the event that it was necessary, Mr. 
Chair, then we would make the appropriate arrangements on 
our lines of credit which we have. We have credit available to 
us. 
 
But do I anticipate that we will do that? Well no, we’ll see what 
happens. And I have every confidence that we’ll receive 
revenue as the government does each and every month and that 
we’ll pay our bills. That has been one of the hallmarks of this 
government, Mr. Chair — living within our means, trying to 
spend less than we actually take in. 
 
I don’t want to be political so I don’t want to suggest that that 
perhaps wasn’t true when the member’s party was in office. But 
suffice it to say that certainly the hallmark of this government 
has been to live within our means, only to spend what we have, 
in fact to spend less than what we take in on a monthly basis. 
That is what we will continue to endeavour to do. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. See, it 
wasn’t that difficult to admit that you had arrangements made. 
We could have done that 15 minutes ago. And as far as my 
party having made any of those types of arrangements, no, we 
never have. We will have arrangements in place when we form 
government after the next election, to cover off any shortfall 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

should there be any, but we haven’t had that opportunity in the 
past, Mr. Minister. 
 
But it’s not that difficult to admit that you have safeguards in 
place should revenues not meet your expectations. Because 
when you’re budgeting for $17.25 for oil right now and the 
price last Friday was less than 16, you may very well not meet 
your projections, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’d also like to deal with one of the departments that are my 
critic area, and that is Environment. Mr. Minister, what is your 
estimate for the expenditures in dealing with the Tetra-Pak 
situation that you announced in the budget that you are now 
going to be compensating people for when they return them for 
their nickel per box. Is that included in the one-month interim 
supply that you’re asking for at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the arrangement will be that people 
will continue to pay 8 cents per Tetra-Pak container, and when 
they return those to SARCAN they will be refunded 5 cents. So 
that essentially the Tetra-Paks will not be in a different position 
than other beverage containers. There is an environmental 
handling charge, there is refundable deposit, and what will be 
done with respect to that arrangement is quite similar to what is 
done whether you’re returning wine bottles or pop bottles or 
whatever. 
 
We’re trying to put them on an equal footing so that people will 
actually get a refund for a Tetra-Pack and other cardboard 
beverage containers such as the gabled boxes, which they didn’t 
receive before. We think that’s good for SARCAN and we also 
think that that is good for the environment. 
 
Whether or not interim supply to the Department of the 
Environment will affect the rate or manner in which it pays 
SARCAN, I really can’t answer today. That would be an 
appropriate question for the Minister of the Environment under 
estimates, and I know that the Minister of the Environment 
would be pleased and anticipates having a very detailed 
discussion with you about that subject when we get into 
estimates for that department. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. The 
SARCAN program is indeed an excellent program that I believe 
came into place with the previous administration and has done a 
lot for the environment today. And I’m sure that even your 
members believe that that is a good program, because you have 
carried on in supporting it, indeed in expanding their mandate. 
That is all to the good, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I’m sure that the Minister for the Environment is looking 
forward to answering any questions we may have in dealing 
with the environment. But you, sir, are here today asking for the 
money, not the Minister for the Environment. So I think it’s 
important to know that those monies are included in this interim 
supply Bill, this one-twelfth, to pay for those recycling 
programs such as the Tetra-Paks and the cardboard boxes. 
 
People have already paid those taxes out. They had those boxes 
in their possession when you proposed the budget. They’re 
returning them already for compensation. Is the money included 

in the budget, in the interim supply package that you presented 
today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think the point to be made here is 
that much of this money will come from the recycling system 
itself in the sense that people, when they buy a Tetra-Pak, 
they’ll still be paying the 8 cents per container with respect to 
that. And they will get 5 cents back and there will be an 
environmental handling charge of 3 cents. 
 
Certainly SARCAN will be compensated for its handling costs 
for those products based upon expected return rates. And I think 
the good news is, I certainly agree with the member that 
SARCAN is very good, and it’s one of the things that the 
previous government did that is worthwhile. There’s no 
question about that. And we’re trying to expand it a bit with 
respect to Tetra-Paks and we think that that’s good for 
SARCAN and also good for the environment. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. SARCAN was 
receiving, I believe it was $8 million a year, from the 
Environment department to run its operations and to pay out the 
recycling deposits that people were . . . when they brought back 
their bottles and their cans and whatever it was, they had $8 
million. Has the budget for SARCAN been increased for the 
month of April to cover off the additional costs such as the 
Tetra-Paks and the cardboard boxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the budget for SARCAN will be 
increased each and every month in the fiscal year. Last year 
SARCAN was given $7.88 million, so almost $7.9 million for 
the year. This year SARCAN will be given $8.1 million for the 
year. So if you divide that by 12, obviously there’s an increase 
in there and SARCAN will be receiving more money. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What kind of 
a additional cost to SARCAN are you estimating because you 
have brought the Tetra-Paks and cardboard boxes under their 
purview, and does that additional — what? — roughly $2 
million . . . $200,000 cover off those costs for the year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We believe it does. And I’ve taken the 
opportunity in the last several weeks to speak to the general 
manager of SARCAN on a number of occasions and also spoke 
to him before the budget about arrangements that might be 
appropriate with respect to SARCAN. And my understanding is 
that SARCAN is quite pleased, as are its member organizations, 
with the budgetary arrangements that have been made. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Minister. I’m not sure that 
“quite pleased” would be the proper adjectives to describe their 
concerns or their feelings about the budget because they wanted 
to be able to expand their operations, not simply cover off the 
costs of further recycling with the Tetra-Paks and the cardboard 
boxes. 
 
I know that there was applications last year for I believe at least 
an additional two depots; that the government was bringing in 
over $9 million for the environmental fees on these kinds of 
services and yet less than $8 million was being disbursed to 
SARCAN to pay for those recovery costs. 
 
With the expansion now into Tetra-Paks and cardboard boxes, 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 1998 

obviously their cost, their money they’re paying out when 
people bring those in is going to increase. Plus they’re going to 
have more staff on, more storage facilities to deal with these 
issues, and that’s not been covered off in the budget. They need 
to put in more depots; that’s not been covered off. 
 
So I think pleased would be too strong an adjective to describe 
their feelings about the budget and the money that SARCAN is 
getting. Are you looking at increasing that further to cover off 
all those additional costs, the additional expenses for what’s 
going out, the additional staffing, and to provide any additional 
depots? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I can only go on the basis of what 
people tell me. I mean obviously everybody would always like 
more money. There’s no question about that. And whether 
you’re talking about Health or Highways or SARCAN or if you 
ask them, well would you like more money, everyone will say 
yes. That’s quite natural. 
 
But they have told me that they are quite pleased with the 
measures in the budget. The budget is for the upcoming year. I 
would anticipate that — well more than anticipate — I fully 
expect that SARCAN will operate within whatever budget is 
approved by the legislature, which I sincerely hope and trust 
will be the budget that we’ve presented to the legislature. 
 
And that arrangement will certainly be the case for the balance 
of the fiscal year, which will take us to March 31, 1999. And 
we will hope that the amount which is increased to SARCAN 
will enable it to operate well. 
 
If you suggest that they’d like more money, I’m sure they 
would. Who wouldn’t? We all would. And every organization 
would. But we’re taking some steps to help SARCAN and also 
to help the environment because it’s very important that these 
Tetra-Paks be returned, that people get the nickel back on the 
Tetra-Paks. We’ve dealt with an issue, trying to deal with an 
issue in the budget that is I think important for SARCAN, also 
important to the environment, and fair that people get this 5 
cents per Tetra-Pak, and I’m sure that you’ll agree with me that 
that’s a good initiative in the budget that we should certainly try 
to support. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, bringing the Tetra-Paks under the 
recovery program is good but it would seem you have not 
allocated enough resources to pay for that within the SARCAN 
system unless nobody bothers returning them and they simply 
continue to go to the dump. Two hundred thousand dollars, I’m 
sure you’re bringing in a lot more than that on the sale of those 
Tetra-Paks and on the sale of the cardboard boxes, but you’re 
not returning that to SARCAN. They obviously are going to 
have some additional expenses both in paying out to the clients 
that come into their door to return the boxes and in staff in 
dealing with that, Mr. Minister. 
 
But I’d like to move on to some of the other issues. Fire 
fighting is a major cost for environment in this province. 
Fire-fighting season is starting. April and May are serious parts 
of the year for it and then it extends through the summer. But 
it’s the things you do in April and May in getting prepared for 
the fire-fighting season that really have the impact on what kind 
of a season you’re going to have along with the weather, Mr. 

Minister. 
 
We’ve had a relatively dry year across the North. There wasn’t 
a lot of snow. We haven’t had much for rain yet this spring. 
There were a few showers across the North. How much of that 
money that is being allocated to the environment will actually 
be used in preparation for the fire-fighting season? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well that would be a very appropriate 
question for the Minister of the Environment when he is here 
for estimates. And I know that he will be very pleased to 
discuss that kind of detail with the member. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well indeed it would be a very 
appropriate question for the Minister of the Environment, but 
he’s not here asking for his money. You’re here asking for the 
money. So surely you have some idea what this one-twelfth is 
going to be spent on for this month that you’re asking for. 
 
In the case of the Environment, you’re asking for almost $8 
million. Now is any of that money being allocated towards the 
fire fighting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We are allocating one-twelfth of the 
amount to be voted for the Department of the Environment, and 
we’re advised that they feel that they can manage their various 
affairs within that amount of money. So we have every 
confidence that they can do so because they have told us that 
they think that this is appropriate to allow them to make 
whatever preparations need to be made. And I’m sure that 
includes whatever preparations they feel are required for forest 
fighting. 
 
And I have every confidence that . . . I mean these are 
professional people. We’re talking about professional 
fire-fighting people and pilots and people that keep the planes 
going. And they will be prepared this year to work at fire 
fighting as required, just as they are every year. Because the 
hallmark of what they have to do is to be prepared, and that’s 
what they will do. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, Mr. Minister, they have to be 
prepared and they are professional. But their costs are not all 
. . . don’t all come equally in 12 portions. And fact is I believe 
roughly a third of the Environment budget deals with 
fire-fighting services which takes place in April, May, June and 
July; sometimes on into August. 
 
So their costs are done all within the first five or six months of 
the year in that area. The rest of the Environment department 
costs are indeed . . . some of them are spread out more equally, 
but most of those costs again are related more to the summer 
season than they are to the winter. 
 
So when it comes to those areas, Mr. Minster, is there going to 
be enough money in place or is the department going to have to 
come back to you for a special warrant or some kind of a loan 
to cover off their costs if they exceed the amount of $8 million 
that you’re allocating to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the department who are more expert 
in this than I am or the member, have told us that this amount of 
money would be reasonable for them to meet the various needs, 



April 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

which includes preparing for forest fires or perhaps fighting 
forest fires. So I take the word of the officials from the 
Department of the Environment which say that this is quite 
reasonable for them. And this is what they’re asking for; this is 
what they shall receive. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, it seems that while 
you want the money, you don’t have the answers on where it’s 
going to be spent. I think perhaps it would be incumbent on you 
the next time you come forward with interim supply, if these 
answers have not yet been answered, that the ministers be here 
to answer some questions rather than the minister who simply 
wants to spend the money and doesn’t have the answers on why 
it wants to be spent or where it’s going to go to, or indeed, in 
your department doesn’t even know where the money is going 
to come in from, Mr. Minister. So I think next time around, it’s 
incumbent that somebody be here who has the answers. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, I certainly appreciate the 
member’s help and advice. I’m at a bit of a disadvantage in that, 
unlike the member, I’m not able to predict the future. So I don’t 
know whether oil revenue will be one-twelfth or more than that 
or less than that; it’s an estimate. And I don’t know how many 
forest fires there will be. I hope none, but there will probably be 
some. The member doesn’t know that either. 
 
I didn’t bring my crystal ball. In fact I don’t even have one, but 
I certainly admit to the member that I don’t have all the 
answers, unlike some people, and I apologize for that. But I’ll 
try to do better in the future and perhaps, listening to the 
member, I will learn perhaps from the experience of the 
previous government. And the member has lots of advice and I 
intend to listen to his advice and take it to heart so that I can 
improve myself. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I hereby move 
resolution no. 2 which says: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the Fiscal Year ending March 31, 1999, the sum 
of $300,121,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 

 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that no. 2 resolved: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the Fiscal Year ending March 31, 1999, the sum 
of $357,121,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read the first time and 
second time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move: 
 

That Bill No. 21, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 1999, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: —Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................461 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................462 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................462 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................462 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................462 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................462 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Tartan Day 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................462 
 Tartan Day Greetings from Saskatchewan Party 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................462 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................463 
 Awasis Conference, Saskatoon 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................463 
 Legislative Graffiti 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................463 
 Cancer Month 
  Koenker .....................................................................................................................................................................................463 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................463 
 Regina Lakeview Area Authors 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................464 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Regina Hospital Emergency Services 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................464 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................464 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................465 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................465 
 Death of North Battleford Community Home Operator 
  Heppner .............................................................................................................................................................................466, 468 
  Calvert ...............................................................................................................................................................................466, 468 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................466 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................466 
 Easter Hospital Bed Closures 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................467 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................468 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................468 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................469 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................472 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................474 



 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................479 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................484 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................489 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................489 
 


