





























































Hansard: April 21, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 669 
 April 21, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition from residents of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis which we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures come from the communities of 
Lampman, Kipling, and Stoughton. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Carievale, Gainsborough, 
Carnduff, Fertile areas, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with petitions as well to 
present to the Assembly. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the Regina, 
Weyburn areas. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are the communities 

of Gainsborough and Oxbow. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I too rise to present a petition 
and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And these are signed by the people from Gainsborough. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of Saskatchewan citizens petitioning to save the Plains 
hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Fairlight, Arcola, Carnduff, Oxbow, and 
Alida. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 

 
People that have signed this petition are all from 
Gainsborough. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have a 
petition to present to the Assembly today dealing with the 
moratorium on the closure of the Plains hospital. This 
petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the Lampman area of 
Saskatchewan and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition 
on behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the towns 
of Indian Head, Qu’Appelle, Montmartre, and Wolseley. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise to 
present a petition, and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Fort Qu’Appelle and Indian Head, and I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities such as Fort Qu’Appelle and Indian Head and 
Glenavon. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a petition 
on behalf of people of Saskatchewan. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures are from Indian Head and Balgonie. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition this afternoon 
from citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about our crumbling 
health care system, and especially with the impending closure 
of the Plains hospital. The petitioners come from Indian Head, 
Montmartre, and Balgonie. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in bringing forward petitions in regards to 
preventing the closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petitions there, 
there’s a flood of petitions coming in from the Indian Head 
meeting where it was very successful, large . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member, of course, will want 
to avoid debating when presenting petitions. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to 
present today a petition sent in by people that have taken time 
out from their spring seeding: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the communities of Gull Lake, Saskatchewan; Abbey, 
Cabri, and of course, from Medicine Hat in Alberta. I’m happy 
to present them today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to put 
a moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health Centre, 
and petitioning the Assembly to act to save the Plains 
Health Centre. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 34 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: what do you intend on doing in 
the ongoing appeal in the Alberta Court of Appeal with 
regards to Bill C-68, the federal gun control Bill; what 
position will you be taking now that it has been clearly 
shown that the federal Department of Justice has 
committed perjury in the presentation of the falsified 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) documents and 
statistics? 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 34 ask the government the 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

following question: 
 

(1) What facilities and programs are available in Saskatoon 
and area for youth who suffer with addiction to alcohol 
and/or drugs; (2) why was the Whitespruce Youth 
Treatment Centre closed, and where did the clients then 
receive treatment; (3) has a comparison been made of 
success rates between youth treated at Whitespruce 
Treatment Centre and youth treated in other programs after 
the closure of Whitespruce; if yes, what are the results; if 
no comparisons have been made, why not; please state the 
criteria used to measure success. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you a group of students from Campbell 
Collegiate who are accompanied today by a group of exchange 
students from Quebec. They are seated in your gallery. 
 
This is part of an annual exchange that goes on between 
Campbell Collegiate . . . You can see them waving up there. 
And I understand I’ll be meeting with them at about 2:30 for 
what is usually, at least in past years, a fairly lively debate. So 
thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, through 
you and to the members of this Assembly, in the west gallery a 
former member of this Assembly that I’m sure a number of 
members may recognize. Mr. Gordon Dirks served in the 
Assembly — served very well. 
 
He’s also joined by, I believe, Ron Waschuk. I’d like the 
members to welcome Gordon and Ron to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to draw your attention and that of the members, to a group 
of students who are seated in your gallery. This is a group of 15 
students who are enrolled in the ENCORE (exceptional needs 
creating options related to education) high school program in 
Regina. They’re accompanied by their teachers, Rand Teed and 
Lisa Briere. This group of students, these young men and 
women, are renewing their commitment to education. And by 
welcoming them today let’s show too that we appreciate this 
commitment that they make to education. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Meeting on Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night 
more than 300 people came out to express their anger and 
frustration with this government’s arrogant decision to close the 
Plains. I can honestly say I don’t think I’ve been part of a more 
raucous public meeting. 
 

Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, these people were mad when they 
got there and they were even madder when they left. And all 
that anger was directed towards the Minister of Health and his 
cabinet cronies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t listen to a word those people 
had to say. Even worse, the minister sent one of his flunkies 
from the Regina Health District Board, who I understand was 
the former campaign manager for the Environment minister, to 
deflect the heat from himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t listen, so let me tell you what 
the people had to say. They said, you are running a health 
system on the edge and people are scared for their lives and the 
lives of their loved ones. For years they have watched your 
government decimate health care in rural Saskatchewan and 
now they see the Plains as all they have left. For a moment you 
gave a glimmer of hope that you were committed to improving 
services in regional centres such as Yorkton and Swift Current. 
But when somebody asked the question, the future of the Swift 
Current hospital, you replied that you were not interested in 
debating the future. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, one thing is certain about the minister’s 
future. If he doesn’t change his mind about the closure of the 
Plains, the people will ensure his future will not be in this 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Organ Donor Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
morning I had the pleasure of speaking at the Saskatchewan 
Coalition for Organ Awareness to help kick off Organ Donor 
Awareness Week. Although organ donation rates have 
remained stable throughout the ’90s, the need for more donors 
is still present. I believe if more people knew of this vital need, 
more people would become donors. 
 
Making a personal commitment to organ and tissue donation is 
so important because it can extend and enhance the quality of 
life of others. Although we should be especially cognizant of 
organ donation this week, it is something we cannot let 
ourselves forget in weeks and years to come. Organ donation is 
a decision an individual should make in an open discussion with 
family members. It is a decision that has the potential to save 
lives. 
 
I would like to congratulate the efforts of the members of 
SCODA (Saskatchewan Coalition for Organ Donor Awareness) 
for raising the profile of organ donation and urging all fellow 
citizens to consider this important issue for their families. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Acute Care Bed Reduction in Living Sky Health District 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, with the snap of the finger this 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government has slashed the 
number of acute care beds in the Living Sky Health District 
down to 16 beds — 16 beds for an entire district. 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

Today we received a letter from the local president of the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses in the district. Susan Kotzer 
writes, and I quote: 
 

It is obvious that our government does not share in our 
vision of keeping rural Saskatchewan viable. Rather they 
seem intent on closing us down. We believe the minimal 
acute care services left in the district is just a stopgap 
measure before the service and the hospitals will be shut 
down completely. 

 
We will continue to fight for decent health care in the 
Living Sky District. We will continue to fight against bed 
closures. And we know the residents of our district support 
us in our campaign. We believe the residents of the district 
are interested in keeping viable acute-care service in the 
district. We believe they will be disappointed and angry 
when they hear of this loss. 
 

In closing, Mrs. Kotzer writes, again, quote: 
 

We do not hold the health board absolutely responsible. 
The Department of Health continues to cut the budget. 
The department is responsible to the minister who in turn 
is responsible to the government, and we believe that the 
buck stops there. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Training of Metis Economic Development Officers 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the 
Economic and Co-operative Development minister, along with 
the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan president, Clem Chartier, 
announced an $80,000 grant to help train 12 Metis economic 
development officers. 
 
The Dumont Technical Institute in Saskatoon will train the 12 
officers in targeted areas ranging from business planning to 
public relations. The program will include specific training in 
Metis economic development issues and a four-month 
internship. 
 
The project will cost between 250,000 and 300,000, with the 
Metis Nation of Saskatchewan contributing all but the $80,000 
that the Economic and Co-operative minister committed. MNS 
(Metis Nation of Saskatchewan) president, Clem Chartier, said, 
and I quote: “We are taxpayers too, and the more people we 
have working, the more taxpayers we have and the less we will 
have to pay.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, all involved in this initiative see it as a crucially 
important step towards the developing of economic potential of 
aboriginal peoples in Saskatchewan. We as a government are 
committed to developing the potential of all people in 
Saskatchewan and to ensure that everyone shares in our 
economic success in a more equitable manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Carlton Trail Regional College Marks 25th Anniversary 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This month Carlton Trail 

Regional College in Humboldt celebrates its 25th anniversary. 
Over that span of time, the college has delivered a 
comprehensive range of programs to meet the adult education 
needs of the 1980s and the 1990s. Thousands have taken 
advantage of and benefited from its offerings. 
 
The hallmark of the Carlton Trail College has been its 
flexibility and adaptability to meet the changing requirements 
of a fast-changing economy and the delivery of quality service 
and programs to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
True to form, Carlton Trail College is looking ahead and is 
commemorating its 25th anniversary by participating in a 
three-day conference at Manitou Beach, April 29, 30, and May 
1, billed as Saskatchewan’s number one business education 
conference of the year. It is a conference that looks ahead to the 
21st century and a new and evolving global economy. 
 
I commend the college staff for its valuable contribution over 
the first 25 years and wish them continued success in the next 
25 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Credit Union Central Elects Board President 
 

Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently delegates chose 
Elwood Harvey, a constituent and former colleague of mine 
from our days as Saskatchewan Wheat Pool delegates, to take 
on the top responsibility of the credit union system. That’s 
when they elected Elwood as president of the board of directors 
of Credit Union Central. 
 
I want to extend my congratulations to Elwood and to his 
family for their support of him, not only in this undertaking but 
also in the additional farming responsibilities that they 
shouldered with Elwood making this major commitment to the 
credit union and its membership. 
 
Elwood Harvey is a community-minded cooperator who has 
served in many positions with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 
the credit union system, and other community organizations. 
We are all fortunate to have Elwood Harvey as president of the 
board of directors of Credit Union Central, as well as a friend, a 
neighbour, and a community leader. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal Health Policy 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
obvious the NDP government is losing its ability to care about 
Saskatchewan people. While I question whether they care, Mr. 
Speaker, until recently I never doubted their ability to listen. 
Now they might ignore newspaper articles from Swift Current 
about bed closures, but I did believe that they read the 
newspapers. 
 
Before me, Mr. Speaker, is a November 24, 1997 Leader-Post 
article. It lists the policies recently adopted by the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party. Included on the list is one which 
notes we voted to uphold the principles of the Canada Health 
Act to ensure publicly funded, publicly administered, universal 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

medicare. 
 
Even though many of them read of our party’s unequivocal 
support of medicare, the NDP members still try and suggest we 
support a Tory/Saskatchewan Party policy like two-tiered 
medicine. Not only do we reject the two-tiered Tories, we took 
this resolution, which originated in my constituency, to the 
national convention where it was made party policy by Liberals 
across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope the NDP members will not let me down. I 
believe they’re still able to listen. They know what our policy is 
— no two-tiered medicine. If they don’t care, they can at least 
show they’re listening by getting their facts straight. And just to 
help, I’ll send them some copies over. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women’s Programs Gain Internet Access 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. I’d be 
the first to admit that I’m not an expert on the Internet. I’m still 
not convinced that a web page on Tallulah Bankhead is an 
improvement on the human condition, but I do believe that an 
on-line program sponsored by the Saskatchewan Women’s 
Secretariat is doing more than a little good. 
 
Yesterday morning I was happy to attend a program during 
which 18 Regina area women’s organizations were presented 
with grants from the on-line program to enable them to access 
the Internet and to train members to use these new 
communications technologies. 
 
The non-profit groups will use this money to purchase the 
relevant equipment and to organize training for members, staff, 
clients, and volunteers. 
 
The 18 groups range from the Girl Guides to Sofia House to the 
YWCA to the Immigrant Women of Saskatchewan — names I 
selected as representative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good use of modern technology. Through 
the Internet these groups will be able to better break down 
isolation, their ability to assist client groups will be enhanced, 
their travel time and expense will be greatly reduced, they can 
save time and money on communications, they can share and 
increase their access to information. 
 
I congratulate the Women’s Secretariat and the minister for this 
useful, modern, and helpful program. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the minister responsible for 
SaskPower. 
 

Mr. Minister, this morning the allegations of wrongdoing in 
Channel Lake got a lot more serious. When Ken Christensen 
and Larry Kram finally got around the other day to reading the 
contract they signed one full year ago, they discovered that the 
contract they signed on behalf of SaskPower was switched 
before it was signed by DEML (Direct Energy Marketing 
Limited). 
 
Mr. Minister, this is no longer just a couple of guys with 
SaskPower forgetting to read a contract. This appears now to be 
a criminal matter. It’s fraud and it’s very possibly a conspiracy. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of the new evidence, what action are you 
taking? Will you immediately be referring this matter to the 
RCMP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I, like the member 
opposite asking the question, was not at the meeting this 
morning. I want to make that clear. But it is my understanding, 
having been briefed by members who were at the meeting, that 
Mr. Ted Priel advised, and I quote: “I caution the committee do 
not draw conclusions after having heard only a small part of the 
story.” 
 
And at that point the committee went back to work, all 
members agreeing — all members agreeing including the 
members from the Conservative caucus who you represent — 
agreed to continue with the work, taking the advice of Ted Priel 
in saying to the committee: “I caution the committee, do not 
draw conclusions after having heard only a small part of the 
story.” 
 
So you, sir, I would urge that you be cautious, listen to the 
testimony, hear all of the testimony before you jump to 
conclusions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, Mr. Kram said that 
the adulterated version of the contract was accomplished by 
removing and inserting pages to the purchase agreement after it 
had been signed by SaskPower. That appears to be very clear 
evidence of fraud. You have sworn testimony from two senior 
Power officials to that effect and now you have the documents 
to back that evidence up. 
 
As minister responsible for SaskPower, you should immediately 
take this evidence to the RCMP. The only reason you wouldn’t 
is if your government had something to hide. Mr. Minister, 
what are you waiting for? Why would you not, in light of the 
evidence this morning, why would you not turn this matter over 
to the RCMP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the 
member opposite that it’s my understanding that your member 
on the committee, the member from Melfort — your leadership 
contender for the Conservative Party — agreed to the fact that 
the committee would continue its work on the advice of Ted 
Priel, and that the member from North Battleford, being a 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

lawyer, also agreed that we would continue the work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members yell and holler from their seats. I can 
understand how if the member from Kindersley has anything to 
do with this investigation it will be chaos because all he does is 
cause problems, yell and holler from his seat. 
 
I say to the members opposite, I say to the members opposite 
that the committee is doing its work. Your member from 
Melfort agreed that the committee would continue to do its 
work. And I say to the member opposite if he would consult 
with the other members of his caucus, get in touch with the 
reality of what’s happening in the committee, he would know 
that there was an agreement to continue the work of the 
committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister obviously was not there because he doesn’t understand 
what was going on. The committee can continue its work. 
There’s clear evidence of potential criminal activity and it was 
clearly said that if that is clearly the case, citizens of this 
province are obligated under good conscience to report that, and 
that’s what’s being asked for. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to direct your attention to another bit of 
contradictory evidence that came out this morning. In your 
statement of March 10 you clearly said that, and I quote: 
 

According to CIC officials, the management and board of 
Channel Lake apparently undertook these gas trading 
activities without the authority from the board of 
SaskPower and indeed contrary to the mandate given by 
the SaskPower board. 
 

Well today Mr. Ken Christensen, SaskPower’s vice-president of 
finance and a member of the Channel Lake board of directors, 
said he disagrees with you. He testified under oath that gas 
trading activities were within the mandate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now the hon. 
member has been extremely long in his preamble and I’m going 
to ask him to go directly to his question now. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question is, 
who’s right — you and your statement or Mr. Ken Christensen 
in his testimony? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to the 
member opposite, who I gave also on March 10 a document 
delivered to the Assembly, on page 20 by Deloitte Touche, and 
if he would turn to page 20, if he would turn to page 20 and 
read item no. 1, the mandate for Channel Lake was clear, and 
the move into arbitrage activity was outside the mandate as 
given. 
 
It goes on to say, as noted in the record of its April 22, 1993 
meeting, the SaskPower board made it clear at the outset it did 
not want the corporation to get into the gas business beyond 
activities necessary to provide security of supply and 
predictability of price. That says that arbitrage was not 
approved by the SaskPower board. 

So I say to you when Mr. Grossman, Mr. Jack Grossman from 
Deloitte Touche comes to the committee, ask him where he 
came to the conclusion that arbitrage was not in the mandate of 
SaskPower’s Channel Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister makes my point entirely. You clearly said that you 
believed that there was no mandate for Sask . . . or Channel 
Lake to undertake the arbitrage trading. And yet today, in clear 
testimony, it’s shown that a senior vice-president of SaskPower 
clearly disagreed with you and said clearly that they had a clear 
mandate to undertake any of these activities as they saw fit. The 
directors of Channel Lake were three SaskPower employees 
and Jack Messer. 
 
Mr. Minister, who’s in charge over there? You, or Jack Messer 
and Ken Christensen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again to the member, who 
apparently didn’t read the document, this is not a debate 
between myself and Mr. Christensen. It’s a debate, it’s a 
discussion between a report that I commissioned, that our 
government commissioned with Deloitte Touche, who said 
clearly the mandate for Channel Lake was clear . . . And the 
move into arbitrage activity was outside the mandate given by 
the Power board. 
 
Now you are going to have obviously a discussion in the 
committee with Mr. Kram and Christensen and with Mr. 
Grossman, who represents Deloitte Touche. And as I said 
earlier, there will be differences of opinion, and obviously this 
is one. 
 
But for the member from Melfort to jump to his feet as if he had 
found some new evidence, when it was reported in the House 
on the March 10, these people interviewed Mr. Christensen and 
came to this conclusion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the yelling and hollering that’s being allowed 
in the House it is extremely difficult to deal here in the 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
not disagreeing that this is clearly outside of the mandate of 
Channel Lake. What you have is not me disagreeing with you, 
but seeing your SaskPower officials disagreeing with you. And, 
Mr. Minister, if you’re not prepared to take charge of your own 
officials, will the Premier get someone in charge of this whole 
portfolio who will? Maybe the Premier should get rid of you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, not to be personal — 
but to be personal, the Conservative Party got rid of you over 
the weekend. I can tell you that loud and clear — and with good 
reason. And the reason that they got rid of you is because you 
can’t be trusted. You weren’t trusted as a Liberal and you’re not 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. All hon. members will come 
order — order — and allow the minister to conclude his 
remarks if he wishes. 
 

Hospital Bed Closures 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Health or his designate. 
Mr. Minister, we found out yesterday that you are planning to 
close down another 25 acute care beds in rural Saskatchewan — 
this time the Living Sky Health District. 
 
Let me see if I have this straight. The NDP’s health care 
strategy is to close down beds and hospitals in rural 
Saskatchewan and that puts pressure on regional hospitals. 
 
But then the NDP is downsizing services and budgets in our 
regional hospitals — that is putting pressure on hospitals in 
Regina and Saskatoon. And now the NDP is closing down the 
Plains hospital and that is putting pressure on the Howard 
Johnson Hotel. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you finally admit what everyone already 
knows — the NDP health reform process is not working and 
people in rural Saskatchewan are paying the price. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of 
Health, the member refers, I believe he refers, in his opening 
comment to decisions that have been made by the Living Sky 
Health District, which decisions, Mr. Speaker, include — 
include — a major enhancement of home care services for their 
health district; which include, I am told, a major enhancement 
to nursing services for their long-term care facilities. So they’ll 
be moving to a 24-hour, round-the-clock nursing service for 
their seniors, their pioneers in that district, Mr. Speaker. And 
that, I believe, will be welcomed in those communities. 
 
Now that member and the members of his caucus will stand in 
this House on a daily basis listing, as they see it — and in some 
cases not too accurately — but listing as they see it the 
problems facing health care. 
 
What they do not stand in this House and suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
are solutions to the problems. They’re not very quick at 
volunteering their solutions to the problems. 
 
But when they make the slip, when they make the slip and some 
of their solutions become part of a press dialogue, we find out 
that one of their solutions is to start cutting insured services in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure 
the people in the Living Sky Health District aren’t taking much 

comfort from the current answer that was just given to us. 
Unfortunately, non-answers are part of this NDP government 
when it comes to fixing what’s wrong in our failing health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are closing beds in the Living Sky Health 
District and people are going to be hurt by it. You’re closing the 
Plains hospital in Regina and people across the southern half of 
the province don’t believe that adequate health services will be 
there in time of need. 
 
Mr. Minister, don’t you think it’s time to swallow hard and 
admit what you are doing with the health care system is failing 
the people in the Living Sky Health District and everyone else 
in Saskatchewan? Isn’t it time to stop the bed closures and the 
hospital closures until you figure out what went wrong and start 
to fix it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I need to but I 
will remind the member again of the commitment of this 
government in this most current budget to health care in this 
province. 
 
Two years ago, if I recall, Mr. Minister, we added 40 million 
new dollars to health care. Last year another 57 million new 
dollars. In this budget another 88 million new dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, which represents an increase to every health district in 
our province. Now that, Mr. Speaker, is in the face, in the 
ongoing and continuing face of cut-backs from the federal 
Liberals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now in terms of each of our health districts, the elected and 
appointed boards work very closely with their communities. I 
know the Living Sky board — I heard reports of it myself — 
conducted community meetings. They have assessed their 
needs. They know that their needs are for their seniors and their 
pioneers and they’re providing new and improved services for 
that generation of our Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, day in and day out the NDP 
government accuses the Liberal opposition of fearmongering 
about health care. Well the Premier would know better if he had 
been among the close to 500 people who joined the Liberals at 
the Save The Plains meeting in Indian Head last night . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . We hear 300; we hear 450; we hear 
500. Take your pick. The hall was packed, but the Premier was 
not there. 
 
Mr. Premier, because you haven’t given people a voice in the 
proposed closure of the Plains hospital, the Liberal opposition 
is. And last night people expressed serious concerns about the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now the Chair’s 
having some difficulty being able to hear the question being 
put. Order. Order. I’ll ask for all hon. members to allow the 
question to be heard. 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier would 
know how many people were there if he had the intestinal 
fortitude to come to one of those meetings and listen to the 
people. Last night they expressed serious concerns about the 
proposed closure of the Plains and they shared health care 
horror stories. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Liberal opposition is sponsoring another Save 
The Plains meeting tonight in Weyburn. Will you shed your 
political bubble and join us at that meeting, and speak to the 
people and be there and count the numbers yourself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is a question from 
the Liberals, who a few days ago in this House asked questions 
surrounding the Swift Current District Health region. And it 
was reported in The Southwest Booster of Swift Current in a 
headline which says “Comments Alarm Provincial Liberals.” 
You were here, Mr. Speaker, in the chair at the time when the 
Liberals made accusations about the bed closures. 
 
Well it then took the district health board in Swift Current just a 
matter of days to reply, to say the following: 
 

The Swift Current Health Board wishes to assure the 
public the reports suggesting dramatic reduction in hospital 
beds are false. Future plans will maintain the role the Swift 
Current hospital has as a service centre for the region. 
Recent controversy has been based on a misinterpretation 
of information presented at a public meeting and at a brief 
to Saskatchewan Health. 
 

That’s what you’re doing at every one of these meetings — 
misrepresenting the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier keeps pointing his 
finger about what we’re doing. Mr. Premier, what you’re not 
doing is listening to the people. Come on out to Weyburn 
tonight. In a snap of the finger more than half of the acute care 
beds in the Living Sky Health District have been eliminated, 
people in the district were informed last night — 25 acute beds. 
Now do you have the clippings of that? Because that is fact. 
They’ve been slashed in Lanigan, Watrous, and Wynyard, 
leaving only 16 beds in the entire district. 
 
What leaves many people frustrated and upset is the fact that 
the Minister of Health promised only a few weeks ago that there 
would be no more bed closures. The minister said he was 
comfortable with the number of beds. He added that slashing 
any more beds would be inappropriate. 
 
I would ask the minister or the Premier, Mr. Speaker, do they 
have short-term memory loss? Why are you allowing further 
closures to take place when you promised there would be no 
more bed closures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat again, this has 
been stated not only by me but by people in the health business, 
that what the Liberals are doing, in gentle words, 
misrepresenting the question of health care. It not only pertains 

to Swift Current, as I said in my previous answer, here it does 
with respect to the Plains. 
 
In the Leader-Post of Saturday, April 18, 1998, the Leader-Post 
April 18, 1998, the spokesperson from the Regina District 
Health region says that what the Liberals are saying is, quote: 
“an inaccurate perception,” in their words. That’s what you’re 
doing. 
 
What you’re not telling the people of Saskatchewan however, is 
that your Liberal Party in Ottawa has cut funding to medicare in 
Saskatchewan from 50-cent dollars to 13-cent dollars. What 
you’re not telling the people is that we back-filled every penny 
of that and have added to that money to the extent that the 
Minister of Social Services said. 
 
And what you’re not telling the people, and you should be 
telling the people, is that once that we’re completed with 
consolidation and improvement at the General and Pasqua, 
services in Regina and the South will be the best ever that 
they’ve been in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, last summer this government 
announced that it would be conducting a review of hospital bed 
closures which occurred under the first phase of what this NDP 
government calls health care reform, the wellness model. The 
aim of the study is to examine what impact the closure of 
almost 1,000 hospital beds had on the health care system. 
 
Mr. Premier, this study is not expected to be completed until 
this summer, yet you continue slashing more hospital beds, like 
those in the Living Sky Health District. How can you allow 
more bed closures to take place? How can you allow the Plains 
to close before you even know the effects of your initial study 
on the health care system and the lack of beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, you know now why 
these people say that the Liberals misrepresent the facts on 
health care. 
 
The hon. member’s question is predicated on the assumption 
that there is going to be bed closures in Regina when the Plains 
shuts down in October of 1998 and the new General and Pasqua 
additions are added on. Nothing could be further from the truth. 
There will not be one bed lost, but the whole question is based 
on bed closure. 
 
There won’t only not be one bed lost, there will be an 
improvement in all kinds of areas of health care — renal care, 
cardiac care, a variety of areas, and we’re doing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. Order. Now 
the Chair is having a great deal of difficulty being able to hear 
the Premier’s response over the shouting from the members of 
the third party, and I’ll ask the House to come to order and to 
allow the Premier to conclude his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll simply conclude my 
response by saying that they have an allergy to the truth, the 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

Liberal Party does. That’s why they do so much cat-calling and 
yelling, and the truth of the matter is that what they are saying 
is inaccurate and misrepresented. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, you can’t have it 
both ways. The NDP claims to be carrying out a review to 
determine how the first round of bed closures impacted the 
health care system. Yet before the review is even completed 
more beds are being slashed. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, how can the people of Saskatchewan 
take you seriously if you’re slashing more beds before you even 
have a report indicating the impact of previous closures? Is this 
because you know the review is a sham? 
 
Will you give the review a little bit of integrity at the least by 
putting a moratorium on any further bed closures and the 
closure of the Plains until this review has been completed and 
we know the findings of it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how it 
could be said more plainly or more clearly to the Liberal Party 
and to the people of Saskatchewan than I’ve put it. When the 
Plains closes down sometime in October of this year, the beds 
at Regina General and Pasqua will be on stream. I have 
personally surveyed the sites and what is taking place there. 
 
In the net result there will be no bed reduction. Mr. Speaker, no 
bed reduction. Mr. Speaker, no bed reduction. Mr. Speaker, no 
bed reduction. And the finest health care services for all of 
southern Saskatchewan. Those are the facts. 
 
They won’t accept that because in their desperate attempt to 
outdo their opposition to the Tory Party, they continue to 
misrepresent the fact that the Liberals have stopped funding 
medicare nationally and that you, sir, that question . . . or 
believe in two-tier medicine. Not us. We do not accept your 
position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investment in New Zealand 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is for the minister in charge of SaskTel . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today my 
question is for the minister in charge of SaskTel. The people of 
Saskatchewan have said they don’t want their Crown 
corporations going on any more globe-trotting boondoggles. 
Your Saturn partner, UIH (United International Holdings) Asia 
Pacific of Denver, Colorado lost $138 million and $91 million 
the year before that. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan are on the hook for 
some $63 million and still counting. 
 

My question to the minister responsible today for SaskTel . . . 
says it will reach a positive cash flow in 1999. But in a letter to 
the Chair of the Crown Corporations Committee from you just 
six months ago, you stated that SaskTel will still face losses for 
a few more years. 
 
Mr. Minister, when will you learn that the people of 
Saskatchewan are tired of your business boondoggles. How 
much will the total losses be? And when will they end? In 
1999? Or more, as your letter stated. Or will it take another 
special committee of the Crown Corporations Committee 
meeting to bring out the truth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, 
this transaction was reported to the Crown Corporations 
Committee. There was a debate about it; that there is no 
surprise. In fact a headline tells the story, “SaskTel on course.” 
It’s clear, it’s clear that when you do an investment, and the 
member opposite may even have some experience with that, 
that when you’re doing a new investment, that you don’t 
instantly start getting a return on your investment. 
 
But if you look at the investment that SaskTel made in Leicester 
Cable in England, if you check that out, and I’m sure the 
member does know that over a hundred million dollars was 
returned to the coffers of SaskTel that helped keep the rates 
lower, and in fact some of the lowest in Canada. 
 
And when it comes to truth, sir, you share part of the problem 
as the rest of your colleagues do on health care. Why don’t you 
be honest and realize that if you were truthful, you’d be 
congratulating the men and women in SaskTel who do an 
excellent job of providing service, and through SaskTel 
International have returned millions of dollars to the coffers of 
SaskTel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Funding for Victims of Family Violence 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to inform you 
that yesterday I announced that Saskatchewan Justice will be 
providing $350,000 in new funding to respond to the effects of 
family violence among aboriginal people in cities across the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This new provincial initiative 
demonstrates our government’s response to the serious issue of 
family violence and our further commitment to respect the 
needs of aboriginal people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this announcement comes as a direct result of 
consultations we have had with the aboriginal people living in 
urban communities in order to determine how we can better 
meet the needs of aboriginal victims of crime. Aboriginal 
service organizations and crime victims said that in the 
aboriginal community, family violence and sexual assault are 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

the crimes of greatest concern to them. They also regard them 
as the most common crimes committed against aboriginal 
people. Unfortunately statistics also support this view, showing 
that 8 out of 10 aboriginal women have been abused or 
assaulted, or expect to be abused and assaulted. 
 
In our consultations we also heard about the need for cultural 
sensitivity. We heard that concern and we agree that there 
should be more aboriginal people involved in responding to the 
needs of aboriginal victims of crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this funding will help community-based aboriginal 
organizations offer a holistic approach to stop the cycle of 
family violence. Victims, children, offenders, other family 
members, and the community will all benefit from these 
programs. 
 
I welcome the participation of the council members of the 
Circle Project and the board of directors of Peyakowak. Each of 
these Regina organizations will receive $45,000 to respond to 
the effects of family violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, these initiatives are another 
example of this government’s commitment to addressing the 
serious issue of family violence. Seven government 
departments have come together as partners to deliver this 
government’s family violence strategy. Justice, Social Services, 
Education, Labour, Municipal Government, the Women’s 
Secretariat, and Health are all making a contribution to this 
important initiative. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, recognizing and responding to the 
needs of the victims of family violence is an essential part of 
dealing effectively with this serious problem. The provincial 
government is committed to addressing family violence and 
protecting vulnerable people. Across the province this new 
initiative will help provide direct assistance from aboriginal 
people to aboriginal victims of family violence and their 
families, assistance that will be given in an appropriate and 
respectful manner to aboriginal people. 
 
I look forward to announcing other Justice initiatives to address 
the cycle of family violence in the near future. Over the next 
several weeks, I will be in Battleford, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, 
and Yorkton to announce more programs to respond to the 
effects of family violence among aboriginal people. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To respond to the 
statement that was made, I think to the effect that you’re 
addressing the needs of the victims, I think that’s a very 
positive move. I think too often, and too much in the past, 
we’ve addressed only the perpetrators and left the victims out of 
it. And I think that emphasis is to be commended. However, 
there are a number of questions that I have and I would like to 
pose a few of those right now. 
 
In the $350,000 of new funding, you are spreading this out 
among numerous organizations. And I guess the question is, 
how much of this is actually going to end up resulting in 
solutions and care for people and how much of that will just end 

up in organizational dollars? And by the time that’s been 
filtered down to those various groups, I suggest very little real 
impact is going to take place as far as helping the victims that 
are out there. 
 
The other thing that this move does not mention anything about 
is what are you doing to end violence. Now it’s fine to go ahead 
and deal with the victims, but you are not addressing how are 
we going to end this cycle of violence that you say is there. 
You’re responding to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I just want to remind the hon. 
member of our rule 28 which requires that debate be directed 
through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the statement 
that we’ve just heard, Mr. Speaker, says nothing to addressing 
an end to the violence and I think that needs to be there or we’ll 
just be throwing more money and more money continually at 
the victims, which is a necessary component but it definitely is 
not a solution. 
 
And I think we need to have something in this whole part that’s 
going to address the perpetrators of the violence — who the 
perpetrators are, Mr. Speaker, and what has caused that. And 
there’s nothing in here that’s addressing that at all. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is very frequently made 
note of that aboriginal persons are unfortunately 
overrepresented in our court and prison systems. What is less 
frequently noted is that, tragically, aboriginal persons are also 
overrepresented as victims. And I congratulate the Minister of 
Justice because it seems to me that today’s initiative underlines 
and acknowledges that basic fact. 
 
We also know that, possibly because of the impact of residential 
schools in past generations, and other government intervention, 
that aboriginal families in particular suffer from tensions, and 
perhaps at times, weaker ties, that have given rise to more 
serious social problems in native families. And we want to 
return the sense of strong family and community membership 
that will, as the member from Rosthern has said, get to the root 
of the problem as opposed to simply dealing with the 
difficulties of assault and other such attacks after they have 
happened. 
 
However I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, that while I am 
basically pleased with the announcement today, I am not 
convinced that separate facilities for aboriginal people are 
always necessary or desirable. I am pleased that apparently my 
home area of the Battlefords is included in this initiative. But I 
want to say that in the Battlefords we have the Interval House, 
the women’s shelter. We have the Sexual Assault Centre and 
we have victims’ services, as do most other larger communities 
in the province. 
 
All of these services, Mr. Speaker, welcome aboriginal and 
non-aboriginal clients alike. Surely, Mr. Speaker, this is as it 
should be. And native persons should be welcomed both as staff 
and service providers, as well, of course, as clients. 
 
We have to acknowledge that sensitivity to the culture and 
special needs of aboriginal people is required if we are going to 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

deal with some of these issues. However, Mr. Speaker, I do 
want to say that I simply am not convinced that separate 
programs are necessarily the proper way to go. 
 
We are all citizens of this province and we all share a common 
destiny. Government policy should acknowledge that basic 
truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, I would comment 
briefly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
happy today to hear of the announcement that the minister has 
made. It is truly a compliment to him and his government to 
address this very serious issue. And to think, as we listen to the 
comments, that 8 out of 10 people in a community find 
themselves subject to the same kind of problems, the same type 
of assaults, and the same type of criminal activities being 
perpetrated on them, is not only astounding, it is totally 
shocking, and certainly it needs to be addressed. 
 
I understand that there’s a need to for cultural sensitivity as was 
mentioned in the next paragraph. And certainly we don’t want 
to offend anyone. However, Mr. Speaker, we have to say that 
when we throw money at a problem we have to be careful that 
that money is going to solve the problem. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I’m going to suggest is some 
alternatives. We heard people say earlier today, we want to hear 
some alternatives. I think you have to remember that we also 
have in our core cities a very high percentage of people on 
welfare. And unfortunately, that does include the native folks 
that are in our communities, and that is where we have to solve 
the problem. 
 
What happens when we have crime? Usually it’s perpetrated by 
people who have too much time on their hands — idle hands 
are the devil’s workshop. And quite simply put then, you have 
to put those people to some useful activity, whether it be 
recreational or whether it be job related, and if you put money 
into education you have to also educate them then to have 
something that relates to a job or some activity. 
 
And I’m suggesting to the minister that you have to go a step 
further with this. You’ve got to provide people with some 
activities, some jobs. You’ve got to provide them with jobs that 
pay enough money to be attractive and reasonable so that they 
have some dignity to do them. They can’t be expected to be the 
street sweepers and the pit diggers all the time. We have to 
allow them to have some dignity and respect in terms of jobs 
that are creative. 
 
(1430) 
 
And so while I appreciate the fact that the minister is doing a 
good job here to try to solve the problem, I think they are too 
narrow in their approach. Most certainly help for victims is 
necessary, but we need to do another step and that is to take a 
look at Indian bands like the Nekaneet Band in Cypress Hills, 

where these kind of problems have been very greatly minimized 
over the years, because this was a small band that integrated 
themselves into the community and they have worked with the 
community to solve their problems. 
 
They’re not all solved but they certainly are an example to the 
rest of the province, and I suggest that the minister take a look 
and have a talk with the chief down there and the folks in that 
area to find some solutions to these problems. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day 
I understand there’s been an agreement by all parties to move to 
condolences. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my brief remarks I will be introducing a motion 
seconded by the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
I want to rise, Mr. Speaker, and say a few words in tribute to the 
passing of Mr. Lawrence Yew, a former member of this House 
and a former colleague in our party. Lawrence Riel Yew died 
on April 18 in Edmonton after a courageous battle with ill 
health, including heart and lung surgery, and he leaves to mourn 
his wife Vicky and daughter Jolene. Amongst other things, a 
trapper and a fisherman, Mr. Yew was a member of this 
Assembly for the riding of Cumberland from 1982 to 1986. 
 
While I never had the privilege of actually serving in the House 
with him at the time, I do know from my observance of the 
proceedings, he stood up repeatedly in this legislature to 
courageously defend the interests of his constituents — and I 
would say indeed all residents of northern Saskatchewan — and 
to call for cooperation, accommodation, and dialogue and 
communication. 
 
He was one of the first, if not the first, member to address this 
House in the Cree language, connecting this place of the people, 
the Assembly, to that particular group of citizens, in a most 
profound and important way to them. 
 
After leaving his service in the legislature, Mr. Lawrence Yew 
continued to act as an advocate for his friends and neighbours in 
northern Saskatchewan in many, many ways, most recently 
acting on the negotiations committee for the Metis of 
north-western Saskatchewan in the dealings with Ottawa over 
the Primrose Lake Air Weapons Range compensation matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the House, I think it’s fair to say 
that Lawrence Yew did not travel an easy road in his life. But 
he travelled that road with the courage and the dignity that he 
possessed in his being and that he carried out in his day-to-day 
activities and that he brought to this legislature. And he came to 
the end of that not so easy road with the very same courage, the 
very same dignity. 
 
Lawrence Yew cared very deeply and passionately about his 
constituents and about the North that he loved so well. And he 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

brought that passion to his service on their behalf — service 
that will not and should not be soon forgotten by those 
constituents nor by those of us left behind to carry on his work. 
 
Lawrence Riel Yew had a distinguished record, Mr. Speaker, of 
public service: an administrator in Pinehouse; working with the 
fishermen’s cooperative in Canoe Lake; three-term elected 
member of the northern municipal council and as its Chair; and 
of course as a member of his family . . . of this Assembly; and 
of course as a strong family man. 
 
This Assembly avails itself of this opportunity to record its 
tribute of respect to a former member and express its most 
sincere sympathy to members of a saddened community of 
Canoe Lake and to the bereaved family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, the best that I can do is to offer them 
the words of the great Chief Seattle of the Suquamish Nation. 
Chief Seattle said that, quote, “There is no death, only a change 
of worlds.” There is no death, only a change of worlds. 
 
And though Lawrence leaves behind a world that is sadder and 
poorer for his passing, we must remember to take solace and 
strength from his memory, which will ever serve to remind us 
of our shared obligation to defend the principles of fairness, 
justice, and cooperation as vigorously as he did. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, 
seconded by the Leader of the Official Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Lawrence Riel Yew, who died in Edmonton on April 18, 
1998, was a member of this Legislative Assembly for the 
constituency of Cumberland from 1982 until 1986. He was 
born on January 17, 1942 in Beauval, Saskatchewan. He 
married Victoria Elizabeth Iron on October 27, 1964, and 
together they had a daughter, Jolene Vanessa. 
 
Mr. Yew was involved in his community and had a 
resolute desire for the betterment of northern 
Saskatchewan and its people. His life as a northern trapper 
and fisherman had a profound influence on his 
understanding of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Yew served as administrator in Pinehouse and was 
actively involved in the fishermen’s cooperative in Canoe 
Lake where he resided. Mr. Yew also served on the 
Northern Wood Producers’ Board and was an executive 
assistant to the minister of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. He served for six years as a northern 
municipal councillor. 
 
Mr. Yew entered provincial politics in 1982 when he was 
elected to this Legislative Assembly. He served his 
constituents until 1986 as a member of the opposition. Mr. 
Yew’s concern for northern Saskatchewan and its citizens 
did not end when he ceased to be a member of this 
Legislative Assembly. He continued to promote the 

interests of his community and the people right up to the 
days immediately prior to his passing on April 18. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

I so move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege on behalf of the official opposition to say a few words 
in regards to the motion presented by the Premier — a motion 
which I’m sure each and every one of us sitting in this 
Assembly just a few days ago would not have thought we 
would be addressing at this time. And it was an honour to have 
Mr. Yew come to the Assembly, I believe it was Thursday of 
last week, and I would have to say, Mr. Speaker, it was quite 
shocking when I had heard on Monday morning that Mr. Yew 
had passed away. 
 
While I was not a member at the time when Mr. Yew was a 
member, Mr. Speaker, everything I’ve heard from colleagues 
that I was involved with, my colleagues, and certainly as the 
Premier has indicated, colleagues who were in the Assembly at 
this time, everyone certainly did speak highly of Mr. Yew, and 
acknowledged his involvement with, as the Premier will 
acknowledge as well, a small caucus at that time. 
 
And his compassionate plea for more consideration for people 
of the North, the aboriginal community or even all peoples of 
the North, and certainly the services that many times we take 
for granted that may not be quite as readily available in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about members of this Assembly 
who have given of themselves, and we all know that to spend 
time in the Legislative Assembly in the province of 
Saskatchewan or in any Assembly, certainly does take away 
from family. Takes away from many of the other opportunities 
a person could involve themselves in. And as I have read about 
Mr. Yew and as I’ve heard about his activities and his 
involvements, Mr. Yew it appears certainly did commit himself 
to serving his constituents with honour, and certainly indeed 
representing the issues that were very important to him and the 
constituency that he represented. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition we 
want to extend to Lawrence’s wife and his daughter our 
sincerest condolences at this time of your bereavement. And we 
trust that you will find comfort in knowing the loving God, the 
God who created you, does care. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, and members, it is indeed 
with great emotion and honour that I will speak and share a few 
words on behalf of my friend Lawrence. 
 
As was mentioned, Lawrence was born in Beauval in 1942. 
And he was married to Victoria Iron on October 27, 1964 and 
they had a daughter, Jolene. He was elected of course in 1982, 
was an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
Cumberland, and we know he has passed on, on April 18, 1998, 
this past week. 
 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

I knew Lawrence, Mr. Speaker; I met Lawrence back in 1973. 
We were both in Ile-a-la-Crosse to deal with the issue of 
northern local control of education. He told me that that was his 
first public speech in a political forum, and I remember 
listening to his passion in regards to the issue of northern 
control. 
 
He was also a man of balance, that in midst of the seriousness 
of the debate that there was also the humorous side of the 
question. He knew that there was a lot of tension in the 
community at that time, and as he spoke he intermixed his 
speech with some humorous stories. That’s how I got to know 
Lawrence. 
 
He was a strong person in regards to the idea of a northern 
unified control, and we saw that at the next stage of his 
development, as I listened and heard that he was running for — 
I was at the university — and he was running for the northern 
municipal council in 1973. The people had a lot of faith and 
trust in Lawrence and he was re-elected three times running. 
And amongst a leadership of five that were representing the 
northern municipal council, he was chosen by his peers to be 
the Chair of the first-elected, publicly elected northern 
municipal power structure. 
 
And he became to be recognized all through the debates of the 
evolution and development of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan, dealing with issues of employment, social 
development, environment, with the Missinipi committee, the 
damming of the Churchill. He dealt with a lot of these issues; 
that I saw him often in the public meetings and the public 
forums. 
 
I thought I would try to look back at some of his speeches, you 
know, later on when he became elected, to capture the essence 
of this northern control element, this idea of participatory 
democracy for the North. And I thought that his speech on the 
throne speech on June 24, 1982, sums it up because he saw the 
evolution over time from the trap line on to the department of 
DNS (Department of Northern Saskatchewan) days. 
 
(1445) 
 
He said that, page 257 of Hansard: 
 

In the last decade, Northerners have achieved some gains 
envied by all other northern regions in Canada. In less than 
10 years we find Northerners controlling, through their 
own elected representatives . . . school boards . . . local 
government councils. 
 
Northern people also operate their own institutions and 
self-help societies . . . 

 
I thought that this comment captured the essence of Lawrence 
as he worked on later on to become the executive assistant for 
the minister of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
He continued the work that he had pursued with the 
development of the municipal structure in the North with the 
NMC (northern municipal council). And as an EA (executive 
assistant) he worked and consulted with Northerners under what 
became known as the Options 80 proposal which then defined 

what we now currently know as the northern administration 
district and an Act that goes along with it for the municipalities. 
 
So we saw him playing a key role as a EA and working to get 
the consultation and making sure that the democratic input and 
the decision making of Northerners was part of the 
development. 
 
As I saw him later on in 1981, I got to know him a little bit 
more closely because I became his campaign manager for the 
nomination. We were looking around for somebody in the 
Cumberland constituency to run. We looked around the North 
and we agreed that although Lawrence was not from 
Cumberland constituency, that his home was in Jans Bay on the 
west side, we agreed in Cumberland constituency at that point 
in time that Lawrence would be the best person to represent 
Cumberland constituency. 
 
I, as the campaign manager, along with others, set up an 
organization which came to be I think in northern history one of 
the great developments of northern political involvement. 
Because even in that nomination convention, Mr. Speaker, 
when Lawrence ran for the NDP nomination, over 1,700 
memberships had been sold in that constituency. It is still the 
record in that constituency. 
 
We had over 600 people at the nomination convention in 
Cumberland constituency. It was an example of political 
participation in action. And it was a great moment to be part of 
that development that Lawrence led, you know, in that period of 
time. 
 
And as we moved on of course he became elected in 1982 with 
one of the highest percentage in the province and he then came 
to the legislature. He had talked to me about it and he was 
worried about moving into a situation and moving into the city 
life and coming to the city representing his people. But I knew 
that he had the gumption to be able to continue what he 
passionately believed in. 
 
I remember on his . . . going back on his throne speech, what he 
sort of worried about in one sense. But on June 24, page 256, he 
said this in Hansard, “It is my sincere hope that all of us will be 
fair, tolerant, and understanding.” As he came into the House he 
had to meet up with a statement that one of the members had 
mentioned about himself doing a rain dance. Well indeed 
people could argue whether or not it was racism. He did not see 
it as a point of respect. He saw it as a point of put-down. 
 
And being who he was, he stood up to challenge that view, and 
that was the type of man he was. He challenged that which put 
down his own people and that’s how he lived his life. He, in 
many ways, when he spoke the first time . . . (Cree). He spoke 
in Cree right away in the legislature because he felt proud not 
only of his people but the language and the culture. And he 
always had his moose-hide jacket as he made his speeches here 
in the legislature and outside, because he respected, you know, 
his cultural symbols and way of life. 
 
And as we saw him move on. Mr. Speaker, he continued to 
work in many areas because we know he had worked with 
fishermen and women, the co-op, the northern wood producers 
and he also became an administrator with Pinehouse. 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

And lastly we saw him when working with Metis people and 
which he had done a lot of work before with Metis society in 
the early ’70s onwards, and was still dealing with the Primrose 
Air Weapons Range. 
 
As I watched him on his visit to the legislature, I mentioned at 
that time that on April 15 that he had had a lung and heart 
operation. While we watched him sitting there on the 
wheelchair with an oxygen tank, a lot of people did not know 
that he had just gone through pneumonia. 
 
But the important thing is that as I went to talk to him, he 
wasn’t talking about himself. When you tried to ask him about, 
you know, how he felt, he would try and steer you away from 
that. He would try and steer you back to the issue of the 
Primrose Air Weapons Range or the North. 
 
He was a selfless individual in the true spirit of his culture in 
the North. And as I tried to capture this thing in regards to how 
he felt that things in the North should run, what his vision was, 
and I thought that this captured a lot of the essence of what he 
talked about. 
 
Again, at the throne speech on June 24 in 1982 on page 259 of 
Hansard this is what he said: 
 

True development . . . only takes place when people do 
things for themselves, in co-operation with government 
and others, rather than depending on others to do things for 
them. 
 

And this was the essence of Lawrence Yew, that indeed he saw 
the development in terms of a self-determination of people, not 
only as Northerners but as aboriginal people and Saskatchewan 
people. That we had to do it in a united fashion but also be able 
to do it with yourself as well, that you couldn’t depend solely 
on others. You had to work in cooperation with others for the 
betterment of self and others. And that is what I thought 
epitomized his legacy of courage, his legacy and spirit of the 
true self-determination of a Northerner. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words in Cree 
in regards to my friend, Lawrence. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to again express my 
deepest sympathies for a great man of northern Saskatchewan 
and a person who carried on the vision that, hopefully as we 
move forward, we carry on his vision. We give our sincerest 
sympathy to Vicky, Jolene, the rest of the family, and friends of 
Lawrence Yew. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to extend our 
condolences and sympathy to the family of Lawrence Yew, in 
particular his wife, Victoria, and daughter Jolene. And I 
appreciate the other members, particularly those of the Liberal 
Party, who gave me the opportunity to speak. 
 

And I want to say first of all that, Mr. Speaker, I had the 
opportunity to serve in the Assembly between 1982 and 1986 
with Lawrence, and during that period, although I didn’t know 
his history or family before that, I got to know Lawrence quite 
well. And he was a very interesting and fascinating individual 
in many ways. 
 
And of course being in a very small caucus — I think from time 
to time we had seven or eight members, having been soundly 
defeated, as I mentioned, in 1982 by the then Devine 
government — Lawrence was a brand-new member and came 
to the Assembly with all of the vim and vigour and wanting to 
do what was best for his constituents. 
 
And he carried out that job in a very able manner, given the fact 
that he was new in the legislature, and being only one of seven, 
initially, members of the opposition, he had to carry a fairly big 
load and having critic area for a number of different portfolios, 
including northern Saskatchewan. 
 
But I say that in carrying that heavy load — and I mentioned it 
when Lawrence was here last week and we had a chance to visit 
with him — I was commenting that Lawrence was one of our 
secret weapons that we used as the opposition of the day. And 
the then Speaker, Mr. Herb Swan, was forever calling us to 
order for repetition because we had to make lengthy speeches in 
order to keep the House going. 
 
Well Lawrence was very able at giving a one-hour speech in 
English and then giving it again in Cree so the Speaker wasn’t 
able to tell whether he was repeating his speech or not. And I 
know it infuriated the Speaker a little bit, but Mr. Swan, being a 
gentleman, tolerated our ambition to keep the House going and 
to give very, very lengthy speeches. 
 
Now during the period when he was speaking in Cree, my 
colleagues would cheer “hear, hear” for Lawrence. And after 
his speech he lectured us saying, look, you don’t know when to, 
you don’t know when to cheer me — you’re doing it at all the 
wrong times. And he said, from now on I’ll give you the signal 
when it’s time to do the hear, hear. And so we got along 
famously. 
 
The other story that I wanted to relay that shows some of the 
character and fun nature of Lawrence was in those early days of 
course, being House Leader, I got an opportunity to speak to the 
press almost as often as I do now on Channel Lake. Every day 
after question period the page would come to me and say, it’s 
time to go out for a scrum. And I would go out and an hour later 
or half an hour later I would come back. 
 
And after about a week of this, Lawrence said to me, he said, 
Link, what the heck is a scrum? And I thought it interesting that 
all of those things that work in the House, that Lawrence 
brought an interesting perspective about the way northern 
Saskatchewan and people work in that part of the world — the 
camaraderie, the friendship, and in travelling in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You don’t have to be up there very long to understand at least in 
a small way why Northerners are different in the way they 
approach life. I think there’s a closeness and closerness of 
community out of necessity, because of the hardship they face 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

both in climate, distances, lack of transportation, all those 
things that we take for granted. 
 
But I want to say that it was a very, very interesting time with a 
small group of caucus members led by the former premier, 
Allan Blakeney, and Lawrence and people like Norm Lusney 
and others, that we were able to put together and cobble 
together what I think was, after some time, not a badly effective 
opposition to the then Conservative government that had a huge 
majority, I think something like 54 or 55 seats. And they had 
more members sitting on our side of the House than we had in 
opposition. 
 
And to start with it was a very daunting experience, but with the 
help of Lawrence and other members we made it through those 
four years. 
 
Having said that, I want to say again in closing, to the family of 
Lawrence Yew, that we will miss him, with the family, a great 
deal. And I want to, on behalf of my colleagues, join with the 
Premier in extending condolences to the family — to Victoria, 
wife of Lawrence, and also his daughter Jolene — and extend 
best wishes to the family. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to make 
a few statements of the life and times of Mr. Lawrence Yew. 
And there are so many things we can say thank you to Mr. Yew 
for. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the entire 
community of Canoe Lake, Jans Bay, and of course the 
neighbouring community of Cole Bay. 
 
The entire community and the aboriginal people of the North 
have contributed and have shared with us the efforts of people 
like Mr. Lawrence Yew. And I want to say unequivocally to all 
the people that are out there that have given us one of their 
native sons, thank you so much for the effort and the work and 
the humble attributes of a man like Lawrence Yew. 
 
As I rose yesterday to pay tribute to him, I rose with a heavy 
heart. There’s no question that personally it’s a huge loss to me. 
Mr. Yew was a constituent of mine and it was a great honour to 
serve as his MLA, and on occasions we did have time to talk on 
the various issues. 
 
I know that simple words will not convey the deep remorse and 
the sadness that all people have at this point in time. We’ve lost 
a great leader, and we know that the family — his brothers and 
sisters, his parents, his wife, Vicky, and his daughter, Jolene — 
will be at a greater loss than most of us. And I want to say that I 
also thank them for sharing Lawrence with us because it is so 
important to have him on our side. 
 
Lawrence was a fisherman and a trapper and many are amazed, 
including myself, at the trail he blazed from Canoe Lake right 
to here in the Legislative Assembly. And to me I think that — 
and I say this with all honesty, with all integrity, and with all 
my heart — that Lawrence Yew, the hon. member from the 
Cumberland constituency, was and will always be the most 
prominent aboriginal MLA to grace this Assembly. 
 
Allow me very briefly, Mr. Speaker, to explain to you why. 
When I was a fairly young lad growing up in Ile-a-la-Crosse, 
Lawrence would often visit our community, and being at that 

young age, we didn’t know who he was. But all we knew, that 
he was an aboriginal person and that he was someone 
important. And very early, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to be like 
him. I wanted to be an aboriginal person that was important. 
 
And I can say to this day that, in all honesty once again, that I 
could never be a Lawrence Yew. But in the very effort of trying 
to accomplish what Mr. Yew has accomplished, I hope 
somehow I could be half the MLA that he certainly was. 
 
We could say the end of a legacy. And certainly the word 
“legacy” is fitting, but the end certainly is not. Lawrence’s work 
will continue. And I dare say that we’ll not be able to find 
another individual with as much passion and as much 
commitment as Mr. Yew had to such efforts like the Primrose 
Lake Air Weapons Range. 
 
I know we brought him here one day to speak on the frustration 
of the people involved with this particular issue, and at times 
we weren’t too sure if we should invite Lawrence because 
Lawrence was the Chair of this committee — he worked very 
hard — but Lawrence, as you’re aware, Mr. Speaker, was quite 
ill and we left it up to him to decide. And we knew that he 
would rise to the occasion, and is an occasion that we 
understood and appreciated. 
 
And I must say that to his wife and to his family and his child, 
that in any way that we may have strained Lawrence in that trip 
or our constant telephone calls to him, we apologize. By the 
same token, we know that many people in the North did count 
on Lawrence and we all have benefited from his great, great 
work. 
 
Lawrence was a man known to fight the fight for northern 
people. And I know, in spite of the challenge to his health, he 
never lost sight of that. He never deviated from that goal. And I 
must say to his family and to the entire people of Canoe Lake, 
that even myself as the MLA, when I was feeling depressed or 
tired, it’s as if Lawrence knew because he’d phone me and he’d 
talk to me. And even though we’re from different political 
stripes, he always offered encouragement and he most certainly 
was very appreciative of the effort and the work that all people 
in this particular position offered to our jobs. 
 
In the final years, Lawrence once again showed leadership and 
commitment when he organized, Mr. Speaker, a small group of 
chronically ill people of the north-west. Many people didn’t 
know that Lawrence sat with these people, himself realizing the 
challenges to his health, to talk about the chronically ill — 
challenges of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And to me this was the purest display of compassion. There was 
no fanfare; there was no press release; there was no interview; 
there was nothing. Lawrence done this type of work because he 
simply cared. And I think again for all people in northern 
Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan and this world, that we’d 
perhaps learn the example of humanity from a man like 
Lawrence Yew. 
 
Lawrence was a very noble person. He often spoke to elders, to 
young people, and whether he was working in Green Lake, or 
whether he was working in Pinehouse, or whether he was 
working for the northern municipal council, or whether he was 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

working with the fishermen’s co-op, or as an MLA — and the 
list can go on as to who he worked for — he always had one 
thing in mind, and that was to treat people in a fair and 
consistent manner. 
 
And this is what we all have to begin to learn, Mr. Speaker. In 
this Assembly he spoke with compassion, he spoke with pride, 
and he spoke with dignity. And I want to say again to the 
community of Canoe Lake and his family, that I sincerely thank 
you for Lawrence’s work and Lawrence’s effort in blazing the 
trail to this particular Assembly so that people like myself, and I 
know the hon. member from Cumberland, can now today stand 
up with the same pride and dignity that he fought hard for and 
afforded us. 
 
I share with the Assembly as well, a clipping from May 16, 
1984 in which Lawrence Yew is quoted as saying, “Residents 
of the North don’t want jobs some day,” Yew said, “they want 
jobs now.” And a quote that I hope to use in the Assembly from 
here on in is a quote that he is, quite frankly, known for. And 
the quote is: “Northerners want to be part of the solution, not 
part of the problem.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what Lawrence personified. 
He showed all aboriginal people and all northern people what 
we could become. He showed me the way, as I know he’s 
shown other people the way. 
 
So it gives me great pleasure as the MLA to say that on behalf 
of the constituents of Athabasca. I say to his wife Vicky, his 
daughter Jolene, his family, and his home community of Canoe 
Lake, Jans Bay, and Cole Bay, that we sincerely thank you for 
sharing Lawrence with us. His wife shares with us that, and I 
quote: 
 

He was our friend. I was proud of the things that he’d 
done, but he suffers no more. And I thank all the people 
that have helped throughout his illness and his final days. 
 

Vicky should also be commended, Mr. Speaker, because his 
wife was always there for him. Through thick and thin, through 
illness and health and all the challenges, Vicky stood by 
Lawrence and certainly was a great help to him. So Vicky 
should be commended and recognized as well. 
 
And as well, Lawrence also had a young daughter named 
Jolene. And when he was first elected to represent Cumberland, 
they moved here in 1982. And often Vicky and Jolene would 
come watch the proceedings and watch Lawrence do his work, 
the good work that he’d done. And Vicky shares that while he 
was up speaking, his daughter (Cree) in the Assembly, is what 
the mother says. And what that means, Mr. Speaker, is that she 
was a handful. 
 
So I know he was a strong family man and when I bring my 
family here, an example of Lawrence Yew bringing his 
daughter here, and I hope that legacy lives on with them. 
 
And I would like to assure the family that after all the accolades 
have faded, his plaques and achievements stored away, 
Lawrence’s memory will always be with us. 
 
And I urge you all, when times go tough, to remember 

leadership and what it’s all about. Lawrence Riel Yew showed 
us how it’s done. And that will for ever be in my mind. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member from Canora, by leave of 
the Assembly: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with a transcript of 
oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1515) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — In keeping with the tradition of providing 
open, accountable, and responsible government, Mr. Speaker, I 
hereby submit the answer to question 49. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 49 is tabled. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Reduction of Child Poverty 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very 
much. I am pleased to take my place in the Assembly this 
afternoon and to move at the end of my remarks the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly applaud the government’s 
determination to reduce child poverty, building on the 
introduction of the action plan for children and the 
Premier’s national leadership in developing the National 
Child Benefit, by introducing the “building independence: 
investing in families” strategy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin by just reminding people about 
the action plan and how it came about. 
 
In June of 1993, the Government of Saskatchewan invited 
people, organizations and communities, to join together in 
addressing children’s issues. The paper, Children First: An 
Invitation to Work Together — Creating Saskatchewan’s Action 
Plan for Children was sent to more than 1,200 groups and 
organizations. The paper proposed a policy framework, 
including vision, beliefs, principles, and goals for improving the 
well-being of Saskatchewan children. 
 
The invitation paper described the opportunity to give renewed 
emphasis to preventive actions. It also outlined the challenge of 
ensuring that actions meet the needs of children and families, 
and use available resources in the most effective manner. 
 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

Groups and communities were invited to respond to the policy 
framework and to expand partnerships on behalf of children 
both provincially and locally. Responses urged a collaborative, 
long-term approach that concentrates on prevention and 
provides a more holistic way of providing services for children 
and families. It was as a result of this consultation process that 
Saskatchewan’s action plan for children was developed. 
 
Just what is Saskatchewan’s action plan for children? The 
action plan for children is a key part of the government’s social 
policy agenda. The action plan promotes and sustains an 
important emphasis on issues affecting children, youth, and 
families, and contributes to awareness of these issues and 
actions across all sectors. 
 
It is a policy framework and multi-year strategy through which 
community and government programs for children and families 
are initiated, developed, and expanded. 
 
The action plan acknowledges the importance of strong support 
for children in their early years. It promotes the development of 
prevention and early intervention services, and encourages 
collaborative approaches between communities and government 
to address the needs of children. 
 
Six government departments and one secretariat are involved in 
the action plan, Mr. Speaker, as well as hundreds of 
Saskatchewan communities, agencies, and organizations. 
Government partners include Saskatchewan Justice, Municipal 
Government, Health, Social Services, Education, 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs, and the Women’s 
Secretariat. 
 
The action plan was one of the first areas in government where 
departments began to develop an inter-sectorial approach to the 
programs and budget development processes. What that means, 
Mr. Speaker, is that they cooperated. Various governments and 
departments cooperated and worked together. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the work of this government through the 
action plan is being recognized. Saskatchewan was privileged to 
be the only province in the country to be presented the 
Champions for Children award by the Child Welfare League of 
Canada and the Ontario Association of Children’s Aid Societies 
in November of 1996 at the Canada’s Children: Canada’s 
Future conference. The award was presented to the province of 
Saskatchewan and its people for the development and 
implementation of Saskatchewan’s action plan for children, 
which is built on some of the same principles called for in the 
Child Welfare League of Canada’s 1991 conference. 
 
And that’s not all, Mr. Speaker. In the spring of last year, 
Saskatchewan was awarded the Canadian Association of 
Community Education’s Institution of the Year award for 
Saskatchewan’s community schools program. It was the first 
government to receive such recognition. The program serves the 
needs of over 8,000 children in the province’s inner-city 
schools. Community schools use a holistic approach to help 
students who are facing barriers to learning caused primarily by 
poverty. 
 
The community schools program promotes shared 
responsibility and is culturally sensitive in its approaches to 

education. Active parental and community involvement is also 
fundamental to the program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the Council of Ministers of Education 
newsletter, which I just received, they talk about the 
Saskatchewan action plan. I quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan action plan for children, the integrated 
school link services program, and the expanded community 
schools program involve government and community 
members working together to address the diverse needs of 
children in holistic, responsive, and effective ways. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what has the action plan accomplished. 
Since its inception, Saskatchewan’s action plan for children has 
resulted in some significant achievements. Many programs and 
services have been developed under the action plan including: 
an Office of the Children’s Advocate to give a voice to children 
under 19; the Saskatchewan Council on Children which is a 
forum for discussion and direction to government; the 
integrated school link services; early-intervention 
pre-kindergarten programs; a family law division of the Court 
of Queen’s Bench which handles family members; numerous 
Indian child and family service agencies providing child welfare 
services on reserves; a new northern community schools 
program; prevention and support grants; and the associated 
entities fund. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, funding for programs under the 
action plan has increased every year since the plan’s inception 
in 1993. In fact in the 1994-95 budget, funding for programs 
and services under the action plan totalled $4.4 million. This 
year, ongoing funding for programs and services has risen to 
$53 million. 
 
The action plan is proving to be extremely successful and I 
believe that success is largely due to the partnerships that have 
been made between government and communities to address 
child and family issues. Through the action plan we are 
investing in our greatest resource, our people. Or more 
importantly for our future, our children. 
 
And in this budget we are continuing that investment. We’re 
investing in vulnerable children and families and taking a 
leadership role in the country by introducing a series of unique 
programs which will redesign Saskatchewan’s social assistance 
program. We’re making changes that will provide opportunity 
rather than dependence for many low income families and 
families presently receiving social assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, work is the best way for low income families with 
children to leave poverty. The majority of people want to be 
independent of social assistance. We need to change our system 
so that people are encouraged to work and are rewarded for 
their efforts. As a community, we have a special responsibility 
for our children. Saskatchewan people want the social 
assistance system redesigned. And we are doing that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would just like to mention a few initiatives under our social 
services redesign — the Saskatchewan employment supplement 
for instance. The supplement ensures that families will be better 
off working than they would be on social assistance. It will 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

assist families in making the leap from dependence to the 
workforce by helping parents with the child-related costs of 
going to work and it will support their decision to work. 
 
It will work to prevent parents in low wage jobs from falling 
onto social assistance as a result of a family or household crisis. 
And this service will be delivered through a user-friendly 
telephone call centre. With the supplement we are making work 
the right choice for families again. 
 
I’ve talked before about the Saskatchewan Child Benefit which 
will assist low income families with the cost of raising children. 
It will help parents remain in the workforce rather than falling 
onto social assistance because of their children’s needs. 
Through the benefit we are building a strong, healthy society in 
the future by investing in our children today. 
 
The family health benefits are an important part of our social 
services redesign, Mr. Speaker. Healthy early childhood 
development has a long-term impact on a healthy, productive 
society. The benefits will help to improve the health of children 
in lower income families by providing health services to those 
families. The family health benefits will reduce barriers to work 
for families on social assistance. Again we are investing in our 
children today for a healthy future tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — And, Mr. Speaker, on Monday, April 6, the 
Minister of Social Services announced some more new 
spending under the child action plan. Some of the 1998-99 
spending announced by the minister includes $4.5 million to 
help students with social, behavioural and emotional 
difficulties; $1.3 million to help community groups respond to 
the problems of children, youth and families; and another 
million dollars extra, Mr. Speaker, for early childhood 
education and day care. 
 
Through the action plan, communities, agencies, and 
governments across Canada are making significant efforts to 
address child and family issues. I want to commend the 
hundreds of communities and agencies from across the province 
that are involved in the action plan. Without your enthusiasm, 
commitment, and hard work the action plan would not exist to 
be providing these important services in communities across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we all strive to be known for a skill or 
some expertise. Some provinces or countries strive to be known 
for their banking skills, others for their military might, and still 
others for their technological expertise. We would wish that 
Saskatchewan be known for the way it treats its children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague, the member 
from Lloydminster: 
 

That this Assembly applaud the government’s 
determination to reduce child poverty, building on the 
introduction of the action plan for children and the 
Premier’s national leadership in developing the National 
Child Benefit, by introducing the “building independence: 
investing in families” strategy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise and 
support this motion today because I really do believe in 
children, and children are the future of Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan always has believed that for our country to have 
a strong future we need to continue to work at the national level 
and the provincial level towards the development of a national 
child’s agenda. This is something that not just a provincial 
government can do, but hand in hand, provincial and federal 
government, we can move towards eradicating poverty in our 
country. And this government has been dedicated to doing so, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan has taken a leadership role in the development of 
a national child’s agenda which will build on the experience 
gained through the child’s action plan for children. When we 
introduced this and pioneered it in 1993, I do not think that any 
of us even on the government side realized the implications that 
it would have throughout Saskatchewan. And I think it will be 
far into the future, Mr. Speaker, when people will realize what 
the child’s action plan has actually done for us. 
 
The Saskatchewan action plan for children is a key part of the 
government’s social policy agenda, Mr. Speaker. The action 
plan promotes and sustains an important emphasis on issues 
affecting children, youth, and families. 
 
Often you will hear, especially from the Saskatchewan Party, 
reference to the family. Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, being 
a mother, a teacher, and a grandmother, there is nothing more 
important to me than my family and my constituents’ families. 
It always has been an important part of my life. My decisions 
have been made geared towards the family. 
 
The one thing that I noticed during the ’80s, that talk is cheap, 
Mr. Speaker. We can talk about the family, but if we take every 
bit of support away from the family and it starts to crumble, 
what it the use of the rhetoric, Mr. Speaker? 
 
You have to put your money and your actions where your 
mouth is. I believe in families. I believe in supporting my 
family, and I do it; I believe in supporting the communities, the 
families of the people in my constituency and my community, 
and I do it. And I believe that our government believes in 
families because we are doing something to help and support 
and move families to independence. And I believe that we do 
believe in families. 
 
This is more than just rhetoric, getting on a platform and saying 
that you believe in families; this is actually action and doing 
something about families. 
 
The action plan promotes and sustains an important emphasis 
on issues affecting children, youth, and families. It is a policy 
framework and multi-year strategy through community and 
government programs for children and families. And I’ll tell 
you, I don’t think many people understand the initiative. And I 
have tried to, in my own constituency, get as much information 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

out as I can and that is why I have asked to speak on this issue. 
 
The action plan acknowledges the importance of strong support 
for children in their early years and promotes the development 
of prevention and early intervention services, Mr. Speaker. In 
1998-99 the government will commit 29 million in new funds 
under the child action plan to strengthen early childhood 
development. 
 
I can tell you, being a teacher, that the die is cast by the time the 
child has reached grade 1. That does not say that improvements 
can’t be made, but it certainly is more preferable to help a child 
when they are three and four years old and even younger. 
 
In fact we know now it is even vitally important to help a child 
when it is in the womb, to give parents education on what they 
must eat, what they must drink, or cannot drink, when they are 
carrying a child so that the woman delivers a healthy, wonderful 
baby. 
 
And I can tell you that this government does believe in that. 
And we have more work to do, Mr. Speaker, starting right from 
the time of conception until that child is graduated from 
post-secondary education so they can take their place in the 
world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there’s anything more important that 
a person can do as a job than helping a child become an 
independent, useful human being. 
 
I have had young women ask me — children that I taught — 
ask me about my accomplishments. Well I never think that I 
have had such wonderful accomplishments in my life. They see, 
I suppose, getting elected as an accomplishment; being the first 
woman on the Waseca Credit Union board as an 
accomplishment. But I can tell you, I have been very honest 
when I have said my greatest accomplishment is raising two 
wonderful daughters and now having two wonderful 
sons-in-law and having four wonderful grandchildren. And that 
is a great accomplishment. 
 
And if we can help our parents to be decent parents, if we can 
help them to raise children decently so that we have good, 
healthy children, there’s nothing more of a joy for me to go 
back to school, to go to schools, to see the bright, young faces 
and see how they love learning. And those are the things that 
are important to me, and I know to most of my colleagues in the 
government. 
 
So since the inception of the child action plan the Saskatchewan 
government’s contribution to new or enhanced programs and 
services for children and families under the plan will exceed 
$53 million annually, including 18 million towards the Child 
Benefit and Saskatchewan employment supplement. And I will 
take some time in trying to explain these two programs because 
I don’t think some of us understand how they are working. And 
I think others of us don’t even give a damn, to be blunt, Mr. 
Speaker, about how they work. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I must remind the member that 
you’re very close to unparliamentary language; in fact you are 
using unparliamentary language and I would ask you to retract 
that statement. 

Ms. Stanger: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I realized it the minute 
I used the word. I withdraw the remark. Thank you very much 
for your patience with me. 
 
In 1996, Saskatchewan received the prestigious national 
Champions for Children award from Canada’s children’s 
council. It’s called — I’ll read the name properly — the 
Canada’s Future national conference sponsored by the Child 
Welfare League of Canada and the Ontario Association of 
Children’s Aid Societies. 
 
The award was presented to our Premier and to the government 
and to the province of Saskatchewan and its people for the 
development, implementation of the action plan. So I’m very 
proud of that. 
 
Now having said that, that does not mean our work is done, Mr. 
Speaker — it goes on. On behalf of the seven cabinet ministers 
involved in the action plan, I’m very pleased to be able to 
provide you with the details of new initiatives we’re funding 
this year in Saskatchewan’s award-winning action plan for 
children. 
 
As you know, funding for programs under the action plan has 
increased every year since the plan’s inception in 1993. In fact 
as I mentioned previously, we will be adding $53 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The action plan is proving to be extremely successful. And I 
believe that success is largely due to the partnerships that have 
been made between government and communities to address 
child and family issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very important to note here that a government 
alone cannot do these initiatives. It takes many, many dedicated 
people, some of them paid, a lot of them volunteer, and people 
that believe in the same things as the government does; people 
that will work towards making life better for families and for 
children. 
 
Through the action plan we are investing in our greatest 
resource, our people. Or more importantly our future, our 
children. In fact Saskatchewan is leading the country through 
the work that it’s doing on children’s issues. 
 
The national child’s agenda, which is presently under 
development by the first ministers, will be a national initiative 
that will build on the good work of the Saskatchewan action 
plan for children. 
 
This year in Saskatchewan we are committing 29 million in 
new money to new initiatives for children and families. And we 
are redirecting the 6 million we put into one-time funded 
programs last year, for a total of more than 34 million in new 
initiatives for 1998-99. 
 
These new initiatives include, for instance, a 4.5 million grant 
to assist school divisions in meeting the needs of children and 
youth who require additional supports in order to benefit from 
education; more than $1 million in new funding through the 
associated entities fund to assist communities in responding to 
the needs of children, youth, and families. 
 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

And one of the groups that will be receiving this money is Big 
Sisters. It’s a group that is dear to my heart because at a time 
when I lost my husband and was really feeling down, I joined 
Big Sisters in Lloydminster and I had a little sister. And this 
group has always meant a lot to me. And the Big Sisters will 
use the grant to address the needs of at-risk female children and 
youth related to family violence. 
 
The violence prevention program will work to decrease or 
eliminate risk factors for children and youth through support, 
education and alternative choices. And when I listened to the 
independent member from Cypress Hills today, he said money 
was not enough. This is true. 
 
There also . . . And this government is doing the support, 
education, and other choices for people. Money alone cannot do 
it. The member was absolutely correct. We have to work with 
people to give them a hand-up but they must do much of the 
things themselves and communities must help also. And a 
portion of the activities that the Big Sisters will be doing will be 
scheduled based on family support service centres and 
programs. Independent components of the program will be 
scheduled through the Big Sisters and I’m very proud that we 
are going to be able to do this for Big Sisters — not for Big 
Sisters; we’ll be doing it for the children — we will be assisting 
Big Sisters. 
 
There’ll be an increased $249,000 to prevention and support 
grant funding to communities, and 300,000 for the development 
and delivery of family literacy projects. And literacy of course 
is another field that is dear to my heart. My daughter, when she 
was employed for five years in Ottawa, worked on literacy. 
There was a definite correlation between people that, that end 
up in jail and the ability to read. Many of the folks that she 
worked with were ex-convicts and their reading ability was very 
scant — a grade 1 or a grade 2 level. 
 
And we have many people in our communities that can’t go 
ahead and get decent jobs because they can’t read, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s as basic as that. They hide it well, but there are many people 
that cannot read. And this is a very good work, working with 
people in literacy, and something a person should consider 
doing after they’re retired I think, part-time, is helping adults to 
learn to read. 
 
In addition, as part of our commitment to addressing family, 
child and family poverty, we’ve committed $20 million in new 
funding this year to the Saskatchewan Child Benefit and the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement and the family health 
benefits programs. Those are three programs I’m going to 
endeavour to give you a little bit of detail on after I’m finished, 
at the end of my speech. These programs will come into effect 
in July. 
 
Our children’s overriding right is to have the opportunity to be 
contributing members of our community and our society. They 
have a right to know that as a society we can be concerned 
about the conditions they are growing up in and the right to be 
nurtured and cared for. Through the action plan committees, 
agencies, and government across Canada, across Saskatchewan, 
we are taking significant efforts to address child and family 
issues. 
 

I want to commend the hundreds of communities and agencies 
from across the province that are involved in the action plan. 
Without your enthusiasm, commitment and hard work, the 
action plan would not exist to be providing these important 
services in communities across Saskatchewan. 
 
You know we all strive to be known for a skill or expertise. 
Some provinces or countries strive to be known for their 
banking skills, others for their military might, still others for 
their technology expertise. I would wish that Saskatchewan 
would be known for the way that it treats its children. 
 
(1545) 
 
Two of the benefits that I have said in the beginning that I 
would try to explain, I would try to explain some of the 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit, which is going to be giving 6.9 
million to Social Services. And just an explanation of this 
because I think it’s important that we know what it does. 
 
The Saskatchewan Child Benefit is a significant new program 
that will provide a monthly allowance to assist lower income 
families with the cost of raising children. It will help families 
remain in the workforce rather than falling onto social 
assistance to meet their children’s basic needs. So often this 
happens when a person is getting upgrading, still haven’t got 
their training complete. They’ll be working in a low income job 
and then they slip back into the system because they can get 
some of those medical needs for their children. 
 
We want to prevent this. We want people working and we want 
them taking school. The Minister of Post-Secondary Education 
and others have a work strategy that I wish we could speak to 
today but it would take too much time. But again this will help 
people, because again just throwing money at a problem isn’t 
all the solution. It’s helping people to help themselves. 
 
The Saskatchewan Child Benefit, we’re investing in children 
and building a better future for the province. The benefit will be 
combined with the national health benefit by the federal 
government and the Canadian child tax benefit and paid to low 
income families based on the number of children under 18 years 
of age and their family . . . and their family income as reported 
to Revenue Canada for the previous year. For families on social 
assistance, the combined Child Benefit will replace your 
children’s basic allowance. This program will come into effect 
July of 1998. 
 
The Saskatchewan employment supplement, 11.1 million in 
Social Services. The Saskatchewan employment supplement is 
a uniquely monthly employment support program that will 
supplement income earned from wages and child/spousal 
maintenance payments by lower income parents. The 
supplement will assist parents with the child-related costs of 
going to work and will support their decision to work. For 
families of social assistance, it will help parents in making the 
leap from dependence on social assistance to the workforce. 
 
And this is what I think is so important. When I think back to 
the 1960s — and I have always been involved in the political 
party that I represent — but I met, as a young mother and 
staying at home with my children, two women that were 
struggling on our block to become independent. They both were 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

single parents; one with a set of twins and one with two young 
boys. 
 
And I can remember them both saying that with the hand-up 
they got one became a teacher — has remained a friend of mine 
for 38 years, is just retiring this year in Saskatoon. She was able 
to raise her children, able to complete her education, and said to 
me that I will always, always vote for your party because they 
gave me a hand-up when other people in other provinces 
weren’t getting that. And I have become a taxpayer and I’m 
proud of it. 
 
The other one got secretarial training in a business college, and 
again has said that to me. I was able to become a worker, raise 
my children, and become a bona fide taxpayer which, when you 
look at it, that’s what most people want to do in our society. 
That’s what gives them the, well the self-concept to become a 
person that is self-actualized. You can’t do that if you feel every 
day that you’re not worth anything. 
 
I think that if you look at a human being, self-worth is the most 
telling thing about a person and how you feel about yourself. 
And you can’t get that if you . . . you can’t get that if . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you for the assistance of all 
members. I appreciate your comments. 
 
Anyway the Saskatchewan employment supplement ensures 
that families will be financially better off working then they 
would be on social assistance. It makes work a realistic choice 
again for families. The amount of the supplement is based on 
the amount of employment, self-employment, or child/spousal 
maintenance income under the number of children under 18. 
 
I didn’t comment on some of the comments that I heard from 
across the way because I didn’t want to really lose my train of 
thought. But now that I’m just about finished, Mr. Speaker, let 
me just say that I am sick and tired from the insinuations from 
the opposition that somehow this government and this party is a 
party which does not believe in working hard, getting ahead. I 
am sick and tired of the insinuations, Mr. Speaker. And I have 
been a CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and a 
New Democrat since I can remember. I have always worked 
hard for everything that I have gotten. 
 
The people that I know in our party and in our organizations are 
hard-working, determined people. They are not people with 
their hand out, as we have tried to be labelled by the people 
opposite. But we do have a heart and compassion to help people 
that aren’t maybe as well off as we are. 
 
I’ll tell you that the sign of a good society is how we treat 
people that are less than we are. The sign of a good society isn’t 
how much money we can make or how much power we can 
have, the sign of a good society is how happy and healthy most 
of the people are in that society. 
 
And I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity to be 
able to speak on this. I am very proud of our government and 
I’m sick and tired of dwelling on issues that don’t affect my 
constituents. I want to talk about the things that affect my 
constituents. 
 
I want to talk about social assistance; I want to talk about roads; 

I want to talk about education; I want to talk about 
post-secondary education. I want to talk about the health care in 
my area and some of the things that are happening. I want to 
talk about the schools. I’m sick and tired of political power tried 
to be gained but only in one way, to defeat a government. Give 
us some good ideas; we’ll work with you. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 
to speak briefly to this government’s commitment to child 
poverty and to respond to the comments that we’ve heard from 
the members opposite today. 
 
But I’d also like to move an amendment to this motion, because 
clearly the government has chosen to ignore completely some 
of the most poverty-stricken people and children in 
Saskatchewan, and that is the first nations people on and off the 
reserve. 
 
It seems to me though that we’ve spoken about this exact same 
motion last year. The government spends more time patting 
themselves on the back, and their Premier on the back, for 
promises they have not kept and the serious problems they have 
treated in superficial ways. 
 
In fact the one statement this government has forgotten, and that 
may be they never knew this statement, is the best social policy 
is a good job. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 1989 there’s been a number of 
changes in the child poverty situation. Since the government’s 
vow to eliminate poverty the number of poor children has risen 
46 per cent. Poor two-parent families have risen by 39 per cent; 
poor single-parent families have risen 58 per cent. Children in 
families experiencing long-term unemployment is 44 per cent. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask all 
members, you will have the opportunity to debate the motion. 
Right now the hon. member from Kelvington-Wadena has the 
floor and I would ask for you to give her your attention. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think there 
is a couple of these numbers that members opposite maybe 
didn’t hear so I’ll repeat them. The number of poor two-parent 
families in Canada has risen 39 per cent. Children in families 
experiencing long-term unemployment is up 44 per cent since 
1989. Children in working-poor families is up 17 per cent. 
Children in families needing social assistance is up 68 per cent. 
Children in unaffordable rented houses is up 60 per cent; 20- 
and 21-year-olds without high school diplomas is up 15 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, jobs alone will not eliminate child 
poverty. Over one-half of Canada’s poor children live in 
families in which their parents had some work. Fully one-third 
of poor children live in families where the parents had 
equivalent of full-time employment but they were still poor 
children. 
 
A poor child in Canada is worse off financially than a poor 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

child in any one of 10 other industrialized countries. The gap 
between privileged and disadvantaged children in this, the 
world’s wealthiest nation, is among most . . . is trained in the 
industrial world. 
 
Without government help, a child in France and Canada are . . . 
(inaudible) . . . at the same risk of poverty. In France, 
government action has slashed that risk by three-quarters. 
Canadian government help reduces it by less than one-half. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1991 this government promised to 
eradicate child poverty. And they said that food banks would be 
a thing of the past. Well it’s 1998 and there are still 10 food 
banks in the province. And I don’t think the members opposite 
are even arrogant enough to say that we’ve eliminated child 
poverty. 
 
Today the government speaks proudly of the revolutionary 
welfare reform. Well they’ve been talking about reforming the 
welfare system for over five years, and finally we’ve seen some 
very small steps. If welfare reform was not such a serious issue 
it would be almost amusing. 
 
During the NDP press conference to announce their welfare 
reforms, the Premier proudly stated that developing these 
reforms meant engaging in revolutionary thinking. Getting 
people off welfare and back in the workforce is not 
revolutionary thinking for anyone but an NDP government. It’s 
what the people of Saskatchewan, including people on welfare, 
have been saying for a very long time. 
 
Unfortunately the government has missed a very important 
variable in the welfare reform equation. The goal is to get 
people off welfare and back into the workforce. But in 
Saskatchewan the quality jobs for them to go to are few and far 
between. 
 
The point can also be made that the government just yesterday 
doled out $144,000 to women’s groups in the province for 
access to Internet. Now that in itself is probably a good thing, 
but I don’t think that you’re going to find very many of the poor 
people out there thinking that $144,000 for Internet is actually 
going to help them. It doesn’t help children who are hungry, it 
doesn’t help children who don’t have the appropriate clothing to 
wear, it doesn’t help women who don’t have transition homes to 
go to. 
 
If you were to ask the women in this province if this is an 
appropriate expenditure of funds, given all the other priorities 
such as child poverty, what do you think the answer will be? 
The Prince Albert women’s shelter is potentially closing down 
because of a lack of funding from the provincial government. 
For every woman who goes into this shelter in crisis, she brings 
at least one child with her. And last year, for every child that 
was taken into that shelter there was one turned away. 
 
And do you know what it would cost to keep that shelter open? 
— $70,000. That’s half of what we just gave to women’s 
groups on the Internet. Last year when I met with the minister 
and we talked about this important program, we said the 
Women’s Secretariat finally has some money to spend; what 
can we do that will best address the problems women face in 
this province. And I thought, great, we have a chance to face 

some of the things that people in all the province and especially 
people in rural Saskatchewan say they’ve needed — and we’ve 
been neglected badly. 
 
And I met with the minister and gave her a number of 
suggestions and she said great, I think this is a good idea; let’s 
work together. And for one of the first times, let’s see if we 
can’t have an all-party agreement on some way to spend money 
that will help everyone. And we had a number of meetings and 
we were all very excited about it. And all of a sudden the 
minister came back and said no, we’re going to spend it on 
Internet. That’s the best way we can spend money in the 
women’s programs in Saskatchewan, best way; $144,000 is 
going to go to Internet training. 
 
We only needed $70,000 in Prince Albert to keep that shelter 
open, but that wasn’t important. Children in this province need 
our help. They need social support and their parents need anger 
management to stop the cycle of abuse, yet shelters don’t 
receive funding. 
 
(1600) 
 
Just as we see this government is not concerned about youth 
crime and violence, and they’re not concerned about the child 
poverty either. Rather they have left society’s most vulnerable 
to fend for themselves. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of the reserves in this 
province have talked to us and asked us to take their very many 
concerns to the floor of the legislature because they don’t have 
a voice. They don’t have a voice in their own system, they don’t 
have a voice in the province, and they definitely don’t have a 
voice federally. 
 
So we have been trying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to talk about 
some of these issues and we’ve been told that it’s not in their 
jurisdiction; it’s not their responsibility. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
somebody has to take responsibility for these children, and 
somebody has to take responsibility for the conditions that 
they’re living under. 
 
I think if we have . . . it’s about time that if the majority of the 
money that’s being spent is coming from the federal 
government, then let’s take our concerns as a province to the 
federal government and say, what are you going to do about 
this? We’ve got a lot of money out there but we have a lot of 
children and a lot of people that are living in next to third world 
conditions, and it has to change. 
 
Quite clearly the government is not serious about improving the 
lives of children who live in poverty or they would be doing 
everything they could to improve the conditions of the first 
nations people on and off the reserves. Some of our very 
poorest children come from a first nations community. The 
number of aboriginal youth is growing. In Saskatchewan 
aboriginal children account for 20 per cent of all youth under 
the age of 15 and the national average is 5 per cent. Provincial 
figures are expected to rise by 25 per cent by the year . . . to 25 
per cent by the year 2016. 
 
More than one-third of the children on reserves live with single 
parents. Many first nations children in Saskatchewan are going 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

hungry and they’re dealing with substance abuse and they are 
being prostituted on the streets for survival. And this 
government buries its head in the sand because it’s scared of 
racial implications. Given the level of funding provided by the 
federal and provincial governments to first nations band 
councils, there is absolutely no reason for children to be living 
in poverty. 
 
But I know, and the member from Athabasca knows, and all the 
members opposite know, that too many times this money’s 
being stymied at a band council level. This money is not getting 
to the children who need it and the government either (a) 
refuses to believe it, or doesn’t care, or they’re scared to do 
something about it. Somebody has to speak up. 
 
Last month when the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs met with 
the Coalition for Accountability of First Nations People to 
discuss the events that were unfolding on their reserves, they 
were not impressed. They felt that nobody was listening to 
them. They felt that their issues were not taken seriously and 
they didn’t have any feeling that there was going to be any 
changes made. 
 
After the meeting the minister told me that he didn’t believe the 
conditions were as the people described them. And why would 
they come all the way into Regina and meet with the minister 
and not tell him exactly what’s going on? There’s a serious 
problem out there and somebody has to start listening. 
 
Since that time I’ve spoken to many more individuals with 
similar experiences and I would like to share some of them with 
you. But before I do, I’d like to reiterate that the reason these 
individuals are so concerned about the lack of accountability in 
the first nations communities and the mismanagement of funds 
is because all around them they see children living in absolute 
squalor. They see children being prostituted on the streets in 
Regina and it almost breaks their hearts. They see the entire 
episode happening while a few very select people are getting 
rich. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to ask the question, why would 
native people move off the reserve if it’s so great there? The 
number of aboriginal people not living on the reserve now is 
nearly half; and as soon as the first nations people move off the 
reserve and are on social assistance, they are now the provincial 
government’s responsibility. And that makes them our 
responsibility — you and I as taxpayers. 
 
We often talk through the media or on coffee row about the 
mismanagement of funds, but we seldom link it to what is 
important. If the money is predominantly going into the pockets 
of one or two people, then everyone else is going without and 
that means the children are going without. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure that in rural areas many of the 
members opposite have had . . . get the same kind of calls that I 
do from reserves saying, do you know anybody who can donate 
clothes to the reserve; do you know anybody who can donate 
extra food; we need help out there, will someone come out and 
talk to us. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had calls from parents who say, I 
have children who’d like to be involved in the powwows and 

some of the traditional heritage programs that are going on, but 
they don’t have the funds to be able to attend these events. And 
we all know that the only way you can make a whole person is 
to not just feed their . . . to feed them with food, but to also treat 
them as a whole person, a whole individual. 
 
Unfortunately for many of these people they have nowhere to 
turn. The federal Department of Indian Affairs often turns a 
blind eye; and it reportedly told individuals not to take it 
personally because these problems are happening everywhere. 
They have a provincial government here in Saskatchewan who 
won’t get involved because they’re scared to step on federal 
turf. And they have native leaders who don’t believe it’s a 
problem. 
 
Last year Phil Fontaine said the national assembly would not 
get involved in band controversy. He said that if a band 
perceives a problem with its leader, it’s up to the members to 
vote them out. What he’s neglected to say is that in some cases 
the grass roots people have been stripped of their right to vote. 
For example, urban Indians belonging to the Pasqua Indian 
Band just out of Regina are not permitted to vote for the band 
council leadership even though band monies are determined by 
the total band population, the majority of which are urban 
Indians. 
 
Everyone in Saskatchewan is a resident and we all have our 
rights. And the government has a responsibility to look after 
everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all concerned about poverty; we’re all 
concerned about child poverty; and we are concerned about all 
children. Mr. Speaker, I would therefore like to move the 
following amendment: 
 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
condemns the provincial government and the federal 
government for their utter lack of concern for those 
children in Saskatchewan who are the most poverty 
stricken — those who are living in first nations reserves 
throughout Saskatchewan — and urges the Premier to take 
some responsibility for this disgrace and begin to work 
with the federal government to ensure that all funding 
provided to first nations in Saskatchewan is used for the 
benefit of all people on the reserve and not just a select 
few; and that this Assembly further condemns the NDP 
government for policies instituted since 1991 that have led 
to greatly increased use of food banks and the highest 
number of people on social assistance in the history of this 
province. 

 
This motion is seconded by the member from Moosomin. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to be able to enter into the debate on the motion put 
forward by my colleague because it allows me to expand upon 
the comments I made in my return speech to the throne speech. 
 
It will also give me an opportunity to speak to the amendment 
by the member opposite. I’m sorry then to hear that she has 
crossed over to work with a group of people who in the past, 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

from 1982 onward, developed the need for the use of food 
banks, and now has the nerve to stand before this Assembly and 
single out aboriginal people in need when we’re talking about 
an action plan for children, when we’re talking about initiatives 
that will help all people in this province, but in particular will 
come to the aid and assistance of children. 
 
The first new social program in 30 years in this country and all 
we can hear from the members opposite is gloom and doom 
about issues that she knows full well in this Assembly we can 
speak about. But certainly when we’re talking about native 
peoples, that it certainly be it . . . the federal government who is 
the one who steps in and administers all of the programs and 
services. 
 
She knows that, Mr. Speaker. She tends to leave those things 
out and tends to want to say that she doesn’t want to highlight 
any of the important initiatives that we do have the power to 
control, and that we do have the dollars set aside in our budget 
to act upon and deflect, that to try and say that somehow we 
should usurp the federal government. 
 
What that did to us, Mr. Speaker, she herself states is to see the 
federal government drop into the laps of the provincial 
government responsibility for off-reserve native people, and the 
responsibility alone of the provincial government and the 
assistance rolls. She knows full well that’s the reason why our 
social assistance register shows more people than ever before. 
 
She, Mr. Speaker, also wants to leave out the fact that we have 
the lowest unemployment rate anywhere in Canada. And as I 
would quote from my throne speech . . . return speech to the 
throne speech that: 
 

The new initiatives announced will help even more 
families and (in particular even) more children. They will 
help by providing the kind of support that builds 
opportunities instead of dependence for individuals, that 
provides supports to help people become independent. We 
need to break the welfare trap that our social structures 
have so neatly set. 

 
Mr. Speaker, our opposition doesn’t want to speak to those 
social structures and provide the structural changes necessary to 
move people into independence. They instead want to talk 
about is there some place in our hearts that we can give more 
clothing. Perhaps we can say to them, as the members of the 
Tory government before them said, grow a bigger garden and 
somehow this will alleviate the poverty and the need for food in 
our communities. 
 
This is not what we’re about, Mr. Speaker. We’re about 
changing the welfare trap, setting welfare on its head so that we 
can allow people to escape the welfare trap that so neatly had 
been set by the social structures that have grown up. And in 
particular have not only grown up, but become a strong brick 
wall during the ’80s when we saw things that were in place 
during the Tory era, where it was blame the victim and bash 
those people who, through no fault of their own, couldn’t access 
jobs in this province. 
 
Today I would like to support the comments of my colleagues 
instead of those of the members opposite. I want to do that with 

a sense that it’s a completion of a journey that I began on city 
council. And I can see for the first time that, although in each of 
our budgets since 1991 we’ve put money in programs or 
stabilized programs to address concerns for those greatest in 
need — anything from child care to trying to look at programs 
and initiatives that would spur jobs in our economy — that 
finally after a number of years we have been able to put forward 
the building to independence initiatives, investing in families 
that was talked about during my years and we’re able to now 
see it bear fruit in this session of our legislature — a fact that 
I’m very proud of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It gives a sense of completeness to know that we have now 
started the next leg of our journey — not only maintaining those 
supports, but significantly changing our structures to remove 
the barriers to independence for so many people in our 
province. While many other jurisdictions are addressing barriers 
to work in the social assistance program by simply cutting the 
amount of assistance to these families, Saskatchewan however, 
in stark contrast, will attack these barriers with a multifaceted 
approach. Much has been said about it, but I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that many people need to hear what the approach looks like in 
its entirety. 
 
It begins with the redesign of the social assistance program with 
the strategy called “building independence: investing in 
families.” There is an integrated, multi-department initiative 
pioneered in 1993 — and many of my colleagues have stated — 
have won national award, named the action plan for children. 
And it’s all bolstered, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the Premier’s 
continued leadership on the national scene with the first new 
social program in 30 years, the National Child Benefit, because 
our concerns for children knows no boundaries. 
 
So in addition to the $15 million we’ve committed through the 
National Child Benefit on an annual basis, we’ll be investing an 
additional $37.5 million in new money making Saskatchewan 
one of the only provinces in the country to be taking such 
strides. We’re turning the welfare system on its head, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and we’re making changes that provide 
opportunity rather than dependence for many lower income 
families and families presently receiving social assistance. 
 
These changes will have an impact on thousands of children 
and families across the province. 
 
(1615) 
 
Many say a society is judged by the way they treat those people 
who are in greatest need. The women and the children of their 
communities are a measure of how the rest of society is 
addressing the concerns of the day. These changes certainly 
speak to the way my colleagues and this government want to be 
spoken about and remembered in the future. 
 
And in that in fact, more than 31,000 children currently rely on 
social assistance to meet their basic needs. Studies show that 
across Canada one in five children live in poverty — a fact that 
the Catholic bishops have called nothing less than a damning 
indictment of the present socio-economic order. It’s this 
government and initiatives that we’ve put before us that are 
willing to take those steps towards changing that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and say that we’re ready to put our money where our 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

mouth is. 
 
The existing social assistance program we all know has not 
worked well in encouraging and supporting families to leave 
social assistance. And why is that? When you consider for 
them, Mr. Speaker, the cost of child care, the travel to work, 
and work-related clothing, many individuals are better off on 
social assistance than they would be working. 
 
Besides these barriers, another glaring one we found was the 
one that said if you work, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you begin to 
enter the working community, then your income is taken off 
your social assistance cheque. 
 
Families may also be forced to stay on social assistance because 
of the health needs of their children. Presently, families on 
social assistance receive supplementary health coverage that 
disappears when they move off. 
 
The time that I served on city council, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
saw many, many people who were taken off rolls of assistance 
because they had for some reason had a chance to gain a little 
bit of income, or they received a bit of remuneration from 
somewhere, and they were put into an appeal process that was 
never ending. There were 300-and-some ways that they were 
taken off social assistance by the Tory members opposite and 
would have to go through an appeal process before they would 
have their social assistance reinstated. And by that time of 
course, they were at the food banks and they were at the mercy 
of the charity of institutions that were, through our society, 
trying to organize to meet that flood of demand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t hear that kind of information coming out 
of the member opposite. Instead, she picks on one segment of 
society and says that we now need to look at that and not talk 
about any of the positive initiatives that are now occurring. 
 
When we talk about the on-line programs that received some 
monies from this government, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to 
highlight another contrast in our society. The contrast of a 
group who during the ’80s would line up women’s groups to 
speak in contradiction to each other, to drive wedges between 
those groups, and to divide and conquer in conflict. 
 
They didn’t do that only with women’s groups. We saw that 
with urban people and rural people; they drove the wedge. We 
saw that with working people versus people who needed 
assistance of any kind. And we saw it with a number of the 
church groups they would line up together and have them 
present their opinions. In every way possible they drove wedges 
in our community. 
 
Some of the women that talked about the need for their groups 
to get together and coordinate and to share information so they 
would have an approach to women that was integrated, some of 
them say this: 
 

Access to the Internet will revolutionize our organization 
by making it possible for our members to speak together on 
our concerns — the alienation and victimization of 
Aboriginal women in Saskatchewan. We are scattered 
across the province, many in isolated pockets, lacking the 
access to resources other women take for granted. We are 

most often the victims of poverty, violence and social 
problems we have been powerless (in the past) to 
overcome. We cannot regularly meet. We cannot 
economically reach out to each other or form concerted 
efforts to overcome pressing problems because of the 
physical distances among us . . . The Internet can change 
that. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you have a government that is set on a 
course to help people come together in community, to be able to 
reach out together to each other, to stop that feeling of being 
isolated in victimization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, that’s what we believe in. 
That’s the steps that we’re taking as we press forward to change 
the social fabrics of our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we found that many families that are forced to 
stay on social assistance because of many reasons. One of them 
is the health needs of their children. It’s something that the 
women on-line talk about. But it’s also something that we saw 
as a necessity if we were going to change their role of 
dependence to independence. 
 
We know presently families on social assistance receive 
supplementary health coverage and it disappeared the minute 
they moved off of assistance. As well, many individuals with 
lower skill levels have trouble accessing jobs without retraining 
— again, information that they can access when they become 
on-line individuals. 
 
Through the new building independence strategy, we’re making 
significant changes so that people are encouraged to work and 
are rewarded for their efforts. They will then maintain people in 
the contributions that they make to our society in the work force 
rather than to lapse back into the cycle that has become almost 
multi-generational. 
 
The new program will ensure that families will be financially 
better off working than they would be on social assistance. It 
will assist families in making a leap from dependence to the 
workforce, help families remain in the workforce rather than 
falling into social assistance, help with the cost of raising 
children; improve child health in lower income families; 
provide training and employment opportunities for individuals 
and parents; and link youth to education and employment 
opportunities. 
 
We have created a Saskatchewan employment supplement, a 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit, new family health benefits, and 
we’re building on the good work of three other initiatives — the 
provincial training allowance, the Youth Futures pilot projects 
in Prince Albert, and the department’s enhanced accountability 
measures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment put forward, in my mind, is an 
atrocity. When you see all of these things happening in our 
community, in partnership with our communities, and the 
member can stand up and nit-pick here and there about the 
things that are left undone when we all know that we need to 
join together and work on these, Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

that she can stand up and take the narrow view because she 
doesn’t demonstrate the long view. And the overarching view 
of all of these interconnect. All of these things come together. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, we know these aren’t the final answer, 
but they’re a first major step. It’s that first major step that I can 
look at and say this is what was contemplated when people 
came to our task force at the city council level and told us their 
stories. They told us their stories in the hope that we would one 
day be able to have an impact on the provincial government. It 
fell on stone during the last . . . the ’80s generation or the Tory 
era. It fell on deaf ears during that era. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have heard them. We heard their stories. 
We’ve taken them to our heart with compassion and with 
strength of our communities behind us. And as a result, the 
strategy will help at least 27,000 families. 
 
In addition, families on welfare who work will keep more of 
their income. Single parents will benefit more from 
maintenance payments. Many low income families will receive 
assistance to help with the cost of raising their children. And all 
low income parents will have the opportunity to benefit from 
work. 
 
In the longer term, we expect these programs to reduce poverty 
and dependence on social systems and improve child health in 
lower income families. In the meantime, coupled with the new 
initiatives under our child action plan, we believe we are truly 
laying out the foundation for a brighter future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Many have spoken to you this afternoon 
about the initiatives this year under the child action plan, but I 
think it needs to be said that this government is committing 
nearly $35 million to new initiatives to strengthen early 
childhood development. And my colleague eloquently talked 
about the need to help children as early on as possible in their 
development. And we would see that there will be early 
childhood programing in day care services targeted toward 
children who are greatest at risk — about a million dollars 
there. 
 
There’s about $4.5 million to assist the school divisions in 
meeting the needs of children and youth who require additional 
supports. And the list, Mr. Speaker, I think many have talked 
about, goes on. All in all, for 1998 and 1999 the total provincial 
funding for ongoing programs and new initiatives under the 
action plan for children will exceed $53 million. 
 
Saskatchewan’s strong and innovative programs for children 
will play a key role in developing a national commitment to 
fighting child poverty. Yes, Mr. Speaker, we need to go after 
the federal government and say, what are you doing to help first 
nation peoples to be in a role of governing themselves and 
looking where their dollars are going. 
 
But we think that when we present the building to independence 
strategy, investing in our families, we fought for our Premier at 
the national level, fights for the first new social program in 30 
years, the child benefit, and we now couple that with further 
initiatives under the child action plan, we know that we’re 

providing a national commitment to fighting child poverty. 
 
The development and implementation of this strategy is an 
extremely significant achievement for this province and this 
country. Through these programs Saskatchewan is taking a 
leadership role in investing in children and families to build a 
strong society today, and in the longer view a better future. It is 
an investment in the quality of life for all of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close in stating that it’s been a long 
journey to this moment when I can say truly that the people 
who spoke to me at city council level when we did the inquiry 
into hunger, who shared their stories and risked the wrath of the 
previous government to do that, Mr. Speaker, have now been 
heard and we are taking action. It’s also in that journey the first 
step toward that action, looking toward a time where we can see 
a future that has everyone actively involved in the economy of 
our province. 
 
It’s with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, that I speak out against the 
amendment presented by the colleague opposite, and it’s with 
that in mind and heart that I stand in support of the motion 
before us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to take a little 
different slant at this problem which we have in this country of 
ours. Of course I spent . . . many of my working years were 
spent in the education field and I’m going to take a look at child 
poverty and how it affects with the education system. 
 
The Premier mentioned one time that we believe that quality 
public education is the cornerstone of success in the modern 
economy — and I don’t think anybody can argue with that — 
and also that lifelong learning is the path not just to 
employment opportunity but to personal fulfilment and quality 
of life. And truly our public education system is the cornerstone 
of our prosperity. 
 
Because of this, our education system must give all children, 
not a select few but all the children the opportunity to learn the 
skills and knowledge they require to live happy and productive 
lives regardless of the challenges they face. But when a child 
comes to school in the morning, especially in the winter, 
without a hat, without mitts, without socks, without breakfast, 
that child faces significant challenges. There’s not much energy 
left to meet the challenge to learn. The child of poverty has very 
little readiness to learn. An empty belly is not conducive to 
learning. 
 
All of us would like to believe that child poverty is rare. 
Statistics were stated just a little while ago by the member 
opposite and we know that it’s rising in Saskatchewan by a rate 
of about 7 per cent. Tory Alberta has an increased rate of 34 per 
cent. But then when we look at Tory Ontario, 99 per cent 
increase — 99! And guess what that province is going to do. 
They are going to privatize, privatize the welfare. And the 
company that’s going to look after it is looking at making $118 
million on the back of the poor. Great plans that they have. 
 
(1630) 
 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

The Canadian conference, of course, of Catholic bishops has 
reported to the blight of child poverty. They call it a damning 
indictment of one of the richest societies in our history and we 
have to agree with them. It indicts our whole society, and our 
whole society must work together to address this problem. 
 
Addressing the scourge of child poverty requires that our 
communities and our country work together. We must respond 
as a community because it is a community responsibility, a 
shared responsibility. The idea of shared responsibility is the 
foundation of Saskatchewan’s action plan for children. 
 
In responding to poverty we must help people to independence. 
We must address poverty and the causes of poverty without 
creating a new dependence. Helping those who need our help is 
an act of friendship and community, but we must fight against 
the cycle of welfare dependency. Our response to child poverty 
must be proactive. 
 
For those of you do not know about the history of the 
Saskatchewan child action plan, allow me a few minutes to 
briefly go over it. The crisis of child poverty required action. In 
Saskatchewan, beginning in 1992, we developed an action plan 
for children. The action plan grew from the realization that the 
challenge of child poverty required a coordinated response. 
 
The action plan for children has been a partnership from the 
beginning. More than 1,200 groups from across the province 
were invited to be part of this process. And out of this 
collaboration came, first, a shared vision that all Saskatchewan 
children — not some but all Saskatchewan children — will 
grow in environments that support their well-being and enable 
them to reach their potential. 
 
Secondly, that children have equal and intrinsic worth as 
individuals in our society. Families and care-givers must be 
valued and supported as they care for children. And individuals, 
families, communities, businesses and governments all share 
responsibility for the well-being of children. 
 
The development of the child action plan was a partnership. The 
government has provided leadership, support, and funding as 
appropriate. But the delivery of services has been community 
driven, and businesses and business people have been a vital 
partner in many of the initiatives. 
 
When we announced the new plan, “building independence: 
investing in families” strategy, this will provide help to tens of 
thousands of Saskatchewan families. 
 
The new strategy builds on the success of our child action plan, 
a new Saskatchewan child benefit which will extend support to 
low income families, encouraging future independence by 
removing children from the welfare rolls entirely; a 
Saskatchewan employment supplement which will provide low 
income working families with the extra support they need to 
stay in the workforce; and finally family health benefits for low 
income working families. 
 
We are turning the welfare system on its head. Before this when 
a parent on welfare found a job they would be hit with day care 
costs and work-related expenses. They would lose their health 
benefits. They would find themselves worse off than before. 

This new initiative will help low income families avoid getting 
trapped in this social manner. 
 
I’d like to tell you just one story about a child action plan 
initiative in my home town of Swift Current. The Ultimate GAP 
— which stands for games, activities, and programs — is a 
summer drop-in program for at-risk kids. In the summer of 
1995 about 1,400 young people took part in the program. In 
1996 there were 2,000. In 1996 there were more than 3,000 
participants. 
 
The original program was developed by a committee which 
included the school boards, the city of Swift Current, the 
government, the RCMP, and community based organizations 
working with youth. In the first year, local businesses were 
generally supportive of the program. After the first summer 
they were more enthusiastic. 
 
In the first summer there was one young fellow. At that time he 
had about a grade 7 education. He was one of those kids who 
was always in trouble. Some people approached him about 
being involved with Ultimate GAP. I’d never be a part of 
something like this, he said. But he did become involved; he 
became a regular. Some of the staff took him under their wing 
and began involving him in planning the program. Eventually 
he was one of the leaders helping to organize activities and 
filling in when staff were sick or away. 
 
So here was this kid whose only contact with the RCMP was 
when he was in trouble, working with the police to solve a 
problem. Before he became involved with Ultimate GAP, no 
one would have believed it. That fall he was asked to come to a 
city council meeting; he thought he was in trouble. The city 
presented him with a certificate and an honorarium to thank him 
for all he’d done for the program. Now this is just an example 
of one person who has been helped by this. There will be many 
people who will be helped by this program as we go through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, addressing child poverty is about investing in the 
future, investing in our communities, investing in families, and 
investing in children. And this investment will pay tremendous 
dividends in thriving children, strong families, prosperous 
communities, and in a bright future. I challenge all to make this 
investment. Not only to invest money, but to invest our time, 
our energy, and our influence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the amendment made by the 
member opposite, but I wholeheartedly support the motion. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker or Deputy 
Speaker, I would like to make a few comments in regards to the 
amendment before this Assembly and indeed the motion as well 
that’s been presented by the . . . presented to the family in 
regards to the National Child Benefit plan and the action plan 
that’s been talked about by this government, and that was 
recently introduced by the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at poverty in this province, 
and we look at the welfare rolls in this province, there’s no 
question that we have seen a major increase in the welfare rolls 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

of the province. And for the government to stand back and say 
that it really isn’t their responsibility is certainly something that 
they cannot do, that they do not have the ability to do. 
 
And now some of the members are arguing that they’re not 
saying that. Well I’m pleased to hear that they are 
acknowledging that it is a problem and that they do have a 
responsibility. After all they were elected in 1991; that was 
seven years ago. In fact they made this promise to 
Saskatchewan people that they were going to eliminate poverty. 
Well they’re well into their second term and we still have 
poverty. 
 
And the unfortunate part is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have some 
of the . . . Saskatchewan has had some of the best times. And if 
the government wants to argue that it’s all because of the ’80s, 
take a look at what the economic times of the ’80s were, not 
just here in Saskatchewan or not just here in Canada, but even 
worldwide, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And when you look at the numbers that have changed in the 
province of Saskatchewan, when you look at the welfare rolls, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can see why they’ve grown in some 
ways. Because this government in the past, and the NDP Party 
in the past, has basically promoted the area of welfare. And 
they’ve suggested they would be the be-all and the end-all for 
all people; that if people were in need that the government 
would look after them, that they would bring in programs that 
would basically look after people and provide for them. 
 
In fact I find it somewhat shocking to hear the member from 
Regina Wascana Plains, I believe, talking about the fact of . . . 
and it may have been a member . . . I believe it was the former 
Social Services minister who did make the comment about 
growing gardens, and ridiculing the idea of having a garden. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think if you looked around the province 
of Saskatchewan, you would find that there are many people, 
even the individuals, two income families, who enjoy growing a 
garden. And a garden certainly can provide for individuals. I 
find it . . . and what I find, the people I chat with, the people I 
talk to, certainly in my constituency, find it very annoying when 
the people are looking for some help in time of need and yet are 
unwilling to take a little bit of time to even provide for 
themselves through the growing of a garden. 
 
What I found very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the 
comment and the fact that not too long ago there was a 
gentlemen just up the road, on No. 11 Highway, set aside four 
acres of property; in fact, he had grown four acres of potatoes 
and vegetables, given them to the food bank . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member from Regina Wascana Plain is 
arguing . . . had given this produce to the food bank to be used 
to meet the needs of hungry people. 
 
The following year, as a result of being a somewhat older 
individual, had prepared that piece of property, had asked the 
food bank to send up some individuals, to plant the potatoes, to 
put in the vegetables, to hoe them, and they could have the 
produce. 
 
Guess what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? No one came — no one 
came. They expected him to provide it all by himself. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s wrong with people doing a little bit 
to help themselves? There’s nothing wrong with governments 
being there to meet the needs of those individuals who, due to 
circumstances beyond their control, need to look to government 
for some assistance. But to provide programs or suggest that 
programs are going to be there for everyone, regardless of 
whether you’re willing to help yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the taxpaying public of this province are not willing to accept 
that. 
 
People are just becoming very disappointed and very 
disillusioned with this province when the taxes in the provinces 
. . . And for the member from Lloydminster, who can drive 
across to Alberta any time and get tax-free products, for her to 
complain and continue and to debate in this Assembly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . . . that member certainly had the opportunity 
to debate before, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m more than 
willing to get into a further debate but I realize I’m supposed to 
enter this debate and speak through the Chair. So I will continue 
to do that. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at the motion and 
while I will commend the minister responsible for Social 
Services, I respect the minister and the work he has done, I have 
to . . . I find it a little abhorrent to listen to some of the ridicule 
that his colleagues place in this Assembly, and how the remarks 
. . . the disparaging remarks they make when we bring up some 
of the issues and concerns that we as opposition members, and 
I’m sure that they, face on a daily basis when they talk to their 
own constituents. 
 
When you talk about poverty in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, poverty is more than just not having enough to eat. 
Poverty is a factor . . . what is some of the major problems for 
poverty in this province? Some of the major problems we find, 
and the reasons we find that people find themselves in a 
situation where they still do not have enough finances available 
to meet their very basic needs, come as a result of high taxation 
in the province of Saskatchewan; they come as a result of a 
policy that discourages business development in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They come as a result of a government that’s more intent on 
patting itself on the back with how well they have done rather 
than a government that’s willing . . . ready to sit back, and 
willing to recognize they have failed in a number of areas and 
begin to sit back and really realistically address some of the 
issues and concerns. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the action plan that was released by 
the government attempts to address some of these concerns, and 
as I say and indicated earlier, while I commend the Minister of 
Social Services . . . because I notice some of the initiatives he’s 
taken have come from some of the comments and suggestions I 
have been making over the past number of years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s time we begin to recognize the fact 
that people themselves do have a real value, and they do have a 
desire to get out and provide for themselves. But because of the 
way the programs have been built through the years, any 
initiative that people had to try and provide for themselves was 
discouraged because of how our whole welfare program and 
network was developed. 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

And so in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I see the 
government talking about the fact that if a person finds a job, 
that they’re not going to take and just eliminate all access to 
welfare, that they will supplement a person’s wage rather than 
forcing them to go off welfare completely, I think that’s a 
positive move. 
 
Because what it says to an individual, it says to a couple who 
are maybe living in a small community in rural Saskatchewan 
where the only job that may be available at the moment is a 
part-time job . . . you know and I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that even if it was a full-time job, at the current minimum wage 
it would not provide the assistance that a couple can get on 
welfare. So why would they work? 
 
And yet I find most people would like to work. By working, 
they feel better about themselves. By working, they feel that 
they’re giving something to society. And by working, it just 
creates a more comfortable environment and they have a lot 
more pride in their abilities. And so in this regard, in that 
regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I commend the Minister of Social 
Services for some of the reforms that he’s brought forward in 
his new social services benefit program. 
 
As the government said, it’s supposedly building independence 
and investing in families. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we hope that indeed will encourage and build 
independence. 
 
(1645) 
 
But building independence isn’t just putting more money into 
people’s pockets. Building independence is creating an 
environment whereby they learn how to provide for themselves 
as well. Not just relying on it. It’s not just going out and getting 
a 10 or a 15 or a $20 wage and finding out that they still can’t 
make the end of the month with their payments as a result of the 
fact that maybe sometimes some individuals in our society do 
not know how to handle their finances. 
 
And so some of the initiatives as well that need to be brought 
forward are means whereby we can encourage and help people 
to understand how to manage their finances and how to provide 
for themselves and how to build for their futures. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at poverty in the 
province of Saskatchewan, we look at the welfare rolls, we see 
the numbers rising from 52,000 in 1991 to over 81,000, almost 
82,000 in 1996, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . It’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how the government 
would like to argue that it’s always the problem of somebody 
else, that it’s always the offloading — especially when it comes 
to social assistance — the offloading of the federal government. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will 
acknowledge that yes, in some cases some of the problems that 
have arisen here — not just here in Saskatchewan but across 
this country — are as a result of the Liberal government in 
Ottawa. And one would have to ask where in the world are the 
Liberal members of this Assembly? What are the Liberal 
members of this Assembly doing to address some of the issues 
that are being put on the backs of Saskatchewan taxpayers as a 
result of the initiatives being taken by the Liberal government 

in Ottawa? 
 
We would ask where in the world is the only federal Liberal 
MP (Member of Parliament) from Saskatchewan? What is he 
doing to address some of these concerns? You would think that 
the federal member, the Hon. Ralph Goodale, would at least go 
back to Ottawa and to his federal counterparts and raise some of 
the concerns that are being directed towards him as a result of 
the federal initiatives that are offloading some of their 
responsibility on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government 
cannot hide behind the fact that they want to blame somebody 
else all the time. The government needs to start looking at itself. 
It needs to realize that every time they point a finger, there’s 
three fingers pointing back at them in most cases — pointing 
the finger back at them, that they have to accept some 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at, whether it’s health, 
whether it’s social assistance, whether it’s social services, 
whether it’s health care, whether it’s agriculture, whatever the 
issue in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has 
to accept responsibility for their actions as well. 
 
And the initiatives taken in the family benefits package and the 
new initiatives of investing in families are part of a step. But 
whether or not they address all the concerns that are out there, 
we have to wait and see. We have to wait and see and determine 
whether or not the initiatives that they’re taking are going to 
address a number of the concerns out there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena 
has raised the issue of child prostitution and that’s a concern 
we’ve been talking about for a number of years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
One asks, while the government talks about coming down 
harder on individuals who would take advantage of child 
prostitutes, the question has to be asked, why do we have young 
children on the streets selling themselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
And in order to . . . In many cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 
we’re finding and what we’re hearing, they’re doing it because 
they are either . . . whether it’s a family need or their own 
personal need of something to eat, some clothes to wear. We 
need to address some of those concerns. 
 
Whether or not the program that’s been initiated by this 
government will address that concern, we’ll wait and see on 
that. I don’t know if it will address it. And I haven’t heard any 
one of the members stand up and say this program will address 
some of those concerns; this program will eliminate young 
children on the streets who would be selling themselves in the 
area of prostitution. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would hope it would. But I haven’t the 
heard the members . . . I haven’t heard even the Minister of 
Social Services talk about the fact that his new program is going 
to address that concern and that need out there. I know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that we need to look and work together to find 
ways in which we can reach out to meet the needs of young 
people who, through no fault of their own, find themselves in 
situations where they are prostituting themselves just to survive. 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1998 

And it’s unfortunate and it’s tragic. 
 
And we all have, we all have families; we all have young 
children at home. Mine are growing up into the teenage years 
but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a parent it certainly bothers me 
when I see and when I hear about some of the things that take 
place. And we as, we as elected members in this Legislative 
Assembly need to look at how we address some of the 
concerns. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, would the concerns of child poverty also 
go beyond just the city of Regina? And my colleague from 
Kelvington-Wadena is right as well. Some of the issues that 
have been raised with us most recently by people from the 
aboriginal community, the concerns they have in regards to the 
fact that the funds that the federal government are putting into 
the hands of their bands, in many cases don’t necessarily always 
reach out to meet the needs of those, of the aboriginal peoples 
of that band, a specific band. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to say that it isn’t happening would 
be burying our heads in the sand. We’ve seen headlines in the 
paper. Not just concerns that have been raised by the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but aboriginal 
people themselves coming forward. The federal government’s 
beginning to recognize the need to look at this, look at the 
question. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we’re going to address 
the needs of poverty in the area of the aboriginal community 
and aboriginal children, we need to look at that very, very 
carefully. 
 
And it would be appropriate for the government, for the current 
government, to go to the federal government and really press 
this issue. And ask the federal government what they are doing 
to address the concerns that I’m sure are being presented 
directly to the federal government by aboriginal peoples 
themselves, concerned about how finances are made available 
and their access and how they are allocated to on reserves, and 
the fact that so many people on reserves are living in dire 
poverty. 
 
When you look at the numbers, they should not be. They should 
have . . . and in fact they shouldn’t have to rely on other 
agencies to provide the services, to meet the needs that they are 
facing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about poverty in 
Saskatchewan, this government likes to talk about food banks. I 
look at the number of food banks that we have throughout the 
province. I look at the number of agencies that continue to 
provide services. And despite the sound economy, the economy 
that we have had over the past number of years, it’s appalling, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s appalling to think that we still rely on 
food banks, and that food banks on an ongoing basis are 
continually asking for more supplies for the food banks. 
 
And why are they asking for more supplies, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? They are forced to ask for more supplies because of 
the demands that continue to fall in their lap — demands for 
services, whether it be in the area of clothing, whether it be in 
the area of food or other services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that doesn’t speak well. And, Mr. Speaker, 

it doesn’t speak well of the programs and of the commitment 
that this NDP government made in 1991 when they’ve said that 
it would eliminate poverty. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think these motions presented to this 
Assembly . . . and I’m going to read the motion: 
 

That this Assembly applaud the government’s 
determination to reduce child poverty, building on to the 
introduction of the action plan for children and the 
Premier’s national leadership in developing the National 
Child Benefit, by introducing the “building independence: 
investing in families” strategy . . . 
 

This motion, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it, when you look 
at it very carefully, I find it interesting that on an ongoing basis 
we find the government has to applaud themselves because no 
one else apparently is giving them any credit for the benefits 
that they keep telling that they are giving us. 
 
Every time we turn around, they’re . . . In fact one begins to 
wonder how long they’re going to be able to reach over and pat 
themselves on the back or whether or not they’re going to go 
into . . . end up in contortions trying to reach around to keep 
patting themselves on the back, they’ve patted themselves on 
the back so long. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think motions themselves do not 
necessarily meet the needs out there. Motions themselves will 
not do anything for that child who’s hungry today. Motions 
themselves will not do anything for the parents who go to the 
cupboard and find that the cupboard really doesn’t have a lot in 
it, and they have to turn to their children and say we may have 
to do without tonight. Motions will not address that. Action is 
going to be needed to address that. 
 
And this, some of this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well the 
member I think just hollered across the floor, that’s called an 
action plan. Well I would suggest to the member, let’s see some 
action. Let’s see whether or not there’s going to be any . . . 
whether or not that’s just a hollow word in a motion or whether 
or not there will be real action, whether or not the government 
is going to address the issue of poverty, not just in our 
community but even in the aboriginal community, whether or 
not . . . And in dealing with that issue it goes beyond just 
provincial politics. It does enter the area of federal politics as 
well. 
 
And I believe this motion brought forward by my colleague 
from . . . the member from Kelvington-Wadena, I’d be 
surprised that the members did not support the motion. And in 
recognizing the fact they keep telling us that the federal 
government has to accept responsibility, but what the motion 
. . . what the amendment to the motion does is indeed ask the 
members, the government members themselves, to recognize 
the fact that the federal government needs to accept 
responsibility. 
 
And this amendment invites the government to go to Ottawa 
and ask the federal government to certainly take the time and 
recognize their responsibility. And I think it would be only 
appropriate if the members would do that, realizing that the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers have just reached the limit. It’s time. 



April 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

It’s time we recognize the fact that we all have a part to play. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the Saskatchewan taxpayer 
in this province, well they’ve said yes and they show on an 
ongoing basis . . . We saw that in the recent Telemiracle’s 
telethon. We saw how Saskatchewan people are willing to give 
of themselves to meet the needs of individuals, and I commend 
them for that. In fact I believe this province is noted for its 
voluntarism. This province is noted for its giving. 
 
However it’s interesting to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just a 
recent — I believe it was a recent headline and I don’t 
remember exactly where I saw it — but in regards to people 
giving over $100 in charitable donations, I believe it was 
StatsCanada. I was really appalled when I saw the figures. I 
believe the figures are just over 25 per cent, 25 per cent of the 
taxpaying public only contribute more than $100. And in 
Saskatchewan at least we can brag about the fact that, I believe, 
we were around 27 or 29. I don’t remember; we were one of the 
higher numbers. 
 
But when you look at that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does it 
say? When I looked at that number I was just amazed that, 
while we do recognize the willingness of people to give and we 
acknowledge how people in Saskatchewan have given through 
the telethon, we acknowledge how people give through . . . to 
agencies such as reaching out to meet the needs of muscular 
dystrophy, or the Red Cross, or any of the other numerous 
agencies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or Speaker, when you look at 
that very carefully, it’s interesting to note, and it boggles my 
mind to realize, that it’s just a small portion of the province that 
is really doing that; that is, really, really reaching out to meet 
that need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that the members of this Assembly 
recognize the fact that we all need to work on this together. And 
I would encourage the members not just to pat themselves on 
the back and suggesting that they’re going to take some action 
because, Mr. Speaker, I would be disappointed if next year at 
the same time we roll around and the motion before this 
Assembly reads the same as the one that we have before us 
right now, basically saying that they failed again. 
 
I hope the government really has a plan in place that will 
address the real needs out there. That the motions that are being 
presented to this Assembly are not hollow motions, and that the 
government members as well will not just write off 
amendments as being nothing, and because it was presented by 
an opposition member it needs to be overruled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that, and I would invite the 
members to vote with the opposition members in accepting the 
amended motion, in accepting the amendment that has been 
brought before this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you can realize, there are so many things that I 
could offer and enter into this debate on at this time. However, 
Mr. Speaker, I find that the fact that there is so much to present, 
it would just . . . we just wouldn’t be able to confine it to the 
time that is limited to us, so therefore at this time I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................669 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................669 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................669 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................669 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................669 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................669 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................669 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................669 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................669 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................670 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................670 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................670 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................670 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................670 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................670 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................670 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................670 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................670 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................671 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................671 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................671 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Meeting on Plains Health Centre Closure 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................671 
 Organ Donor Awareness Week 
  Whitmore...................................................................................................................................................................................671 
 Acute Care Bed Reduction in Living Sky Health District 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................671 
 Training of Metis Economic Development Officers 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................672 
 Carlton Trail Regional College Marks 25th Anniversary 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................672 
 Credit Union Central Elects Board President 
  Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................672 
 Liberal Health Policy 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................672 
 Women’s Programs Gain Internet Access 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................673 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................673 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................673 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................674 
 Hospital Bed Closures 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................675 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................675 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................675 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................676 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................676 
 SaskTel Investment in New Zealand 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................677 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................677 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Funding for Victims of Family Violence 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................677 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................678 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................678 



 

  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................679 
CONDOLENCES 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................679 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................680 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................680 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................682 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................683 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................684 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Reduction of Child Poverty 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................686 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................689 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................691 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................694 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................695 
 
 
 


