





























































Hansard: May 20, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1229 
 May 20, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Radville. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, all come from the people of 
Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lakes fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The community involved, Mr. Speaker, from the community of 
Arcola and Midale. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present a petition 
and these are signed by the good people from Arborfield, and 
they’re concerned about the severance payment to Jack Messer. 
And their statement basically is, tell Jack we want it back. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now the hon. member from Rosthern 
will recognize of course that he’s not to enter into debate while 
presenting petitions, and I think he’ll recognize his final 
comments fall into that category. And I’m sure that he’ll want 
to avoid doing that in the future. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 

present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
payment of the severance package to Jack Messer. The 
petitioners on this . . . signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, 
are from the communities of Arcola and Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
People that have signed this petition are all from Arcola. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud again 
today to rise on behalf of people of Saskatchewan to present a 
petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has signatures on from Briercrest and 
the city of Moose Jaw, and I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition in reference to some of the challenges of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take immediate action to 
allow the North to join the rest of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 
primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse, and we also have our MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) signing this petition. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of the province. These ones are 
concerned about the closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
the community of Frontier. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in bringing forward petitions that come from 
the Saskatchewan people in their efforts to stop the closure of 
the Plains hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are all 
from the Aneroid area. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present petitions 
from residents of Pinehouse in northern Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to address the issue of reducing 
the high costs of power rates in the North. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are seeking 
justice for men and women who have lost spouses in 
work-related accidents. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows, widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and their revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 

And these signatures today are from Balgonie, Regina, Indian 
Head, and Saskatoon. Thank you very much. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
also on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned that people 
permanently injured through auto-related injuries covered by 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) no-fault insurance 
are being denied or having benefits suspended at the taxpayers’ 
expense. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to acknowledge the concerns of 
taxpaying citizens by causing the Government of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that absolute fairness and 
equitable treatment be given to those injured and disabled 
people and their families and be diligent in this most urgent 
matter. 

 

This petition has been signed by citizens of North Battleford, 
Carlyle, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
people from the communities of Consul, Robsart, and Maple 
Creek, I present the following petition. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And I’m happy to present these today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to reduce the high costs of power rates 
in the North; to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; to save the Plains Health Centre; to put a 
moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 
to have the Workers’ Compensation Board reinstate 
pensions for disenfranchised widows and widowers. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Johnson, as Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills, presents the sixth report of the said 
committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the following Bill and has 
agreed to report the same without amendment, Bill No. 301 
— The Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan Act. 

 
Your committee recommends under the provision of rule 
66 that fees be remitted less the cost of printing with 
respect to Bill No. 301. 

 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, 
the education accountability Act. 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1231 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 54 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment and Resource 
Management: what studies of the change in the fish 
population of Doré Lake over the past year has the minister 
conducted, and will he table such studies? 
 
The second part is to the Minister of the Environment and 
Resource Management as well: what studies of the water 
levels at Doré Lake has the minister undertaken during the 
past year, and will the minister table such studies? 
 

And the third notice of written question, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 54 ask the Minister of the 
Environment and Resource Management: 

 
What consultation had the minister undertaken with the 
fishermen who take part in the commercial fishery at Doré 
Lake to address the problems of: (1) declining water level 
in Doré Lake; (2) the blockage of the rivers running into 
Doré Lake, particularly the Sled River; (3) the declining 
fish population in Doré Lake. And what strategies has the 
minister put forward to address these problems? 

 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Jess: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity 
to introduce in your gallery the former member of parliament 
for the riding of Battlefords-Meadow Lake, Mr. Len Taylor. 
And I would ask everyone here to welcome him. I hope that 
your presence in the chamber here, Len, doesn’t make the 
temporary member from North Battleford too nervous, but I 
appreciate that you’re here and I ask everyone to welcome you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to 
you I’d like to introduce to the Assembly two groups of people 
in fact. In your gallery we have 10 students from the public 
administration and health administration program of the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology. They are here to 
visit the Assembly and tour the Assembly, and they’re here with 
their chaperon instructor, Leslie. 
 
And I wanted to point out, Mr. Speaker, that these individuals 
have made a tremendous effort in education in terms of 
management, and that it’s all part and parcel of their efforts of 
supporting and working towards aboriginal self-government, 
and certainly accountability and professionalism is something 
that they are striving for. And I want to make sure that the 
Assembly appreciates that and certainly advise them that we 
appreciate their effort in furthering their education. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, we also have a 
gentleman from my home-town of Ile-a-la-Crosse, who lives 
now in Beauval and is studying in Winnipeg, and is planning on 
moving here; so we’re not sure where he is from. But what I do 
want to say is that Michael Durocher is also visiting the 

Assembly, and he’s also a student at law and I think he’s got 
one more year to go before he gets his degree. And it just goes 
to show you that the aboriginal folks are striving and working 
very hard to achieve a high level of education, and certainly as a 
result of the commitment of these individuals the best is yet to 
come. And we’ll certainly see evidence of that over the next 
several 10, 15 years. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I note 
in the west gallery, and I’d like to introduce to everyone 
through you, some individuals who have been visiting our 
legislative grounds to bring their plight to our attention. These 
are men and women, some of whom represent the Blue Rose 
Advocacy group, others who are part of the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like everyone here to give them a very warm welcome this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
join in welcoming to the House this afternoon my friend Len 
Taylor. 
 
And to say to my colleague from Redberry Lake, the answer to 
his question is no. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the member 
from Greystone in welcoming the individuals here today from 
— not only in this gallery but in your gallery as well — 
representatives from the Blue Rose Advocacy group. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Mill Improves Feed Quality 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently leaders from 
the Saskatchewan hog industry met in Blaine Lake to discuss 
Saskatchewan’s role in the pork industry. 
 
Currently Saskatchewan hog farmers produce 1 million pigs 
annually. Part of the reason for this success is low feed costs, 
room for expansion in terms of available land, and a favourable 
climate. 
 
A feed mill is currently under construction in North Battleford 
and this will help hog farmers in the province to build upon 
their competitive advantage. To put this all in perspective, one 
feed mill along with four hog projects would provide 93 
full-time jobs plus a trucking fleet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with our national competitive advantages, the 
industry’s growth potential, and its ability to create sustainable 
full-time employment, the hog industry in Saskatchewan has 
become a very viable and lucrative one which should contribute 
greatly to our economy in the coming years. Thank you, Mr. 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Honorary Fellowship Recipient 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Dr. 
Lionel Lavoie of Melfort is the sole recipient in Saskatchewan 
of the honorary distinction of fellowship in the College of 
Family Physicians of Canada. Dr. Lionel Lavoie has made great 
contributions to health care. He was born and raised in St. 
Brieux, Saskatchewan. He graduated from the university in 
Ottawa with a Doctor of Medicine degree and then began to 
practice in Melfort in 1965. 
 
At present, Mr. Lavoie is chief of medical staff of the North 
Central Health District and associate clinical professor of 
family medicine with the College of Medicine, University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
He has served as the president of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and currently serves on the SMA (Saskatchewan 
Medical Association) joint professional review committee. He 
has also served as the president of the Canadian Medical 
Association. 
 
Lionel has always taken an active role in the community since 
having moved to Melfort. He has served as the club physician 
for the Melfort Mustangs since 1990, chairman of the Parks and 
Recreation Board, an active member of the Catholic church and 
Melfort Jaycees and the Melfort Rotarians. Lionel and his wife, 
Mary, have four children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list of accomplishments go on and on. But I do 
want to mention that Dr. Lavoie has also been the recipient of 
the Canada 125 Medal. 
 
Would the Assembly please join me in congratulating Dr. 
Lionel Lavoie. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Customer Financing Announcement 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning a 
significant announcement was made in the resort village of Lac 
Pelletier, which is just south of Swift Current. This 
announcement by the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) on behalf of SaskEnergy will not 
only benefit Lac Pelletier but up to 6,000 new customers and up 
to 15 other small communities. 
 
SaskEnergy has launched a new customer financing program 
designed to give new customers options in connecting to the 
existing gas network. This will allow families and businesses to 
take advantage of the efficiencies of natural gas and allow them 
to operate more competitively. Of course, Mr. Speaker, more 
lines and more hook-ups means economic activity and jobs, and 
in our more remote areas. 
 
The new plan is this: people who receive the new lines will be 
able to pay for them in convenient instalments. They’ll be able 
to pay over a period of up to five years and they can make the 

payments on their monthly gas bills. Most importantly, no down 
payment will be required for installations of $1,000 or less. This 
will give more Saskatchewan people the ability to choose 
natural gas. Already 15 people in Lac Pelletier have taken 
advantage of the program and thus are taking advantage of a 
fuel that is about one-third the price of others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a small program but a valuable one, 
especially to those in the agriculture and food industries — 
another way SaskEnergy is finding helpful and innovative ways 
to help its customers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inequitable Treatment Concerns Raised 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
detect a disturbing trend in the growing numbers of complaints 
at my constituency office lodged by Saskatchewan citizens 
about inhumane treatment inflicted upon them by various 
government departments and agencies. 
 
One recent example is the Health department’s inequitable 
treatment of medical interns at the University of Saskatchewan. 
Another is the disenfranchised widows and widowers who have 
been strung along with too many broken promises and have 
experienced unkind and incompassionate treatment from some 
people at the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Injured workers have now had to set up camp on the legislative 
grounds to draw attention to their concerns which has been 
compounded by their mistreatment with Workers’ 
Compensation. SGI no-fault insurance tramples on accident 
victims’ basic legal and human rights and subjects complainants 
to degrading and nerve-racking surveillance. More and more 
patients complain that overworked health providers cannot give 
the service that is required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while there are many dedicated, many 
compassionate employees at these agencies, there is enough 
evidence of uncaring behaviour to warrant these operations 
being subjected to close scrutiny. And I think we all here should 
follow the golden rule. Let’s not forget that we will be judged 
by the care and compassion we show those less fortunate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Pulp and Paper Mill 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, there’s good news being 
discussed around the coffee shops, living rooms, and kitchen 
tables in Prince Albert. This is good news for Saskatchewan and 
good news about jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Weyerhaeuser Canada has just announced a $315 million 
upgrade to the P.A. (Prince Albert) pulp and paper mill. George 
Weyerhaeuser, the CEO (chief executive officer) for Canada 
called the investment a sign of confidence in the timber supply, 
confidence in the provincial government, and confidence in his 
company’s environmental competitiveness. 
 
The upgrade will involve converting the existing boiler so that 
wood waste can be used to generate electricity, thus saving on 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

natural gas and reducing waste products, and the upgrade will 
also benefit the environment. 
 
It will create jobs, Mr. Speaker, good paying jobs. Construction 
has already begun. There’ll be 300 new jobs by the end of the 
year. And by the time the job is completed in the year 2000, 
construction is expected to peak at 700 new jobs. That’s some 
announcement for the new millennium, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Weyerhaeuser and Saskatchewan Environment have been 
working together for five years to come to an arrangement that 
will meet both environmental and competitive needs in this 
highly competitive industry. The fact that they have done so is 
an excellent sign of far-sightedness and cooperation between 
government and industry. There’s going to be more efficient 
utilization of wood harvested in Saskatchewan and it will grow 
the wood-related and value added industry. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Cuts 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Too often this 
government accuses us of dwelling on the past instead of 
focusing on the future when it comes to health care. Too often 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) members claim the Liberals 
have their heads stuck in the sand when we raise issues of grave 
concern to the people of this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it appears what goes around comes around 
in political life. The members opposite had their heads stuck in 
the sand when they eliminated 579 nurses from the health 
system. Now only under tremendous public pressure do they 
start trying to undo some of the damage they’ve created. 
 
The time for the NDP to rely on past glories related to health 
care has passed. Their attempts to revive memories of the 
medicare debates of the 1960s is not working. Mr. Speaker, I 
say to the government members opposite, welcome to the 1990s 
before we pass into the new millennium. 
 
I don’t see Ross Thatcher sitting amongst us here today, but 
when will this government acknowledge that there’s no one 
who could hold a candle to T.C. Douglas among them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Norwegian Constitution Day Celebrations 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on May 17, last Sunday, 
there was a large gathering of people in Regina Lakeview at the 
Wascana band shell to celebrate the 184th anniversary of the 
Norwegian constitution. These people gathered together to sing 
and dance and give speeches and have a children’s parade. At 
the same time there was also a gathering at Kinsmen Park in 
Saskatoon which had a similar children’s parade. 
 
But the really important part was that in Weldon, Saskatchewan 
there were over 500 people who gathered together to celebrate 
Norwegian Constitution Day or Syttende Mai. And these people 
were such a large crowd in that town that one of the old-timers 

was heard to remark that he hadn't seen a traffic jam in Weldon 
for about 80 years. 
 
Let’s all wish all of the Norwegian descendants in 
Saskatchewan a great Syttende Mai and Hurra for Syttende 
Mai! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grant for Renovation Construction at Humboldt 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to stand today to commend the government, and 
especially the Minister of Post-Secondary Education, on their 
recent announcement to provide $750,000 in funding to assist in 
the renovation construction of the first phase of a new, shared 
facility between the Humboldt Collegiate and the Carlton Trail 
Regional College. 
 
The new facility will become home for a multipurpose shop and 
classrooms used for instructing a variety of trade programs and 
basic education, as well as new office space. And the shared 
facility is an opportunity for the college, the school division, 
and the community to work together to provide more up-to-date 
facilities and equipment for learners and instructors. 
 
The Carlton Trail Regional College saw an increase of 400 
students this year and plans to offer increased course selections. 
And the Humboldt Collegiate Institute will also see another 
increase in its students this year to approximately 400. 
 
While this funding is very much appreciated, it is only a small 
portion of the 12 to $14 million necessary for the joint facility 
to serve the community of Humboldt and area and it is my hope 
that the government will commit to further funding as the next 
phase of this project is implemented. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatoon School Board’s Proposed New Building 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Education. Madam 
Minister, as you are well aware, the Saskatoon Public School 
Board is planning to build a new $14 million administration 
building on prime river bank property. Many Saskatoon 
taxpayers oppose this decision, suggesting the school board 
could save millions of dollars by buying or leasing existing 
office space in Saskatoon. In fact a poll released yesterday 
shows that 85 per cent of Saskatoon taxpayers oppose the 
construction of a new building. 
 
Madam Minister, have you discussed this proposal with the 
Saskatoon Public School Board? Are they considering reversing 
this decision in light of overwhelming public opposition? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member will know, decisions as to whether or not to 
construct an educational centre, whether or not to close a 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

school, whether or not to go forward with a number of 
educational initiatives are determined by those locally elected 
school trustees. 
 
As the member may know, this is a decision that has been left, 
through The Education Act, to the locally elected trustees of the 
Saskatoon Public School Board. As the member may not know, 
we have indicated to the public school board in Saskatoon that 
any decision regarding the school bank will need the approval 
of the city of Saskatoon and the Meewasin Valley Authority, 
and it will be up to those two organizations to determine what 
kind of development will go forward on the river bank 
overlooking the Saskatchewan River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, you and I both agree on the 
need for school boards to have autonomy from government, but 
the ultimate authority should always lie in the hands of 
taxpayers — the people who pay the bill. 
 
The Urban Municipality Act gives taxpayers the right to 
petition urban councils to force a binding referendum, and 
ultimately to overturn council decisions if those decisions don’t 
have the support of the public. This provision was used a few 
years ago in Saskatoon to block the construction of an 
unwanted casino. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party believes taxpayers should have the 
same right to reverse the decisions of school boards if they do 
not have the support of the public. 
 
Earlier today I gave notice of a private members’ Bill that 
would allow voters to force a binding referendum on a school 
board decision by gathering enough names on a petition. 
Madam Minister, will you support this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously I’m not in a 
position to indicate whether or not I’d support the legislation 
because I’ve not yet seen the contents of the Bill and it would 
be irresponsible to say yes that I would support the contents 
without first having seen it. As I said, the department has placed 
a condition on the sale of this property — that any construction 
on this site must have the approval of the city of Saskatoon and 
the Meewasin Valley Authority. The Saskatoon Public School 
Board is a locally elected board of education; they’ve acted 
within the contents of The Education Act; and they’re 
responsible to their electors. 
 
I understand that this is a controversial issue in the city of 
Saskatoon and I would presume that the trustees that are on the 
locally elected school board will listen very carefully to what 
their electors have to say on this matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
85 per cent of Saskatoon residents oppose the construction of a 
new $14 million education building but there’s nothing that 
they can do about it, even though it is the taxpayers who pay the 
bill. If the city were building a new office building that the 

public opposed, taxpayers could gather names on a petition, 
force a binding referendum, and vote it down. 
 
All we’re saying is that taxpayers should have the same 
authority over school board decisions. After all, school boards 
collect as much or more in taxes as municipalities. Madam 
Minister, will you support our education accountability Act, or 
will you at least agree with the concept that would allow 
taxpayers the same opportunity to deal with municipal councils 
and boards of education? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 
just want to remind the member that The Education Act is very 
clear that there are a number of matters that are within the 
prerogative of a locally elected school division board. This is an 
issue that is determined by that locally elected board. I assume 
that they will listen very carefully to what their local electors 
have to say on this matter. 
 
I would also like to remind the member that it was his 
forerunner, the former minister of Education, Lorne Hepworth, 
who in December of 1988 gave approval of the disposition of 
that particular property where the proceeds of that sale could be 
used for the construction of an administrative facility which the 
department normally does not fund. 
 
So I would say to the member, one needs to be very careful on 
trying to enter into a debate at the local level that will be 
determined by locally elected trustees. We have been 
reprimanded in the past for getting involved in issues that have 
nothing to do with this Legislative Assembly and I would say to 
the member that this is a decision that will be guided and made 
by those locally elected trustees. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Potential Sale of Crown Life 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for CIC. Mr. Minister, 
The Financial Post is reporting that your government is 
interfering in the sale of Crown Life. It says that Canada Life is 
interested in buying Crown Life but it is running into 
interference and red tape from your government. Mr. Minister, 
what does that mean exactly? 
 
If you are taking steps to keep Crown Life jobs in 
Saskatchewan, we support that. However, if the government can 
make a good return on its investment in Crown Life and keep 
those jobs in Regina, we see no reason why you would be 
stalling a deal. Mr. Minister, is Crown Life up for sale and why 
are you interfering with the process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I have indicated to the member 
on a number of occasions, here in the House and outside of the 
Assembly, obviously any speculation on the position of Crown 
Life vis-a-vis sale or not is simply at this point speculation. 
 
In terms of the process though, in terms of sale of assets, what I 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

can say is that when you recommended to us that we sell our 
shares in Husky Oil at 7 cents on the dollar, we told your 
political party, the Liberals and the Conservatives — I’m not 
sure which party you want to be in at the time you made the 
statement — but we said to you that selling our shares at 7 cents 
on the dollar was not the right thing to do. And our officials at 
CIC told us to hold. We did and we sold the assets not for 25 
million but 310 million. 
 
The same is true of our Cameco shares, which your party and 
the party that you represent, the Conservative Party, said we 
should be selling the shares of Cameco when they were far 
below $75 a share. Our officials at CIC said to hold them until 
they got to $75. We then sold. 
 
As it relates to Crown Life, I will take the opinion of my 
officials at CIC long before I will yours, sir, with the greatest of 
respect. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Canamino 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Economic Development. Madam Minister, it 
appears the NDP’s usual ineptitude at doing business is coming 
home to roost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two months ago the Saskatchewan government 
took voting control of the Canamino oat processing plant in 
Saskatoon at the time when other investors said the company 
was just about to turn a profit. However after the government’s 
take-over, share values in the company crashed to 37 cents a 
share from $1.30. Now the government’s plan to do a quick sale 
to Sask Wheat Pool has fallen through. Can-Oat Milling has 
withdrawn from taking over Canamino, leaving you in control 
over a business you know nothing about. 
 
Madam Minister, Saskatchewan people have their savings 
invested in this company, yet it appears the government doesn’t 
have a clue what it’s doing. My question is simple: what are 
you going to do? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome an opportunity to talk about the 
economy and the fact that there are more people working in 
Saskatchewan than ever before in our history. 
 
Now to get to some of the facts that the member’s alluding to. 
First of all, there are no taxpayers’ dollars involved in SGGF 
(Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund Management 
Corporation). It is not a government-run agency; it is money 
from foreigners invested in Saskatchewan. There is no reason 
why we should be politically interfering. No tax dollars are at 
risk. It’s an arm’s-length agency and the best decisions are 
decisions made by an arm’s-length agency. They can’t have it 
both ways; they can’t say when they don’t like what they think 
the result might be, that we should interfere, but in principle, 
independent agencies should be independent. We believe 
independent agencies should be independent all of the time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, your job is to 
ensure that Saskatchewan is known globally as a great place to 
do business. What about the people that have their money 
invested in this company? This is another example of the 
government getting involved in business and hurting those who 
actually know what they are doing. Now you’re running this 
company with no technical expertise. 
 
Since you exercised your take-over of the company, CEAPRO 
Inc., which owns 100 per cent of the common shares, has 
stopped funding Canamino. You obviously have no plan for the 
future of this company now that the Wheat Pool has backed out. 
This is the company that was on the verge of becoming 
successful and profitable, and a key component to value added 
industry for agricultural products. Now investors are 
threatening to sue you because of the damaging effects your 
actions have had on the company and their investments. 
 
Madam Minister, what message do you think this is sending to 
the ag-biotech firms that you’re trying to attract to 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, this is not 
a government agency. And it’s not taxpayers’ dollars; it’s 
foreign investors’ dollars and is an independent agency. 
 
But she asks a very good question which I want to answer. 
What are people outside of this province saying about 
Saskatchewan as a place in which to invest? I’d like to quote 
from the Investment Dealers Association of Canada, its recent 
report: 
 

The strong growth of recent years and this year’s 
projection of continuing economic growth are clear 
evidence of a more diversified, efficient agricultural sector, 
a more diversified provincial economy. 

 
The association credited the economic growth to sound fiscal 
management by the provincial government: 

 
The province, in our view, has moved consistently in the 
right direction for the last four years. 
 

Now if she would like some more quotes about what other 
agencies outside the province say about Saskatchewan as a 
place in which to invest, I have them here for her and we can 
continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Additional Hiring of Nurses 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
government was forced to take a step in the right direction 
yesterday when it announced the addition of 200 nurses to the 
health care system. However, many people are questioning 
where the government is going to find the nurses to address the 
areas most in need, such as acute care and critical care needs. 
 
In the Southwest Health District, CEO Alan Ruetz says he’s 
having trouble attracting nurses to Shaunavon, particularly for 
summer relief. He says it may result in the present nursing staff 
providing on-call services. 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

My question is to the Minister of Health: do you support the 
notion of nurses providing on-call service in our hospitals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that the question that he asks about how we’re 
going to recruit nurses in the province is one that we’ve been 
speaking with with the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association, one that that we’ve been speaking with SUN 
about, Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, and have been speaking 
with SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) about as we look at enriching nurses across the 
province. 
 
And I appreciate the member’s comment. Now it’s two days 
consecutive that both he and the member from Thunder Creek 
stand up and say that it’s a wonderful decision that’s been made 
by the government of the day to enrich the number of staff that 
we have in Saskatchewan. And we support that position as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that we’ll continue to work 
very closely with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, with the 
Saskatchewan association of registered nurses as well, the 
Department of Education, and Health, to ensure that over the 
next several months we put together a strategy that will add 
additional nurses to work in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, I notice that the minister 
avoided the question — that is, is he in support of on-call 
services by the nurses? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke with Shaunavon’s two physicians today 
who used less than flattering words to describe even the thought 
of nurses providing on-call services. They say such a thought is, 
among other things, preposterous, unthinkable, naïve. These 
doctors say when life-threatening situations present themselves 
at hospitals, it is imperative that a nurse be on duty at the 
hospital — not on call. Mr. Minister, this makes a mockery of 
your so-called health reform process. 
 
You plan on meeting with the Southwest Health District Board 
next Monday. What will you be telling the board, Mr. Minister, 
and what immediate action are you taking to ensure this issue is 
resolved and health services do not even sink further under your 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite that when I meet with the district health board, I’m 
going to be saying to them what they’ve been saying to me. 
And the member opposite should be paying attention to this 
because it’s in his riding. 
 
The members on his district health board are applauding the 
fact that they’re getting a new facility in your district. Soon in 
Shaunavon you’re going to have a new facility of which your 
district health board has been promoting, of which you weren’t 
even a part of . . . in on the initial opening, Mr. Member. And I 
say to you, that’s what the individuals in your community are 
going to be saying. 
 
Recently the members from your community, when we opened 

the Ponteix facility again — and the services have been 
enriched substantially — they say to us that they’re very 
pleased about the services that they’re receiving there. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, what you should be doing is 
you should be going out to your constituency and promoting the 
quality of health care services that are being enriched on a daily 
basis rather than taking your dog and pony show around the 
province, which you lead and you chair, trying to dismantle 
health care in this province instead of working to enrich it. 
 
And I say to you, you need to change your attitude; you need to 
change your style and start to promote the services of health 
care in this province as opposed to taking it apart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it 
interesting that the minister would try and take credit for the 
addition to the hospital of some nursing home beds when it’s 
been a 17-, 18-year fight. Before you were ever involved in 
politics, there were good people out in Shaunavon fighting for 
that and now you’re putting forward the position that you don’t 
even have to have staff in that facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears the nursing shortage is not limited to 
hospitals, as residents of Shaunavon nursing home found out 
yesterday. The nursing home in Shaunavon has a policy that a 
registered nurse must be on duty at all times. Yesterday two 
nursing aides were advised there was no RN (registered nurse) 
to cover the night shift. They refused to work unless a nurse 
was on duty, so finally the director of nursing for the district 
had to cover the night shift. 
 
Mr. Minister, any team needs depth in building its line-up. And 
our nurses and doctors are no different. You say 200 nurses will 
be added to the system. Where, Mr. Minister, are you going to 
find them and what are you doing to ensure that they go to areas 
in desperate need and when? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that the addition of 200 nurses to the province of 
Saskatchewan; the addition of additional physicians to the 
province of Saskatchewan, which is the rural physician program 
last year, 26 new positions; the increase of additional funding 
for positions, of which $5.5 million to rural on call; another 
$1.3 million to emergency services to rural Saskatchewan — all 
of those accomplishments, Mr. Speaker, have been done by this 
government alone. 
 
An investment of $1.72 billion in health care in this province by 
the people of Saskatchewan. Not one additional penny from 
your friends in Ottawa — none. And I say to the member 
opposite, if you’re objecting about the quality and level of 
services that we have in the province today, you should be 
putting your pen to paper as the member opposite from you, 
from Ottawa, to Ottawa and say to them, you need to help 
enrich the funding in Saskatchewan rather than being critical, 
Mr. Member, of the services that are provided across the 
province. Could you do that? 
 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Infrastructure Maintenance 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for SaskPower. The last several weeks 
we’ve been talking about SaskPower rates in northern 
Saskatchewan and now we run into another problem — the 
infrastructure of SaskPower throughout the North. 
 
On September 17, 1997, Dean Anderson was repairing street 
lights in Cumberland House when the power pole he was 
climbing broke off at the base and fell to the ground, killing Mr. 
Anderson. Instead of globe-trotting boondoggles, instead of 
rewarding NDP friends and insiders with fat severance 
packages, will the minister admit that his government’s policy 
of taking more and more money from SaskPower is a mistake? 
And that it has hurt SaskPower’s ability to at least maintain its 
Saskatchewan-based infrastructure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that the unfortunate accident that he refers to, 
I’m sure that it would be fair to say that all members would 
share in the grief that the family has towards the individual 
involved in the accident, there’s no doubt about that. 
 
As to the issue, Mr. Speaker — if the member from Wood 
River would quit heckling on this important issue where there’s 
injury of an individual at hand, and he has the lack of courtesy 
even to listen to the answer — I would say that obviously 
infrastructure is truly important in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Earlier today we were in Lac Pelletier 
announcing the infrastructure expansion to the natural gas 
program. 
 
In total we procure in the province of Saskatchewan about $1.2 
billion in goods and services for our Crowns. In terms of 
expansion of the system, over $300 million will be spent this 
year alone in the province of Saskatchewan improving the 
systems that our Crowns use, but I would argue that the 
thousands of men and women who work in the Crowns provide 
the best service in the world at the most reasonable costs. And 
any other argument to dissuade . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 

Child Prostitution 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday I 
stood in the House and stated to the Minister of Justice that 
major financial deterrents are needed to effect an end to the 
sexual abuse of children through the child prostitution trade. 
 
Now I want you to think about this. If Saskatchewan had the 
legislation in place that I put forward, pimps and johns could be 
fined $25,000. It would take 30 fines to raise the $750,000 that 
the government and in fact the taxpayers have dedicated to help 
street children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a $25,000 . . . or just the threat of a fine of that 
magnitude would clear the streets of pimps and johns a heck of 

a lot faster than a $500 fine and a slap on the wrist. In addition, 
the money from these heavy fines paid by the perpetrators could 
and should be used for healing programs and safe house 
programs and relieving the taxpayers of that burden. 
 
Mr. Minister of Justice, recognizing that the elementary law of 
supply and demand operates . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now the hon. 
member has been extremely lengthy in her preamble and I’ll ask 
her to go now directly to her question. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister of Justice, 
will your government finally take initiative and show some 
courage by imposing major deterrent fees on pimps and johns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in reference to the 
member’s Bill which is before the House, I want to report to the 
House today that it will be my and our intention as government 
to take her Bill and use it as a part of a significant consultation 
with people across the province over the next coming months, 
looking to whatever might be appropriate legislative change in 
our next session. 
 
I want to say to the member and invite her to . . . and I know 
she has the document, the summary document that came from 
the conference which was held in Victoria, drawing together 
young people, children, who’ve been involved in the trade on 
the streets. In the covering — I don’t have it with me so I can’t 
quote it exactly — but in the covering note, that document says, 
and these are the children who say this to us, that the process is 
as important as the product. We need to engage in the process, 
engaging Saskatchewan people, engaging communities, 
engaging the children before we develop the product. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the minister for 
that response, but I ask you to please centre on what I have 
asked. I’m talking about supply and demand. I’m talking here 
about eradicating this horrific crime. These are steps that can be 
taken in spite of anything else and everything else that is being 
done. 
 
Other provinces, Mr. Minister, have taken these steps. We have 
been talking about this now for three years. Why does it have to 
go into another year? We need your response, your immediate 
response now and this year. Mr. Minister, will you please take 
the necessary steps, put in place what can be done immediately, 
and help the children that are really suffering on the streets of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as the member well knows, 
there are many things which are happening on a very immediate 
basis. Those things are happening in the communities of 
Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and elsewhere in our 
province. And there will be further announcements of activities 
which will be happening in the next few days and weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our assessment of legislative penalty, and trusting 
some of the best legal advice that we’ve been able to assemble 
around these questions, tells us that we’re in some conflict with 
the Criminal Code of Canada and therefore would be threatened 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

with having such laws simply thrown out of court at the first 
occasion. Mr. Speaker, we share with the member a desire to do 
whatever we can legally to protect children on our streets and to 
take those adults who would abuse the children on our streets 
off the streets. 
 
Finally, let me also remind the House that today if any adult is 
found abusing a child on our streets, it’s not simply a 
prostitution charge it is a child abuse charge. Because it is child 
abuse that we’re talking about here, not as apart from adult 
prostitution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 225  The Saskatchewan Regulatory Reform Act 
 
Ms. Draude: — I move first reading of Bill No. 225, The 
Saskatchewan Regulatory Reform Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 747 — The Naming of Northern 
Municipal Airports Act 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 747, An Act to enable Northern Municipalities to Name 
Airports within their Boundaries be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 748 — The NORTHERN Act 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 748, The New Organized and Rigorous Transportation, 
Housing, and Economic Renewal of the North Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day 
pursuant to section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, I table the 
Provincial Auditor’s 1998 Spring Report. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 1998. 
This Bill is the result of this government’s decision to review 

and modernize Saskatchewan’s financial services legislation. 
Members will recall that The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 
1997 was passed in the last session of the legislature. A new 
Credit Union Act has also received second reading this session. 
The amendments before this House today were developed in a 
manner consistent with the principles that guided the 
development of The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 1997 
and The Credit Union Act, 1998. 
 
The Bill before us today deals with phase one of the review of 
The Saskatchewan Insurance Act. Phase two will focus on 
extensive amendments to the balance of the Act. Planning for 
phase two is under way. The proposed amendments deal with 
changes that needed to be addressed at this time. 
 
The first amendment addresses immunity and corporate status 
for the insurance councils. While the current legislation 
establishes the Saskatchewan insurance councils as the primary 
regulators of insurance agents and brokerages, it does not 
provide the councils with corporate status nor does the 
legislation extend the same statutory protection commonly 
extended to other regulatory bodies. The insurance councils 
have requested that these changes be made. This Bill also 
introduces provisions which reinforce and update the 
supervisory and enforcement powers of the Superintendent of 
Insurance and the insurance councils. 
 
The existing legislation does not provide the superintendent and 
the councils with adequate powers to regulate compliance with 
the Act. For example, under the current legislation the only 
remedies available are cancellation, suspension, or placing 
conditions on an insurer’s or agent’s licence. Although these 
remedies are appropriate in certain situations, they do not 
effectively address all situations which may arise. 
 
Further, many of the provisions we are examining today are 
more than 30 years old. The insurance industry has undergone 
significant change in the past three decades. For example, the 
penalties for contravention of the Act are no longer an effective 
deterrent. Fines under the existing legislation range from $25 to 
$200. Modernizing this legislation requires that the Act includes 
a range of remedies, updated fine amounts, and improved 
penalty provisions that are comparable to those available to 
other regulators. 
 
This Bill provides a range of remedies allowing the regulator to 
respond more appropriately to infractions under the Act from 
minor incidents to more serious breeches. In addition, Mr. 
Speaker, we have incorporated administrative law principles to 
ensure that companies facing sanctions are provided with an 
opportunity to know and respond to the case against them and 
to be heard by the regulator regarding the appropriateness of the 
sanction. The modernization of these powers is important to 
ensure the superintendent and the councils are in a position to 
act effectively and provide the consumer protection intended 
under the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s Bill also addresses concerns regarding the 
use of consumer’s confidential information. With the increasing 
use of new technology such as telemarketing and the Internet, 
the ability to pass consumer information back and forth has 
increased. 
 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

Consumers have increasingly expressed concerns about the use 
and disclosure of their personal information. The Bill before 
you is designed to ensure that the personal information which 
consumers provide to insurance companies is used only for the 
purposes that the consumer designates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments also address the important 
consumer protection issue of tied selling. Tied selling occurs 
when consumers are forced to buy products that they may not 
need or want in order to obtain a product they do need. The 
amendments prohibit the sale of an insurance product as the 
condition of the sale of another product. Consumer groups have 
expressed their support for the inclusion of these provisions in 
the legislation. 
 
Further amendments clarify and modify the appeal provisions 
under the legislation. Technical amendments are also made, 
many of which address issues that have been identified by the 
industry. A number of these amendments are made to 
harmonize the provisions of our legislation with the legislation 
of other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in reviewing this legislation we have consulted 
extensively with industry, consumer groups, and other 
governments. I appreciate the time, effort, and cooperation 
which these groups have contributed to the development of this 
Bill. This Act carries out the first step in a much needed 
modernization of this important piece of provincial insurance 
legislation. It provides increased consumer protection and will 
ensure the continued smooth operation of the existing Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few comments 
before I would suggest we adjourn this piece of legislation and 
allow for some further, not just debate, but research to go into 
the piece of legislation to determine whether or not the 
legislation exactly meets what the minister’s been telling us the 
reasons for the Bill. As I understand it, the insurance brokers 
are indicating that it makes simple housekeeping changes, but I 
think there are some significant changes as well in the Bill that 
we certainly need to keep our eyes on and need to take the time 
to address and look into very carefully. 
 
One of the things that I believe the Bill does do is enhance the 
role of the Superintendent of Insurance and also clarifies the 
duties of the Superintendent of Insurance. It sets out the 
superintendent’s statutory authority to request all relevant 
information needed to perform his duties under the Act and set 
out a reasonable time frame when any such information must be 
turned over. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s appropriate in order to allow 
the superintendent certainly to carry out his duties and meet any 
requests or any suggestions that have been brought to his 
attention that he needs to follow up on. He needs to have the 
access and needs to be able to set time lines so that he’s not left 
in a position where six months down the road someone is 

coming back and was asking the superintendent, what have you 
done in regards to this question, is the concern we’ve raised. So 
I think that’s certainly something that’s appropriate and proper 
to be in the Bill. 
 
The Bill also ensures confidentiality of information, requests by 
the superintendent, but does under certain circumstances allow 
him to share the information with the police. If there’s 
information that would be required it would be of a nature that 
would suggest that maybe it’s appropriate that the police be 
informed if a request is made. 
 
The Bill also allows the superintendent with the minister’s and 
consumers’ consent to bring action against insurers practising 
misleading or deceptive conduct. And one question, I guess, 
that needs to be asked at the end of the day is why the 
minister’s consent is needed? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you look at the Bill, the Bill also gives the right 
to appeal a decision by the superintendent to the Court of 
Queen’s Bench, and that allows that to be expanded. It also 
prohibits the sale of an insurance product as a condition for the 
sale of another product, and currently the legislation does not 
allow the people to sue insured persons for economic loss. 
 
Under the new legislation and under this Bill, it now includes 
that. And I think, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure many people on many 
occasions have attempted or would love to have at least got 
some of the loss they incurred but haven’t been able to, and I 
think this is a positive move. 
 
It also allows the superintendent to refuse to reinstate an 
insurance licence in the case where fees and costs attributable to 
an investigation have not been paid. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 
an area that we want to look at very carefully. 
 
If indeed fees and costs attributable to an investigation have not 
been paid, and the reason they haven’t been paid is because the 
person that assessed the fees was not guilty, then you would 
have to ask why would you be going after them if indeed they 
were fees that were used to defend their innocence. 
 
We want to make sure that the legislation certainly deals with 
people fairly and doesn’t impede people’s rights or 
responsibilities. It also strengthens privacy provisions and 
insurance councils under this Act are given corporate status. It 
is made clear they are not representatives of government. I think 
that’s certainly appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The more we can do to remove government from areas of direct 
responsibility or direct involvement, the more I believe at the 
end of the day that we will provide an avenue whereby 
consumers can feel very comfortable with, whether it’s 
insurance companies or other business companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re looking at here is direct involvement. 
We’re saying governments need to regulate but they don’t 
always necessarily need to control and be directly involved. 
And I think that’s appropriate. 
 
With these few comments, Mr. Speaker, however, I believe we 
need to take more time to consider the legislation. Therefore at 
this time I move to adjourn debate. 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
move the second reading of The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1997 this government undertook to review its 
policy with respect to the payment of grants in lieu of taxes to 
the cities. One of the matters identified was the surcharge . . . or 
by the surcharge is the amount that may be added to the account 
of SaskPower customers in cities and towns and villages and 
remitted as payment in lieu of taxes. 
 
The municipal surcharge is collected monthly but was remitted 
yearly or half-yearly. In response to this direction, it was given 
to SaskPower to remit the municipal surcharge payment 
monthly commencing October 1997. This has been done since 
that time. 
 
This Bill will simply amend section 36 of The Power 
Corporation Act to provide SaskPower with the authorization to 
remit payments monthly effective October 31, 1997. 
 
Accordingly, I move second reading of The Gas Inspection Act, 
1998. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, here again 
we have a piece of legislation that looks very simple and the 
minister says is very positive. There’s a few positive things 
about the legislation. No doubt about it. The fact that 
municipalities can now look to receiving payments on a 
monthly basis rather than a yearly basis is certainly a positive 
move. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the fact that 
municipalities have been looking for a number of years for 
grants in lieu of property taxes for government property, it’s 
unclear how this is the case since this isn’t new money. And I 
guess the question we have to ask here, when we get into 
further discussion and debate and questions in committee, is 
what this does to address the questions municipalities have in 
regards to grants in lieu of taxes, and whether or not this piece 
of legislation supposedly meets some of the requirements. 
 
Now the fact that SaskPower will be sending . . . changing the 
method in which it pays its municipal surcharge, while on one 
hand it’s positive, it’s on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, we need 
to look very carefully to make sure that indeed this is money 
going directly. And if it’s money going to . . . that it’s new 
money, not just another method whereby the governments say 
we’re now giving municipalities some more funding but on the 
other hand they may remove it from another avenue or another 
source so at the end of the day the line stays the same or the net 
return to municipalities is zero. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be appropriate 
that we take time to address this and to look a little more 
seriously and a little more closely into this piece of legislation. 
While it looks very simple and straightforward, I think, Mr. 
Speaker, it demands some time by the opposition and scrutiny 

of the piece of legislation. Therefore I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of An Act to amend The Crown Corporations 
Act, 1993. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, does two main things to the Act. First it 
will give the Crown Investments Corporation the legislative 
authority to make grants to subsidiary Crown corporations with 
the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. Second it 
will eliminate the mandatory requirement that the minister 
responsible for a subsidiary Crown corporation serve as 
chairperson of that Crown’s board of directors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first amendment will address some of the 
housekeeping that we need to do. On July 23, 1997 Crown 
Investments Corporation obtained an order in council. This 
order in council gave CIC the authority to provide up to $8 
million in grants to the Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
while it was going through a restructuring period. Upon further 
examination, we have determined that The Crown Corporations 
Act, 1993 must be amended to provide CIC with a specific 
authority to make grants to STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company) or other subsidiary Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were acting in good faith when we proceeded 
with the approval of the order in council last year, and we were 
acting on the advice that the term “cash advance” in section 
6(1)(f) of the Act included grants. When we concluded that this 
was not technically correct, we took immediate action. 
 
We stopped providing grants to STC and we began preparing an 
amendment to the Act to specifically allow for grants to 
subsidiary Crowns. We wanted to be certain that we had clear 
legislative authority before proceeding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment we are introducing will correct the 
misinterpretation of the Act, it also ensures any grant of more 
than $50,000 to a subsidiary Crown must be approved by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council. This amendment does not 
change the nature of assistance to STC which was announced 
last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, STC needs this financial assistance so it can 
remain solvent and continue to provide jobs, and more 
importantly, service to the people of Saskatchewan. The 
assistance is essential, no matter whether it comes in the form 
of a grant from CIC or from the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people need and want a 
provincially owned bus company — that was clear in the 
discussion/debate that went on in 1996. They understand the 
financial challenges of operating such a company in a province 
where the population is spread out and distances are far. 
 
None the less during the Crown review they told this 
government that STC must take action to operate more 
efficiently. The financial restructuring that is taking place at 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

STC is addressing that concern. Grants from CIC will help the 
company remain solvent during this restructuring period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second amendment we are introducing today 
to The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 is a direct result of the 
Crown review I just mentioned in 1996. During the so-called 
“Talk About Saskatchewan Crowns” public hearings in 1996, 
people raised concerns about the potential of political 
interference in our Crown corporations. They said one way to 
change that perception would be to remove the requirement that 
cabinet ministers chair individual Crown boards. They said it 
would be more appropriate to designate a Chair from among the 
members of the board other than a cabinet minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government agrees with this proposition. 
 
We have six cabinet ministers on the CIC board of directors and 
this board oversees the decisions of the individual Crown 
boards and gives direction. As well, decisions of the Crown 
boards are scrutinized by the Crown Corporations Committee, 
members who sit on that committee are members of the 
legislature, and ultimately decisions are approved by cabinet. 
 
With these checks and balances in place, we see no need for 
cabinet ministers to remain as the Chair of boards of directors 
of our Crown corporations. We believe those roles can better be 
filled by qualified people who have so graciously agreed to 
serve on individual boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment follows through on a commitment 
made by the government and we first made this commitment 
last June in a document called “Saskatchewan’s Crown 
Corporations: A New Era.” This document was the 
government’s response to the Crown review and we later 
restated our commitment in a release to the public. And now we 
are following through on that commitment. 
 
This amendment also includes the necessary clauses to amend 
the legislation of the Crown corporations affected by this 
change. Mr. Speaker, it pleases me then to move second reading 
of The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again a 
few comments regarding the legislation and the Bill presently 
before the Assembly. The minister talks about the fact that one 
of the things this Bill does is remove cabinet ministers from the 
board of directors of Crown corporations. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, for a number of years people have 
been asking and felt that it would be certainly appropriate and 
probably de-politicize the whole issue of Crown corporations if 
cabinet ministers were not directly involved in an area of 
directorship or on a Crown board or even as the government has 
done for the past number of years, the current government, of 
putting cabinet ministers as Chairs of the boards of Crown 
corporations. 
 
We have seen certainly just recently some of the problems that 
can arise. The Channel Lake fiasco is a good example of how 

Crown corporations can run amok. And the fact that we had 
cabinet ministers involved on the board of CIC and certainly 
involved in SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, shows very clearly that 
even their involvement did not necessarily mean that . . . 
doesn’t mean that Crown corporations will not make mistakes 
or may have run into situations where we have the Channel 
Lakes and the taxpayers are left footing the bill at the end of the 
day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess when we look at this, however, you’re 
talking about removing ministers from the board and certainly I 
applaud that. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that there are a lot of 
positive, solid business people throughout this province that 
could be invited to sit on boards of Crown corporations to give 
some real business-like leadership to our Crowns to make sure 
that they do indeed meet the objectives of the Crowns and their 
reasons for existence. One of the questions that we certainly 
will want to pose to the minister is how appointments to Crown 
corporations’ boards of directors will be made. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at the Chair of 
the board, it might be appropriate to allow the members of the 
board to elect their own chairman from within their board after 
you’ve put the board in place, therefore they have control. 
 
I would hope, Mr. Speaker, though that we do not face the 
situation down the road where Crown corporation boards are 
taking a lot of criticism for some of the hits that corporations 
may face as a result of . . . being publicly funded, publicly 
responsible due to economic times not necessarily able to meet 
all the demands put on them. And the government just using 
them as a scapegoat, as we see with health boards where, if a 
decision is made that is not something positive, the Minister of 
Health and the Premier will blame the health district board for 
the decision; something positive — the government takes the 
credit. I would hope that isn’t something that will happen in 
regards to Crown corporations. 
 
The minister talked about the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, suggested that we need to continue subsidies to this 
Crown as a result of the fact that it has so far been unable to 
operate in the black — in fact continues to run a fairly high 
deficit — and if it wasn’t for the subsidies certainly would have 
discontinued existence a number of years ago. 
 
The minister’s comment that back in 1986 the public said, Mr. 
Speaker, that we do need and we should have a public 
transportation company within the province, I would suggest to 
you — and I’m sure even members of this Assembly who are 
on the road — more times than not in watching the STC buses 
roll by you can barely count anybody sitting in the buses. You’d 
have to ask yourself if indeed if this is such an important 
service, why aren’t people using it. 
 
And the other question to be asked is: is one of the problems 
that we’re facing the fact that we do have other companies 
operating throughout the province? Other companies that 
possibly could provide assistance and provide a service 
probably more economically to the people of Saskatchewan 
rather than continue to subsidize a publicly-owned bus 
company that certainly is not in a position to even operate and 
keep its head above water without government subsidies and 
taxpayers’ dollars. 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

So it certainly appears to me to be, Mr. Speaker, that while the 
Bill before us, the legislation, has some very positive notes to it, 
there are a number of questions that certainly arise from the 
piece of legislation and questions that we would look forward to 
addressing at a later date as we get into . . . as we move forward 
into committee. 
 
However, I think there are a number of issues that we need to 
look at a little more carefully in preparing ourselves for that 
work in committee. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I feel it’s important that we 
don’t just move this into committee today, but it’s appropriate 
that we adjourn this piece of legislation. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I now move to adjournment of debate on Bill No. 54. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 49 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 49 — The 
Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1998 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few short 
comments before allowing this piece of legislation to move to 
committee. As noted earlier, the Bill amends legislation putting 
in place the mechanisms for the government social service 
reform that has been announced recently, and because the 
federal government Revenue Canada will be administering the 
child tax benefit, a couple of changes were necessary. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the other day when I spoke to this I brought some 
concerns in regards to that, and certainly we’ll want to raise 
some questions, some more questions with the minister as we 
get into committee. 
 
First the Act was amended to allow the provincial government 
to enter into agreements with the federal government. Second, 
this section of the Act dealing with notices of decisions: for 
example if Social Services was to determine there was an 
overpayment, there’s a certain process to follow with change to 
be consistent with federal legislation. And in that regard I don’t 
have a problem. 
 
I believe it’s certainly appropriate that we have some 
consistency across the piece, especially when you’re dealing 
with third-party agreements and certainly federal agreements 
with provinces and how you administer funds and how you 
follow up to determine whether or not taxpayers’ money is 
certainly being spent wisely. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as well, notice of decision is explained 
above to . . . the Saskatchewan employment supplement 
program will be specified in the program and regulations, not 
the Act, to allow for greater flexibility for the department in the 
future. 
 
And I understand when you move to regulations, what it does, 

Mr. Speaker, certainly allows for . . . if changes are needed it 
allows for a quicker turnaround rather than waiting for the 
Legislative Assembly to sit and that particular piece of 
legislation to be brought before this Assembly and the changes 
discussed and eventually passed. So that certainly seems to be 
positive. 
 
At this point however, we’ll need greater clarification from the 
minister during Committee of the Whole. Although we certainly 
agree that flexibility is an important element of any program, 
we are concerned about allowing this government to continually 
govern by regulation. That’s a concern that we’ve raised with a 
number of pieces of legislation, where we seem to be moving 
more and more areas of responsibility into regulation. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, one of the problems we have in this 
province right now is the fact that we’ve become too overly 
regulated to the point that in many cases, for individuals and 
businesses, we are stymied in our ability to move ahead because 
of regulation. But there are places for regulation. There are 
places where government needs to make sure that there are 
sufficient regulations to make sure that the rights of individuals 
are protected. 
 
Generally there is nothing in this legislation we are not 
supportive of. There are questions to be dealt with in 
Committee of the Whole and I think we can make the point that 
although these are good first steps we need to go much further 
to break the welfare cycle in this province. 
 
One of the first things we must do then is create a vibrant 
economy so people have jobs to go to. And that’s an issue that I 
raised originally and it’s an issue that the Saskatchewan Party 
continues to hold to, the fact that we need to create an avenue 
within this province that allows individuals who have ideas for 
businesses to continue to function. And that’s part of the red 
tape I was talking of earlier, that we don’t so overly regulate 
people that it takes away the incentive to establish and set up 
businesses. 
 
Or even for businesses that do a lot in this province but right 
now continue to have headquarters outside of the province 
because the rules of business that we continue to have in this 
province discourages them from coming to this province to 
invest. And that, Mr. Speaker, means that while they are not 
investing in the province in a major way, while they put some 
funding into the province, we do have a lack of job 
opportunities. 
 
As a result of those lack of job opportunities, we have 
individuals who are forced to, at the end of the day, turn to 
social services and to welfare. And I find, Mr. Speaker, most 
people would prefer to work at a good paying job and be able to 
support their family rather than look to welfare. 
 
So in regards to The Saskatchewan Assistance Act, we do have 
some questions we want to raise with the minister in Committee 
of the Whole and we look forward to that opportunity. 
However, at this time I don’t see any point in upholding any 
further movement of progress of the piece of legislation. Thank 
you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 44 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 44 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1998 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
whenever we discuss any issues having to do with 
municipalities we are concerned because of the severe and 
constant funding hits delivered to local governments courtesy of 
the members opposite. 
 
Municipalities have been devastated financially by the 
government. So when I look at this Bill the first question I ask 
is, will this cost the municipalities more money? If it does cost 
the local governments more money to meet pension 
requirements, how much more? Where are they expected to find 
this cash? From the provincial government? I doubt that very 
much. 
 
That being said, we don’t begrudge municipal employees an 
improved pension plan. This Bill will improve benefits for 
about 2,500 municipal and school board employees. These for 
the most part are hardworking men and women and they 
deserve the security. Their jobs have been made all the harder 
given the stresses put on them by the decisions made by this 
government and its policy of downloading. However, Mr. 
Speaker, I feel at this point we can ask our questions in 
Committee of the Whole and see no reason to hold this Bill up. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 45 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 45 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act has actually two parts to it that we have 
been discussing. The first part actually scales back the 
insurance offered by SGI for snowmobiles. We now have the 
policy only covering liability for snowmobile owners. This is 
something that was discussed to great extent last winter when 
the snowmobile owners were afraid that they were going to be 
de-registered and it caused considerable concern. This now 
allows them to have the liability insurance and the option to buy 
property coverage. 
 
We had a couple of suggestions that were brought forward to 
the government at that time, and that is suggesting that 
premiums be put up too so that . . . raised so that the owners of 
the snowmobiles could actually ensure that they would have 
coverage if there was an accident. And we also suggested that 
they inspect snowmobiles before licences were issued, and that 
would have also give some coverage and also would have 
ensured that there wasn’t . . . that the premiums were never . . . 
weren’t paid on . . . or we didn’t have to pay out for 

snowmobiles that were maybe not fit to be driven. 
 
But the government has opted to only cover for liability 
insurance, which means that now owners are going to have go 
out and buy separate property coverage. The snowmobile 
association accepted this change and it’s something that 
probably will be looked at again in the future. 
 
The second part of the Bill allows SGI to withhold someone’s 
driver’s licence if they are guilty of a property crime until such 
time as they pay restitution to SGI for their crime. Now this 
means to us that the government is trying to look proactive on 
the problem of crime, and youth crime in particular. We support 
any actions that might help reduce crime; however we question 
whether this will actually do anything to prevent crime. 
 
I don’t believe anyone thinks that a youth who is brave enough 
to steal a car in the first place will stop because he might not get 
his driver’s licence later on. A 13-year-old that’s in the process 
of stealing a vehicle I can’t imagine is going to stop in his 
tracks and say, gee, in three years from now I might not get my 
driver’s licence if I do this; maybe I’d better stop. I say it’s an 
action that we definitely question. If he’s stealing or breaking 
into a car, it seems certain that he’s not too concerned about the 
laws we have right now anyway. 
 
The government’s new-found love for getting tough on crime is 
laughable. A year ago the Minister of Justice stood up in this 
House and told us he didn’t think it was a major issue. And now 
all of a sudden, everybody’s jumping up and down to address 
people’s real concern in this regard. And this is the best we 
could come up with. I hope this is just the first step in the 
government actually taking property crime seriously. 
 
(1500) 
 
It’s interesting to note that this Bill only addresses the issue of 
restitution to SGI. There’s nothing in this Bill that’s . . . to talk 
about restitution to victims of crime who have to fork out things 
like a $700 deductible that we were faced with last weekend 
with a man who had to pay to SGI for a vehicle that he was . . . 
he had a collision with when attempting to stop a bank robber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things we would like to 
discuss in this Bill, but we would at this time send it to the 
committee and discuss it later. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call the first subvote I’ll invite 
the minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sitting to my 
right is my deputy minister, Brian King; just to my left is the 
executive director of logistics, planning and compliance, Bernie 
Churko; directly behind me is executive director of corporate 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

information services, Lynn Tulloch. And Barry Martin will be 
joining us shortly, who is the executive director of engineering 
services. 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And good 
afternoon, Madam Minister, and I want to welcome your 
officials here today. Madam Minister, my counterpart from 
Cannington had asked questions the last time we had Highways 
estimates up, so bear with me if I also repeat some of his. And 
I’ve been reading Hansard to get some of your answers. And 
some of my questions actually are very close to his but I would 
just like to re-ask them maybe in a different way because they 
may affect something different. 
 
But some of the concerns that I have had brought to me in 
letters that I have had wrote to me, there seems to be a 
misunderstanding out there that if someone does damage to 
their vehicle on one of the highways, whether it’s a pothole or 
whatever it is, who really is responsible? Now in some respects 
I understand SGI will look at it, and in others, unless I’m 
misinformed, maybe even Highways themselves. So could you 
maybe give me an overview of what process these people take. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, as I’d said previously, there 
are three types of claims. The one type of claim, if we are 
definitely at fault — there hadn’t been signage or if there had 
been some reason that we were at fault — we would pay the 
damage cost. 
 
The other type of claim is where there was no fault that we 
could identify on behalf of the roads and so on, that would go to 
an insurance claim then. 
 
And there are some in which maybe there’s some, you know, 
kind of that grey area in which we sit down with the person and 
we try to negotiate then a settlement. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So, Madam Minister, if someone hits a hole 
and busts a wheel off their car, who would they go and see 
then? You’re saying really in that case probably SGI? If there 
was markers up and, as you said, if there was flags there and so 
on, then probably it would be an SGI problem, would it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, yes. If the damage or the 
condition of the road was clearly marked and the person, you 
know, hadn’t followed that marking, it would be an SGI claim. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Does the 
Department of Highways carry liability insurance or is that 
strictly at the peril of the Highways department to cover these 
costs, or is there a liability insurance on the side that covers 
situations like this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, no, we don’t carry any 
liability insurance. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, another concern and I’ve had it happen to myself in 
fact on two occasions last year — when the Highway crews are 
out there and they’re patching and they do put a . . . surface it 
with oil and then they come along and put the gravel on it. And 

I know in the past few years, I’ve seen them go back then and 
they sweep. You know, as it starts to dry and it’s packed in, 
they sweep off the excess gravel. And for some reason last year 
on more than one occasion — and I had actually two stone 
chips myself and I’ve had others bring it to my attention that 
this year — it seemed like . . . or last year it seemed like that 
wasn’t happening like it was before. And I know the two 
different times myself . . . and I can use by Fort Qu’Appelle 
was the example, but you know I’m not specifically picking out 
that highway crew there. 
 
But I’ve had it brought to my attention in other areas where the 
excess stones were not swept off. And I know in my case I have 
two stone chips to prove it, and I’m sure if I have, many others 
have. 
 
And I guess my question is why is that happening and is a 
windshield covered in that case? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, okay, the understanding here 
is that on the high volume roads sweeping would be done 
sooner than on a low volume road because part of the treatment 
actually — and both should be signed — is that you drive it . . . 
to put it into the treatment, the stones and so on. So they should 
be signed. 
 
We could actually get you the detailed policy on that. But how 
soon it’s swept and so on depends on the volume of traffic. But 
part of that treatment is that it’s actually the impact of putting 
the gravel into the treatment itself. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — That’s what I thought, Madam Minister. I 
understood . . . that’s what I had thought would happen out 
there. I guess in the cases that I’m talking about and maybe it 
only happens once in awhile, but it is a concern for anyone, 
especially if you buy a new vehicle and you get two or three 
stone chips right away on your windshield. 
 
And I know in the case . . . and I can’t verify it both times that I 
got a stone chip that it wasn’t marked, but I know once in 
particular there was absolutely no marks, and I knew they had 
been working on it because I’d come in through that way, and 
then the damage was done. And I mean, you have no 
forewarning. You know that there’s work being done out there 
in the last few days and all of a sudden you get a stone chip. 
 
And I don’t think it matters, Madam Minister, as you know, I’m 
sure you’re well aware, how fast you’re driving; it really 
doesn’t have much to do with it because in that new tar or, you 
know, in the last few days if the temperature is warm it picks 
up. 
 
(1515) 
 
Madam Minister, is there any kind of an arbitration board then 
if someone has a problem out there, and SGI for an example 
really doesn’t want to deal with it, it says it’s not really their 
responsibility, is there any kind of arbitration board or, for lack 
of a better word, ombudsman or somebody that people can 
actually go to and try and have someone arbitrate whether they 
get any coverage or not with the Department of Highways or 
who it really should go to? 
 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I’m just . . . I forgot 
something in the last question. I was going to mention this that 
the policy hasn’t changed … like last year wasn’t different in 
whether the sweeping when it occurred than other years 
previous. 
 
On the case if there’s damage done to a car in which a person is 
trying to deal through the Department of Highways it would be 
our area managers that would first deal with that person. Now if 
that’s not satisfactory it does kind of move back up and we’ll 
also then have him go to the executive director of the region 
and he can eventually get to the deputy minister. 
 
But we are looking at reviewing the whole policy and 
wondering . . . looking at the possibility of a third party or a 
mutual party trying to arbitrate some of these pieces. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m glad to 
hear that because I think it has been a . . . It’s a problem for us 
as MLAs out there because we know that’s happening more and 
more. And I’m sure it must be a problem for you because in 
many cases we have nowhere to turn but to write to you or take 
your time. And I guess by talking to . . . you’ve mentioned the 
area managers and executive director. 
 
Possibly you could tell me like in our case if we have a concern 
brought to us as MLAs out there, who is the right person then 
should we see? Is it the area manager, executive director? Who 
should we go to, to try and get some kind of a resolution to the 
constituent’s problem? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — If the complaint hasn’t already been 
forwarded I would — I mean the first place is the area manager, 
they try to deal with it — but if it’s already come to you and 
that’s already been dealt with it might be then like I said kind of 
in that order of going to the executive director of the region or 
then up to the deputy minister. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And as a last resort, the minister, I would 
presume. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, another concern I have out there — and I 
know I’m not alone in this situation because there are others 
that have also talked about it — but how do you go about . . . is 
there an engineer on the job, say a section of highway now that 
you’re out resurfacing. You’re just starting to get going on the 
resurfacing projects. 
 
And my concern I guess partly comes back from when I was a 
reeve out there, and I know how we used to inspect the roads 
after they were built and you had final inspection, and before 
you would pass that road everything had to be exactly the way 
you wanted. It couldn’t have stones in the top section of the 
road and so on. 
 
And you wouldn’t pass that road unless you felt it was built to 
the standards it was supposed to be built by and engineered to. 
And you wouldn’t pay the final portion of the money to the 
contractor. You could hold back a certain amount of money if 
that road was not built to the standards that it was supposed to 
be and the contractor had agreed to build it by. 
 
I guess where my concern is, in some of the surfacing jobs that 

we’re seeing in the province right now — in my opinion 
anyway and maybe you disagree with me — is that there is a 
big difference between the quality of work that is being done 
out there by contractors. And I don’t know if you’ve seen that 
as I have, but I know some of my MLAs on our side here have 
certainly seen it, where one contractor will do just a splendid 
job out there; you can’t see the joins in the new pavement. As 
they do sections, you know, it’s nice and smooth. And for the 
first couple of years at least it stands up very well and you 
appreciate being on those roads. 
 
But there are also others, Madam Minister, and I think it is a 
concern because I’m sure that they are being paid whatever they 
tendered for, as well as the person that’s doing a very good job 
out there. And I guess my question is: is there an engineer on 
that job at all times, you know, to guarantee that the job is being 
done? I know in some areas where they’re putting sand 
underneath or — I call it sand, you may call it gravel — and 
then resurfacing the top, which seems to be a new idea and 
maybe going to work well. 
 
Is there someone there to protect our interests as taxpayers to 
get what we ask for out there? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Before the minister responds, I 
just would request the hon. member from Saltcoats follow rule 
28 and direct his comments through the Chair. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, Mr. Chair. On the surfacing 
question then, there is a person on site as the project manager 
all the time, if he or that person isn’t there, there would be a 
technician on site. And you say, as with the RMs (rural 
municipality) for a sign off that that whole project would have 
been . . . had to reach a certain . . . the quality or level that you 
know that they would be you know monitoring for. Now they 
can reject the project in which case then they don’t get the 
payment and they have to redo it or rework it, or sometimes 
there can be acceptance of a project which isn’t quite of the top 
quality in which you would want and there’d be a reduced 
payment because of that. So either it’s accepted or it can be 
accepted with reduced payment or it can be rejected. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Is there a 
number of times that the reduced payment happens, and you 
know maybe that goes hand in hand with what I’m talking 
about. But say in the last fiscal year, how many times would 
that have happened? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on the answer to this, we 
don’t have the specific numbers. I guess it can vary from 
sometimes a few hundred dollars or even on a million dollar 
contract where you have one piece, they break the work into 
small units, and they might be able to deduct a little bit you 
know if something wasn’t right on one piece of the work. 
 
But we would have to get back to you on more significant . . . 
like if you wanted specific numbers. But we don’t feel that 
there’s any significant difference in the last year, or this year, 
from you know the various years. They try the quality of 
services, we can’t see a big difference in it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, I 
certainly don’t want to get into specifics of which highways 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

were fixed to what I felt were good standards because I 
definitely don’t want to hurt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
construction companies that are involved and I don’t want to 
get into that at all. I was more concerned about I guess the job 
that we’re receiving for the tax dollars that we’re paying, 
Madam Minister, and I know in the RMs that was the biggest 
concern we as councillors and reeves had, and I’m sure it’s no 
different in this situation, just many more dollars are involved. 
 
And I guess what you’re saying is that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that it’s not . . . doesn’t seem to be any more common now than 
it was before. Maybe it’s just the certain roads that I’m driving 
on, but in the last year I really feel that I’ve been on occasion to 
drive on some that have just been repaired that I would really 
question about how smooth they are. And if those roads that 
have just been resurfaced, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and already 
have little ripples in them, how long is that going to last before 
they’re just about back to the point they were before. 
 
And I think when we’re paying, as you know, and you’re more 
aware of than I am, the millions and millions of dollars to repair 
these highways, we need quality work done out there, and I 
think that was my concern. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to go into a little bit different area 
now and the one highway, Madam Minister, I know this is 
really coming into and I know there’s many around the 
province, but it is No. 15 Highway from No. 9 over to 16 — 
and I just explained that’s from Melville across country there by 
Bredenbury. And it’s not the only one like that, there’s many in 
the province I believe like that, but that highway I believe was 
never built to a very good standard and it’s breaking up every 
spring and actually all summer. And the highway crews out 
there are having a tremendous time trying to just keep that road 
in any kind of repair. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Chair, the question I guess this time I have to 
ask is, are we getting to a point where we are going to be 
turning them back to gravel roads. Because I notice on that 
highway, because I travel it when I get caught and can’t go no 
other way, is that part of it’s gravel, part of it’s pavement. And 
once again I think the windshields and everything else come 
into call here. So highways like that, are we in the process of 
deciding should they go back to gravel or should they be 
repaired as pavement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, okay, first of all we are doing 
a tremendous amount of work on the number of kilometres in 
the highway system in the province, like over I think 30,000 
kilometres of highways. And we’re doing a lot of work both in 
intensive preservation and reconstruction. And you know we 
have 3,000 kilometres of a national highway that we’re looking 
at — that we’d hoped we can get some funding — about 8,000 
kilometres of provincial and 15,000 kilometres of the thin 
surfaced or the collector surface highway. 
 
Now in any of these pieces, like the piece that you’re talking 
about right now on Highway No. 15, Bredenbury to Junction 
No. 9, there is work going to be done on that piece of intensive 
preservation of around the 33 kilometres. And then Raymore to 
Semans, which is further on on that highway No. 15, there’s 
another piece — around 14 kilometres of intensive preservation. 
Now if other pieces still need preservation work, those will be 

done. 
 
And some pieces of highway on our collector system, and in 
that one as I’m told, it that it was built on maybe some poor soil 
conditions in some places, some alkali soil conditions and so 
on. And there are pieces in which we do put it to gravel for a 
period of time anyway to dry them out or look at conditions. 
 
And the other aspect is in planning. Now we don’t have any 
reversion program plan from the department, but we’re working 
with the area transportation planning committees to look at 
overall traffic patterns, where we do need to upgrade, where we 
may look at some truck haul routes that might be more effective 
as in a grid system. I mean we’ve got to look at all those pieces 
in what the future will hold throughout the province. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, in the case of No. 15 highway, why I’ve brought 
that concern forward today is that I’ve just been contacted by 
my local RM. And we have in the RM what we call the 
correction line. And you know as most RMs have names of 
roads, they call them . . . this is actually a correction line. What 
is happening now, the traffic and the heavy traffic is diverting 
from No. 15 about 2 miles over, going down a correction line, 
and they’re losing the road. 
 
And I guess my concern, and their concern I know is, that as the 
traffic diverts off of 15 because of the condition it’s in, the 
expense is falling directly with the RM. And that road at the 
present time will not be covered under any funding agreement 
with the government because it’s farm access. 
 
And I guess the real concern for the RMs . . . and I’m sure it’s 
happening in that area, it is happening in a number of areas. 
Madam Minister, there was a time and not that long ago that I 
would have said that we shouldn’t be turning these roads back 
into gravel. I would have said, Mr. Deputy Chair, that we 
should definitely be keeping them on an oil surface. 
 
Having looked in hindsight now and the condition of some of 
these oiled surfaces such as the road we’re talking about and the 
condition it’s in — and I’m glad to hear you say that some work 
is going to be done with that — but I guess, maybe you know, 
maybe there’s some point we might be better off having them 
back in gravel than having to go through this, you know, and 
having our constituents and taxpayers driving over this 
busted-up pavement all the time. 
 
Maybe there is a point that we would be better off having them 
back in gravel and I don’t think I’d probably have many of my 
constituents agree with me on that at this point, but I honestly 
feel there must be some point there where we have to give up. 
Either rebuild the whole road and put a base under it, such as 
this road . . . because we just can’t win on that road, and it’s just 
about impassable. 
 
So I would hope . . . and I would ask you to comment on this. 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I would ask the minister to comment on this. 
If you get to the point where you may consider putting some of 
these roads back into gravel, will a number of things be taken 
into consideration? Number one being the cost of gravel, the 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

distance you would have to go to get gravel. And I guess where 
another of my concerns comes is in our area, especially at 
home, and there’s many areas in the province getting to that 
point, where there’s a great shortage of gravel. And I know in 
our home area we’re going to end up hauling probably 60, 70 
miles to get good quality gravel in the very near future. 
 
And you know as well as I do who that’s going to cost. It’s 
going to cost the local taxpayers, but it’s going to cost all 
taxpayers because we’re going to be hauling that on the 
highway system. So I would hope you would take that into 
consideration too. Would that be possible? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I think in response to that, 
one of the reasons that we formed the transportation area 
committees is to do joint planning. And as I say from the 
department’s perspective, we do not have a reversion plan in 
place, but if it makes sense in areas . . . I think we’ve got to 
look at our whole system from the national, provincial highway 
system down to the collector roads and what’s happening in 
total areas. 
 
Part of that is the change in grain transportation; part of the 
pressures is some of the other economic development that’s 
occurring in the province, which is good news but it puts a big 
stress on the transportation system. And we do face that right 
from the farm access roads right up to the national highways. 
 
And so one of the initiatives is also they’ve been working with 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 
the Department of Highways and looking at what every road 
use is — part of the reclassification. Also setting up the area 
planning committees to look at are there ways in which we 
should be putting heavy load volumes . . . especially if we’re 
going to lose branch lines and so on, are there certain patterns 
of roads and where the traffic should go. 
 
If we have some of those becoming a heavy haul road, and 
maybe that is in the grid system, and we’re saving a thin surface 
highway because it’s still important for the school bus traffic 
and the ambulance and the, you know, lower weight traffic, we 
have to do some good thinking and good planning. And that 
involves not only the province but the local municipalities. 
 
And so we’ve been willing, and we’ve had some examples of 
where it’s made sense for heavy traffic to be diverted more on 
to the municipal system, in which it’s saving the highway 
system and that we can do some joint funding of maintenance 
on that to help out the RMs and so on, because it’s a win-win. 
 
So there’s a lot of work being done to try to coordinate how we 
can plan for the future to do the very best we can with the 
dollars we have. And even at the local levels they’ve recognized 
. . . I’ve been at many, many meetings too that there’s a lot of 
shifting going on right now. And they said maybe how we 
would have spent our dollars even a couple of years ago may be 
different than the way we want to see them spent now. 
 
So we’re really open to working with local area planning 
committees, with the RMs, the towns and areas, to sort out 
what’s the best in the interests of the economic development, 
also the social needs of our communities, tourism, all of those 

pieces. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d just like 
to get you to elaborate a little bit then and ask the minister, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, about the reclassification that you talked about. 
Can you elaborate a little more on it? Because I understand 
from what you’re saying that RM roads, as well as secondary 
highways all the way up, would be part of this program. What 
kind of a classification . . . Like how is it going to work and 
how will it be in conjunction with the RM roads? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, the reclassification is just . . . 
(inaudible) . . . a lot of preliminary work has been done. But it 
is working with SUMA, SARM, and the province. And to 
reclassify, these are all of the roads, like I said, right from a . . . 
like a farm access up to the national highways road system. And 
we’re working really closely with them. 
 
And the classes are based on really management being able to 
look at their use and so on, and what kind of management and 
cost it would be also to maintain those different classes. So it 
looks at their function. And now it also will look at, even 
though it might be a low volume road it may have very 
important social implications because it’s an important road to a 
health centre or something like that. 
 
So there’s a lot of work being done. It’s at a fairly preliminary 
stage. I know SARM and SUMA have presented it at their 
conventions, just kind of the general outline. There will still be 
a lot of work done on that. But I think one of the other reasons 
and goals for it is that then we can understand, if we can finally 
kind of classify the system, that we have some understanding of 
what kind of level of service and what that will be at the 
different class levels. And then we would after all of that is 
done . . . also of course it comes down to how will those be 
funded. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, I’d like to ask the minister, when you set your priorities 
for a year, and I know you have it and I haven’t got it with me 
right now, but the highways that you’re going to . . . your plan 
is to work on this summer, how are those decisions made? 
Because I know in some of the areas, in my area it really kind 
of makes you wonder sometimes how you decided to fix this 
one and leave this one over here. 
 
And my phone rings right away. As soon as you start working 
on . . . I’ll give you an example. And I know the road needs 
working on; I’m not disagreeing with you there at all. But from 
Canora to Kamsack I believe you’re doing a section of that 
highway. I can’t remember the number. No. 5 west. And I 
believe you’re doing some work there and that’s great; the road 
needs it. But go one step further past Kamsack and go south, 
and I believe it’s No. 8 Highway heading south to Wroxton. 
 
And I get more complaints out of that piece of road I think 
probably than I do in any in my constituency. And I can just 
hear what’s going to happen when I see work being done on the 
other highway and not touching the other one over there. You 
know, I know it’s going to happen to me and I’m sure you’re 
going to get some of the feedback too, Madam Minister. 
 
How do you decide which roads get priority and which don’t? 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, do I . . . Okay, I’ll keep 
answering. Okay, on that question then on maintenance of 
roads, we use an asset management program. And so the 
specific piece that was asked of me on . . . like No. 5 Highway, 
it may look in better condition but it’s also a larger investment. 
And they also are . . . They analyse them each fall and this one 
needs to have the investment made in it so you don’t lose 
dollars, a larger amount later for when it needs to be fixed. 
 
Where Highway No. 8 would be a thin membrane surfaced 
highway, a little less investment, it may look in a little worse 
shape, there will still be maintenance done on it, but they have 
to kind of balance the kind of volumes that are on the roads and 
also the investment that’s already there. And so sometimes 
pieces of the system will be fixed that look like they’re not in as 
much need of repair but it actually preserves the investment, 
and in the long run it makes dollars . . . it makes wise use of the 
dollars being spent on our highway system. 
 
On any of the capital construction and new construction, we do 
a benefit/cost analysis on it and we priorize projects with that 
and of course you’re always considering other pieces in that, 
like the importance of how much twinning you can do each 
year, with economic development and other priorities within the 
province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Minister, I 
would like to continue on, on the costing and the analysis of 
where you do your work, and I would like to focus a little more 
specifically in my area. 
 
In your analysis or in this year’s budget, is there any allowance 
taken for the type of winter that we have? For example in my 
area in Highway 41 last winter, I received very few complaints 
in the spring about the type of the highway and it seemed to me 
to be an extremely severe winter. You would expect that with 
the snow loads and all the rest of it that went on and the 
temperature that we had last winter it would be a severe winter. 
This year, by contrast I’ve received an infinite number more of 
concerns about Highway 41 and it seemed to me that that would 
be out of sync. 
 
So the question I have specifically is, has your department 
noticed a great deal more problems with things like frost heaves 
and things of that nature this spring as compared to a so-called 
normal winter and spring? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. You seem to be very 
observant on that. It was a milder winter and we actually were 
surprised that there was still a significant amount of heaving. 
 
And I guess what they were saying is that the frost, actually in a 
year that there’s not as much snow coverage and maybe is even 
milder, it actually penetrates deeper. And it actually then gets 
into moisture farther down in the soil and so that comes up. And 
actually we had a surprising amount of heaving this spring that 
we wouldn’t have thought normally, because it was a milder 
winter. But that seems to be the explanation. 
 
Now when there is this extra heaving we do then start targeting 
more dollars in, because you could never actually predict 
exactly which roads in the spring will receive this amount . . . of 
kind of damage. But then dollars are reallocated to try to repair 

those roads. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, I accept your explanation 
if we’re talking in the middle of a field, because the snow then 
stays on the field and insulates the ground from the frost 
penetration. Surely you’re not telling me you left all the snow 
on the roads over the course of the winter and therefore the frost 
penetration varies. We’re talking a situation where there is no 
snow on the roads and a good winter or a poor winter, so how 
would that be the explanation. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, Mr. Chair. Okay, we do keep the 
snow off of the surface of our highways and roads. But the 
ditches fill in with snow and that’s the insulation, like the 
blanket that’s around them when you have a heavier snowfall 
that we didn’t have this year. And so there is that kind of an 
insulation effect. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, again I have to take some 
difference with you. It’s sort of like saying a bald man doesn’t 
have to wear a hat because he’s got hair over his ears. Madam 
Minister, the top of the highway is exposed. The frost goes 
down from that point; it doesn’t come in from the ditches 
surely. And so it shouldn’t make any difference in terms of the 
top of the highway if the frost is going down. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Actually, you 
know, I have a science background here so this is getting kind 
of interesting. But the whole . . . I think the issue here is the 
winters that you have snow — and I don’t have an engineering 
background but this is what . . . and it does make sense —that 
there would be snow in the ditches and also up the side slopes, 
which would be insulating. Now if the snow isn’t along that 
side slope, the frost tends to penetrate into the soil then deeper. 
And that’s . . . at least that’s the explanation in which the . . . I 
guess the theoretical explanation — but that’s the explanation 
too from the . . . that the engineers would say that they think we 
experienced last year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I would like 
to use one of the letters that I received from constituents, a 
particular concern about Highway 41. And it’s a concern I have 
as well and I’ve travelled on that road last spring. When I went 
to Saskatoon from Melfort on the highway, there were a number 
of severe potholes, let’s call them that. And I have to give the 
Highway department some credit in that through the course of 
the day, or in the morning or early afternoon, they attempted to 
do some grading to stabilize them, if you like, for a better word. 
When I came back at night in the dark, because of the traffic on 
the highway and perhaps the big trucks, they were again severe 
potholes. 
 
My question is, is the signage adequate in those kind of 
circumstances because when you’re travelling in daylight you 
can see a flag or a red sign fairly easily. At night when it’s dark, 
it’s much more difficult and in essence the severity of the 
circumstances change through the course of a day. How do you 
reconcile those issues from a signage and a safety perspective? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, there’s two things there: that 
we do monitor roads in which those type of conditions . . . on a 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

daily basis; and we’ve worked on improving the signing policy 
so that there’s more than just maybe the little triangle or the flag 
right at the pothole. But that if there’s a severe stretch of road, 
that there would be a sign up that would say, the next number of 
kilometres, you know, slow down because of the potholes, or 
you know, that there’s work being done. So we have tried to, I 
think, make sure that the public is aware of the type of road 
condition that they’d be driving on. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, because people become sort of 
complacent if you like, in the springtime because you see a 
certain sign and you drive over the pothole that it’s flagging, 
and it’s not too bad. And another time you see the same sign 
and you drive over the pothole and, you know, you’re almost 
knocked out of the car because it’s a very severe pothole as 
compared to the last signage. 
 
And in many instances people become complacent, not 
knowing what the severity of the pothole may be, from a minor 
bump to a crater, as described in this letter. Is there a 
methodology that the people might understand that clearly 
identifies the expected severity of the pothole? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I think, as I said before, Mr. Chair, that 
we don’t have I guess different types of signs for different 
levels of potholes, because what is done, I mean, is that if it’s a 
pothole we want people to slow down and be very cautious on 
it. They are trying to be monitored. If it’s a severe break, those 
are monitored probably twice in a day, and that they try to get 
them fixed within three to four days after that. 
 
So I would hope that the people of Saskatchewan, when we 
have signage out, you know, that they would drive accordingly. 
And certainly if there’s something, a permanent spot or 
something that’s of some kind of danger, a bump say before a 
railway or something like that, those have permanent signs. 
 
But these other pieces, we don’t get the different criteria. What 
we do want is to have them flagged; people should slow down 
and be cautious; and we try to get them repaired as soon as 
possible. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Madam Minister, I think in the instance that 
I explained, on Highway 41 this spring, there must have been a 
very severe kind of acknowledgement of the problem because 
the grader was parked right in the ditch next to the pothole. The 
only thing I missed — it might have been the break — was the 
operator to run out there and keep grading it in between every 
vehicle that went by. 
 
And part of the problem . . . and seeing a vehicle go by . . . are 
these large grain trucks and large trucks that are on the road 
right now. You could see literally the situation dramatically 
changed with one vehicle going over that location. Is that not 
the kind of thing that’s severe enough that needs more 
long-term repair in order to prevent those kinds of potholes 
from being that unstable? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, now I think there’s definitely, 
I mean, concern. And if you say if there’s one big truck, it can 
do considerable damage especially if there is . . . I would hope 
it wasn’t during time that there were road bans on and that there 
weren’t overweights on that — and I think that’s another piece 

that’s extremely important in our budget, that we have 
compliance and that we work with the trucking industry 
throughout the province in order that we keep the right weights 
on the right roads at the right times. 
 
The other piece is though, I think what we’re seeing here is an 
example too, of a branch line in that area that it hasn’t been 
abandoned yet but it certainly . . . we’re starting to see the 
increased truck traffic out of that area on the highway system 
and it’s certainly something in which it does amount to a lot of 
stress on the road system. 
 
And I would hope, as we’ve seen here at different private 
members’ days, in which we would still get support from both 
opposition parties, in that we should have had, first of all, a 
moratorium on rail-line abandonment during this important 
review, but that the stress that will be on our road system, that if 
we’d see the number of branch-lines abandoned, will be a 
tremendous challenge to our province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam Minister, 
while we’re talking about potholes and I’m just talking of some 
preventative measures, last fall it was brought to my attention 
that No. 1 had — No. 1 Highway just west of Broadview, just 
over the overpass of the tracks there — had some areas that 
certainly looked like they had potential for break-out before the 
spring. And I chatted with the department, chatted with 
officials, and I had people respond to me and say, there really is 
no problem there, took the time to drive the area. 
 
What was being brought to my attention was three different 
areas, very close, probably within a quarter mile section, almost 
all of them were in the middle of the road where you could see 
the pavement was already starting to break and starting to push 
up. 
 
Yes, it hadn’t broken open yet, but the concern was the fact that 
would be one of the very first areas that would break up come 
springtime and the results were actually that they were. In fact I 
would have to commend local highways officials for being out 
there very quickly, even before it really got very warm, because 
they really start to break out very quickly. 
 
And I was wondering, Madam Minister, what is the policy of 
the department? When you see areas where you can tell that 
there’s an area that will break out, you’re in later in the fall, it’s 
still nice enough, wouldn’t it be appropriate at that time to 
address and make sure that that piece of pavement is 
reconstructed so that you don’t have a problem early in the 
spring before it really gets mild enough to get out and address 
it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I think if the weather conditions permit, 
our department does try to do as much work as they possibly 
can still in the fall, and if some of those kinds of pieces are 
noted. We actually were able to last year to put an additional 
$10 million into our budget because we did have a good fall, 
recognizing that a lot of significant work could be still done last 
fall. 
 
And so those things are brought to the attention, through the 
different areas, the Department of Highways workers and so on, 
seeing these kind of pieces, and we try to constantly manage 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

this huge asset that we have across this province in 
transportation. 
 
So if there’s a good fall and we’ve got the dollars and we can 
identify problems, we try to do the work. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well I guess, Mr. Chair, what I’m saying, Madam 
Minister, is the fact was this was brought to the attention but 
nobody really did anything. The comments that came back to 
me were, we didn’t notice anything out of the usual on that 
particular stretch. 
 
And I thought, just for my own information, I took the . . . 
basically, it’s on my way a lot of times driving. I drove and the 
first time I missed it too. But then I noticed, taking another 
drive over it, because I called the two individuals that had 
called me, I called them back, and they said well, yes there are 
breaks there; the area is going to break. And I spotted that. 
 
I guess the concern I have is that nothing was really done last 
fall when it was brought to the attention of highways and the 
results were this spring . . . early break-out. And that’s a major 
highway and then you’re coming into that intersection — or not 
the intersection — but you’re coming to that overpass where it 
tends to have some congestion at times, and I think it was 
important because of the location of those spots. 
 
So I guess what I would say in the future — Madam Minister, 
you indicated that every attempt is being made — I think we 
need to just look a little more closely, even earlier in the fall. If 
there’s areas that look like there’s potential problems . . . areas 
early in the spring, even before it gets nice enough maybe to 
address those, to make sure that those little boils don’t turn up 
breaking open. And certainly this past winter, as mild as it was, 
some of those started to crumble even a lot earlier, I think. So 
it’s just a matter of keeping on top of it. 
 
Madam Minister, in a couple of areas of particular interest 
certainly in the Moosomin constituency, our Highways 47, 48, 
and No. 8 south of Moosomin. Now your department will be 
aware of the fact that there’s upgrading being done on No. 8 
north of Fairlight. I forget; it’s about 7 miles I believe —about 
13 kilometres, and 3 or 5 kilometres west on Highway 48. 
 
Madam Minister, I’m wondering where we are with the project 
right now and whether or not you’re going to move further with 
that project. Because one of the problems that’s arising, and the 
department will be aware of this, with the Sask Wheat Pool 
terminal being put at Fairlight, basically it was put in an area 
where we’re dealing with two highways that were in very poor 
shape. And as a result of that volume of truck traffic both 
moving north-south and east-west, while there’s improvements 
close to the terminal, those two highways are taking quite a 
beating. 
 
And certainly when you get No. 8 south of Moosomin, you get 
into the valley area. You get into an area with a lot of large 
truck traffic where it creates a very unstable situation as a result 
of large trucks and smaller vehicles on a very narrow top 
highway. 
 
So I’m wondering, Madam Minister, what the department is 
doing to address the other areas of both No. 8 and No. 48 as far 

as further construction on those two areas of highway. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, in response to that, first of all 
of course some of the work that is being done is the work 
through the CAIP (Canada/Saskatchewan Agri-Infrastructure 
Program) funding. And also the other piece that you talk about 
on Highway No. 8, we’re putting in significant dollars too for 
some intensive preservation, but it will . . . it’s I guess rated 
very high over the next five years on a significant kind of work 
being done there. 
 
But I think one of the pieces that needs to be . . . I think 
everyone needs to recognize, is the number of terminals that are 
being put up in the province, the consolidation of the 
grain-elevator system, the branch-line abandonment, is having 
tremendous pressures on our road system right across this 
province. 
 
And when I’ve had an opportunity to meet with the grain 
companies, and I know that they will put significant investment 
in, that often they might have invested 8, $10 million and 
they’ll talk about the kind of road work that needs to be done, 
and we might be talking $20 million in an area or more. And so 
because of the kind of rationalization and the speed in which 
this is happening, it is difficult to respond to all of it as quickly 
as possible. 
 
We talk of course again, like I said earlier, on area planning. 
Let’s make the best decisions that we can with the dollars both 
provincially, municipally, and of course as I say before, I would 
hope that the federal government would be putting in their 
dollars also into our province both on national highways but 
also on the huge stress that we’re seeing on the infrastructure 
because of the change which is happening from rail to road. 
 
We also think it’s extremely important this year still with the 
grain transportation review, that we get changes in the Canadian 
transportation Act which allows for true competition, which 
allows for short-line . . . friendly type of legislation in which we 
can have short-lines run in this province which will help to meet 
then some of the pressures that we see on our road system. 
 
Also in talking with the grain companies though we also speak 
. . . we talk as we have with other industries in the province on 
partnership agreements. And I know grain companies will say 
to me, well we need the system changed from secondary 
weights to primary weights. We just cannot respond to all of 
these demands as quickly as possible, and certainly if there was 
some dollars being put in, in which grain companies could also 
contribute, we could respond to improving some of the 
infrastructure related to the terminal locations in this province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, you mentioned that the 
project down at Fairlight is under — I think you called it the 
CAIP program — is this an ongoing program, or will there be 
more funds available under this program for further highway 
maintenance, repair, and construction? And also, Madam 
Minister, I would suggest to you that when you look at No. 8 
south of Moosomin it needs more than just an upgrade of the 
surface area. It certainly needs . . . I think it needs the same type 
of work that’s being done on No. 8 just exactly north of 48 — 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

the current construction where they’re widening the top of the 
highway and then surfacing it. 
 
So I guess, Madam Minister, my question to you is: how many 
more dollars are available under the CAIP program, and is there 
an application already put forward to extend the construction on 
both No. 8 and No. 48 in that vicinity? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on the CAIP funding, there 
will still be this year’s allocation and my understanding is there 
will be one more year left in that funding. That is, remember, 
dollars that came back as part of the Crow benefit pay-out to 
producers. So it was just dollars really targeted back to the 
province through that benefit; so it’s producer dollars that are 
going into grain dependent road systems. 
 
Now we submitted as a province over a hundred million dollars 
worth of projects and we only get allocated to the provincial 
system somewhere between 24 to $25 million worth of projects. 
 
So that just shows some example of . . . it’s almost a drop in the 
bucket when we look at the type of dollars that need to be spent 
on our road system due to the changes in grain delivery patterns 
in this province. 
 
So there’s 84 million was allocated to the province all together. 
Somewhere around, I think, 24, 25 million, maybe 28 million, 
something like that was allocated to provincial . . . We, like I 
said, submitted well over a hundred million dollars worth of 
projects. 
 
Now the CAIP committee is made up of, again, representatives 
from the federal government, from SARM, SUMA, and the 
provincial government. And so also the local municipalities are 
applying then for those dollars. So there’s probably at least one 
more year of projects that will go to that committee and they 
will decide which projects will get allocations. But there will be 
significantly more projects put in than what the CAIP funding 
will be able to meet. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, so what you’re 
saying then as far as any further construction or upgrading of 
No. 8 and No. 48, at this point, there isn’t any, or you don’t 
perceive that there will be any further construction in the near 
future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, as far . . . the CAIP 
committee would decide. An application could still go in and so 
they may still be eligible for other funding for upgrading of 
some of those roads in that area. 
 
But on our provincial basis, Highway No. 8 is a high priority 
for us to continue on as a provincial government separate from 
CAIP. And so I think that you’ll be seeing, you know, 
significant work there within the next five years to try to 
complete that work all the way up to Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister and Mr. Chair. I 
think certainly people in the area, living along Highway No. 8, 
would certainly be pleased to hear that. 
 
As I look at your budget this year, Madam Minister, and the 
previous minister talked about $2.5 billion over 10 years which, 

if my arithmetic is correct, is about $250 million a year. This 
year we’re up to 218; we’re falling short by 32 million. It seems 
to me that unless we get up immediate . . . or get up to 250 
we’re going to . . . we’re basically now at a point where you’re 
looking at about $260 million a year just to catch up to that 
10-year, $2.5 billion figure. 
 
Now if you had even $250 million, Madam Minister, it would 
certainly give you some leverage to address some of the 
concerns out there. And rather than saying 5 years down the 
road for No. 8, which is I’m guessing now in the neighbourhood 
of 10, 12 miles left, that’s a long time to look at that period of 
highway to be upgraded. And I would hope that the department 
would look at that a little more favourably. 
 
I was pleased to hear your comments about it being a priority. 
And for the sake of the traffic up and down . . . As you’re aware 
of the fact there’s . . . it’s not just grain terminals, Madam 
Minister, it’s just the safety of the public moving up and down. 
Because just in the last three years that we’ve actually seen two 
terminals, one on the north end, one on the south end of that 
particular stretch of highway. So we certainly appreciate what 
has been done. 
 
But I think most people are saying and hoping for . . . especially 
when you go through the Pipestone valley area with the hills 
there and how narrow the top is at that particular section. I 
know for a number of people, and just travelling there myself, 
many times you hope you’re over top of the hill before you 
meet someone because it’s so narrow and people tend to crowd 
the centre line rather than getting over to the side. So it would 
be certainly pleasing to see construction in that area continue in 
that area. 
 
Another area, Madam Minister, and your officials will be very 
familiar with it, is No. 47 north-south. I believe last year there 
was some resurfacing was done on No. 47 north of Grenfell — I 
don’t know if it quite went to the valley, to the Qu’Appelle 
Valley — and I’m wondering if there’s further resurfacing, the 
surface had come apart. But the major area certainly south of 
No. 1 between No. 1 and No. 48 and 47, in that area last year. 
 
In fact, Madam Minister, if I was going across country in my 
constituency, I didn’t take 47. I found the gravel or the grid 
roads tended to be in better shape. Now it’s not that I’m asking 
you, Madam Minister, to allow this to fall into a grid road, 
because I think people would be certainly disappointed if it did. 
But what is the status of No. 47 at this point in the Highways 
budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, Mr. Chair, there is work being 
done on Highway 47 . . . 10 kilometres south of Junction No 48 
is one of the pieces that is designated for intensive preservation. 
Grenfell to 20 kilometres south and of course then further south 
yet, Estevan to 3 kilometres south. But those were all 
designated kilometres. I think that’s well over . . . well that’s 
over 30, 32 kilometres of intensive work being done on 
Highway No. 47. 
 
I had the opportunity actually last year, I was out on Highway 
47 and Highway 48 out in that area, and it’s as you say, I mean 
there’s a lot of . . . It’s sitting down I think with areas, area 
planning is going to be an important part of all of the 



1252 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

decision-making but there is a tremendous amount of work 
being done in that area. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I thank you, Madam Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
Madam Minister, if I heard you correctly you’re saying that 
there’s . . . what you’re saying is intensive preservation on 47 
south of No. 1 down to 48 and then south of 48. When you’re 
talking of intensive preservation, what exactly is intensive 
preservation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, well intensive preservation, it 
involves actually increasing the overall surface strength quality 
of the road segment. It has strategic treatment combinations put 
in place, and so it’s not upgrading to a new level of surface but 
a lot of work is done on it to reconstruct the level of the road in 
which it should be at. 
 
So it’s more dollars, much more dollars being put in, which can 
go anywhere from in the dollars . . . here it says anywhere from 
oh 5,000 to $20,000 per kilometre depending on the kind of 
treatment that’s done on intensive preservation. So it’s major 
work being done on the piece. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam Minister. So in 
other words it’s a little more than patchwork. As I gather and 
what I’m hearing you saying and when you’re talking of more 
major work, if there’s a major area of breakup and a pothole 
developing, tearing that out and putting in, building it up and 
making sure that it’s upgraded so that it can withhold, I’m 
gathering that you’re going to have some kind of a surface, 
probably a cold treat surface. Is that correct when you talk about 
intensive preservation that you would put on that? That you 
would do the whole surface of the road or are you doing it just 
in a patchwork mode? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, intensive preservation as it 
says, depends again on the road that you’re doing it on. But you 
will be doing . . . you will be fixing up weak spots, you will be 
bringing it back to a condition again, depending on the type of 
road it is. But you’re not upgrading the road; but what you are 
doing is repairing it to a good standard on it. 
 
So it’s much more than potholes; you’re fixing weak spots. It’ll 
depend on the volumes again on that road and so on, on what 
kind of treatment that gets done on each piece of road. But 
you’re not upgrading it to a different level of road. 
 
Intensive preservation though can be where you resurface, it can 
be reconstruction of that piece if there’s a weakness there. So it 
involves a significant work to bring it back to that standard. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, I guess when you’re talking 
significant work, and I know that of your officials that are here 
with you today I’ve had a chance to chat with some of the 
gentlemen coming in from Yorkton. There was an area he was 
responsible for and I was hoping once he moved up that it 
would be an area that would really be a priority. 
 
But I would like to . . . when we talk about 47, we talk about 
break up, one question I would ask, Madam Minister, is 
especially . . . okay just using 47 as an example because of so 

many break ups of the surface, do you take that surface in the 
upgrading and kind of rip it up and redo it, repack it so that it’s 
indeed all moulded together or is it just done in spots as you 
upgrade areas that are really broken up. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, well I think it’s . . . as I said 
before, it’ll depend on each road but it is usually then 
reconstruction. And definitely there’s times, if it’s 2 to 3 
kilometres, that it would be . . . you know, the surface would be 
taken off, it would be reworked and redone. If there’s 
significant stretches in which they need to build the grade up 
and it needs to dry out, it maybe then becomes a gravel surface 
for a year — try to get it dried out, then put the surfacing on the 
next year. 
 
There’s different treatments depending on the conditions and on 
each section. But this kind of work is certainly well beyond the 
regular maintenance and preservation work that is done on other 
pieces of highway. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Madam Minister. Because I 
think that’s what most people are looking for at the end of the 
day. I don’t know if people are particularly all that concerned 
about the fact that we do a patch here and maybe a half a 
kilometre here and a kilometre down the road, but take the time 
to indeed do some aggressive long-term work, even if that 
means a little bit of extra gravel for the time being as you allow 
that piece of roadway to settle so that you can indeed put the 
surface on that will last for awhile. 
 
And if that’s the route that Highways is following and if that’s 
. . . I think if we just explain that to the general public, let them 
know this is what our intention is, but in order to achieve it, this 
is the route we have to follow. 
 
I certainly commend the department for taking those steps and 
following a procedure that looks at the long term, because the 
facts are we can’t keep coming back to the 47’s or the 48’s or 
the No. 8’s. I think we need to build . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — 312. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And my colleague says 312. There’s just too 
many roadways in this province to continue to every year have 
to address the same question. So the more we can look at 
building towards the long term, the better off everyone in 
Saskatchewan is going to be. 
 
Everyone’s been on my case about bringing up my particular 
points. I have one more — No. 1 west of Wolseley. And we 
talked about twinning. I’m wondering, Madam Minister, where 
you hope to be come fall in regards . . . Are we just going to be 
basically following and completing the engineering phase and 
tendered contracts, or is there going to be actual construction 
begin on twinning of No. 1 east of Indian Head? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — On that section of the twinning, we will 
be then contracting it out. We expect to have dirt moving this 
fall. So you should see dirt moving this fall if everything goes 
well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, one more question. I know I said one 
more question, but just a point in closing. And I appreciate the 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

fact that what you’re talking about for No. 1 and the twinning. 
And certainly I agree with you, Madam Minister; I think it’s 
important as well for the federal government to recognize its 
responsibility when it comes to the national roadway structures 
in this country. 
 
I think and I firmly believe that the province can certainly give 
some leadership. But at the same time the federal government, 
the federal Liberal Party, has to recognize that if they’re talking 
about a national unity, they’ve got to recognize their 
responsibility in helping maintain national roadways such as 
No. 1 and the Yellowhead when you look at the traffic flow and 
the number of people, all kinds of Canadians, who travel on 
those highways. 
 
And so it’s important that continues to be raised and I guess it’s 
important that Mr. Goodale begin to recognize he’s our only 
voice here in order to speak on behalf of the government . . . of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
One question in closing though. That last question is, Madam 
Minister, I’m not exactly sure whether your department has any 
influence or whether it comes under your department, but it 
would seem to me that for all the four-lane highways in this 
province that there might be time to and appropriate to consider 
in the near future bumping the speed limits a little bit such as 
we see in other provinces on well-maintained good four-lane 
highways. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. There is a 
number of things I would want to just comment on and from a 
previous comment too is that we do understand our $2.5 billion 
commitment. And that we will continue to ramp up the budget 
and we will meet that $2.5 billion commitment. And I have to 
agree with the member opposite on that I do believe the federal 
government has abdicated its responsibility and that 
transportation really is a unity issue. 
 
And it’s one of the things in which when the rail system was 
built across this country that pulled this country together. There 
are certainly some strong north-south pulls right now. And if we 
can’t keep strong east-west connections I think it’s, you know, 
it’s unconscionable. I think there’s a moral obligation of the 
federal government to make sure that we have a national 
transportation system. 
 
And as we see all other countries, developed countries, as we 
see our neighbour to the south in the national funding that they 
put into their roads and they’ve just announced a continued 
national funding on interstates called the ISTEA (Intermodal 
Service Transportation Efficiency Act) agreement which is 
hundreds of billions of dollars that they’re going to be putting 
into interstate connections across that country. And we’re 
getting zero dollars from our federal counterparts. 
 
And so I think it’s extremely important, that our local 
governments are affected by the conditions to the road system 
of which we see with branch line abandonment, the changes in 
the Crow benefit, in which it took hundreds of millions of 
dollars out of this province, and we’re getting zero dollars back 
to compensate for that. 
 
And we have that effect on the provincial system. We see the 

federal government opting out in not only roads but in 
navigation, in the airports. And so I agree with the comments 
that you’ve made on that. 
 
On speed limits, it’s certainly something that we would need to 
consider. If we have good four-lane highways, should we be 
considering changing the speed limits — I think there needs to 
be discussion on that. 
 
I think one of the things though we always have to recognize is 
that speed is one of the biggest factors in fatalities, in the kind 
of accident rate that speed is one of the biggest contributing 
factors. So we have to look at the safety conditions but also 
what would be good for the public in this province. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
Madam Minister. I’d like to follow up on a couple of issues that 
you’ve already discussed briefly this afternoon, Madam 
Minister. 
 
In your 1998-99 construction project you identify, I think, four 
key areas as to where highway projects will be located. You 
talk about grading and you talk about surfacing; you talk about 
preservation resurfacing, and then you talk about intensive 
preservation. 
 
I think you’ve expanded a little bit on intensive preservations, 
and of course the first category, grading, new construction, 
you’ve mentioned Highway No. 1 and what might be happening 
there as far as earth moving. 
 
Could you expand on the other two areas especially, Madam 
Minister, in terms of what people would expect to see as the job 
completion. If we’re talking about surfacing or we’re talking 
about preservation resurfacing, what’s the difference in those 
classifications and what kind of jobs would we expect to see as 
a result of a highway in one category versus a highway in the 
other category. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, I think, Mr. Chair, if I’ve got the 
question correct, is you’re asking, okay what does strictly 
surfacing mean. Like there’s grading, which is done on a new 
piece of road, I mean, being built. Then surfacing would be the 
treatment that’s being put on top of that. New grading 
resurfacing would just be when a pavement or whatever needs 
to be resurfaced, where it would be taken off and new surfacing 
placed on that. 
 
So surfacing is a new piece of road where resurfacing is taking 
a piece that needs new surfacing work and it’s taken off and 
redone. And that would range . . . and the cost of resurfacing 
averages about $80,000 a kilometre. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Then let’s 
spend a little time on the resurfacing aspect. You’ve indicated 
on resurfacing that you’re replacing the surface that already 
exists. Who would determine which highway falls into that 
category versus intensive preservation? I think you’ve indicated 
to my colleague that Highway 47, Highway 48 are in that 
intensive preservation column. What will determine which 
highway is in the resurfacing? 
 
And the second question, Madam Minister, you indicated that 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

there would be a new surface driving on — and I’ll use 
Highway No. 5 as the example that travels through my 
constituency. We’ve seen examples of different surfaces placed 
on Highway No. 5. One continuous piece of highway, but we 
see what I call a hot mix laid down, hot pavement; then we see 
cold mix, then we see sand seal, and then we see something 
else. 
 
What kind of criteria is followed by your department officials to 
determine what piece of road is going to receive what 
treatment? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, I thank you for that. Mr. Chair, on 
the resurfacing, resurfacing is what you would do on your major 
structural pavements. And so that would be like a Highway No. 
10 that you would do . . . what would be in that category would 
be the resurfacing; those would be the thick, structural 
pavements. 
 
On our thin surfaced highways, on the collector system more, 
those pieces if there is even . . . even if they do a resurfacing, 
that is called intensive preservation — those would be down in 
that level. 
 
Now there may be different treatments, again, depending on the 
volume and they try different mixes and different ways 
whether, you know, along so there may be, like as you’ve seen 
on Highway No. 5, different types of treatment in different 
sections. They’re always trying to use the most appropriate 
treatment for the volume of traffic and to extend the life as 
much as possible. 
 
And of course that all comes into asset management and their 
benefit/cost analysis and the work that they do on which pieces 
. . . what is being done on which pieces of highway. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order, order. Stand that . . . 
Order. Hon. members, there is becoming a drone in the room 
and I just ask that all conversations be ratcheted down a 
significant number of degrees. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Madam Minister, as I was indicating, on your listing you’ve 
indicated that Highway 5 will have a couple of projects in fact, 
and one is the completion. And I guess I want to follow up on 
your explanation about what type of surfacing is being done as 
well as a follow-up on my colleague’s comments, the member 
from Saltcoats, regarding when you finally are approving that a 
job is completed. 
 
I understood your answer to say that there is a hold back from a 
contractor of course until the job is completed. And I would 
refer you to the section of No. 5 from . . . you have it down as: 
“complete east of Clair to Watson.” 
 
That was the section of highway, Madam Minister, that was 
under construction last year. It looked like it was finished and 
then it fell apart. And I want to tell you, Madam Minister, that I 
even have had a bus driver for Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company, the STC, travelling from Saskatoon on No. 5, who 
had stopped to tell me, like, what has happened? This road was 

supposed to be completed. 
 
The question that he had was: did this contractor get paid, and 
was he paid completely for that job because it really wasn’t 
completed. And I notice that you have it down on your project 
list as being completed. Is this in fact true? Was this job 
completed last fall and you’re having to redo 8.5 kilometres? Or 
is this a follow-up on what was a project last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, Mr. Chair. On this piece, what it 
means here when it says, to complete, it needs to be completed. 
And there were some difficulties found on that piece, so that 
work will be continued this year. And it will be completed. 
Some of it — like it wasn’t all done — but some of it, what was 
done, needs to still be worked on. It has not been accepted and 
so that project will be worked on. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, is this a job that will be 
re-tendered? Is it the same contractor and was there a hold-back 
from the previous contractor as far as not being completed? 
And was there a penalty imposed upon that contractor for the 
condition of that highway? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, yes, it is the same contractor. 
Yes, there was money held back. The project will have to be 
still worked on and completed and it will have to be decided at 
that time again whether or not it’ll be accepted. It hasn’t been as 
yet and so that work has to be completed. Money was held 
back. It is the same contractor. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I know 
that many people who travel on No. 5 will be looking forward 
to that chunk of highway getting finished. Because I understand 
from talking with some SGI agents as well, there have been 
accidents, vehicle damage as a result of the condition of that 
highway, and the concern by the bus drivers. One is who is 
going to be paying for this? Is it the contractor? Is it the 
department? And I know you’ve answered that already and I 
won’t expound on that any further. 
 
Madam Minister, a couple of years ago you announced, or the 
former minister of Highways announced a restructuring of the 
Department of Highways where you had offices moved from 
the community of Yorkton in the engineering department and 
moved to Saskatoon. 
 
There were a lot of concerns expressed to me by individuals 
working with the Department of Highways about relocation, 
about having to move to Saskatoon, and then finding out that 
indeed most of their jobs took them back into the very area that 
they had moved from — east-central Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m wondering if you’ve had a chance to look at that 
restructuring that occurred a couple of years ago. Is there an 
assessment of that and is there any proposed changes in terms 
of bringing what I look at as far as bringing the people back to 
the area that they’re actually performing the work in. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, there was significant 
restructuring. And any time that that’s done, I think you always 
do it very cautiously. And you do have some empathy for the 
people that have to move. But overall we have seen . . . we’ve 
reviewed it, and we feel that again we’ve had significant 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

administrative savings. And from time to time definitely people 
do have to go back out to areas to still work in those areas. 
 
But overall there has been administrative savings and we’ve 
been able to put more dollars back into actually then working 
on the roads, and preservation, and upgrading, and so on. So it’s 
been sometimes difficult in any reorganization but we have seen 
a significant savings in administration by it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. While we may 
have seen some savings I think what we are hearing from 
people in the area, that they have a concern about service. And 
we’re talking about responding in the wintertime. This past 
winter has been a mild winter and of course those complaints 
weren’t there. But recall the previous winter, a lot of people 
were concerned about having to respond to Saskatoon, to 
having to ensure that indeed the people were near the job site. 
 
So while you’ve said that you’ve reviewed it, I would 
encourage you to look at maybe some decentralization ensuring 
that we have people available at the source where the problems 
are, rather than having them in the city. Located in Saskatoon 
isn’t a whole lot of benefit to the area of east-central 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, a different area of concern has been one that 
has been brought to my attention by the community 
development officer in the town of Canora. Shannon Walker 
contacted me recently regarding the reclassification of roads in 
rural Saskatchewan — highways, municipal roads, etc. — and 
has indicated that your department is currently looking at 
reclassifications. Reclassifying roads from I believe a class 1 to 
a class 7. 
 
Is this a project that is under way right now, who is being 
consulted, and when do you expect this project to be 
completed? Or is this just a draft that you’re looking at that may 
never prove to come to fruition? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — While the minister is preparing for the 
answer, I would request the hon. member for Canora-Pelly to 
direct his remarks through the Chair, according to rule 28. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Excuse me. Thank you for the question. 
Mr. Chair, on the piece when you talk about the consolidation 
and the restructuring of the department, as far as the service for 
winter conditions and so on, I mean the crews were not 
consolidated to Regina and Saskatoon. There was some 
consolidation even in our regions and areas, but the winter 
crews are still out there. 
 
And we do re-evaluate that at all times to always be watching 
the kind of level of service and the timely level of service that 
needs to be done on those systems. And actually I believe our 
departments responds. I know this last year was an easier year, 
but we had some significant storms in areas and there’s been 
extremely good response of the department in trying to get 
roads clear and to keep safe road surfaces for people to drive on 
in this province. 
 
On the reclassification as I’ve said earlier, this has been a 
project in which the Department of Highways, SARM, and 
SUMA are involved in. And it’s definitely still at a fairly 

preliminary stage. There’s been a lot of work done on it but 
there still will be a lot of work that still needs to be done. 
 
And in the reclassification as I’d said previously, it’s really to 
look at every road, right from farm access up to the national 
highways, and decide in those level of classes what those roads 
will . . . not just the volumes but what they are used for. And 
then be able to, once the road system is classified, to then have 
a pretty consistent level of maintenance, surface, and what 
people could expect if they want a class 3 road or a class 7 road 
or whatever that might be. 
 
That’s going to take a lot of time. I think we’re in a significant 
time of change within the province. Reclassification is one of 
those major initiatives going on. Area planning, working with 
local governments. We have to work with the tourism industry, 
economic development. All of those pieces have to be put into 
this reclassification. 
 
(1645) 
 
And we see transportation under tremendous stress but under 
tremendous change. So I think in developing this, we don’t 
have a time line where it necessarily has to be done, but it’s 
going to take some time over the next few years I believe before 
that will be all completed. We need to go back to communities 
and say, do these meet the kind of needs; does this classification 
make sense to you. There’s nothing written in stone yet at all. 
 
And so there’s a lot of work’s been done but a lot of work that 
needs to be done. And I think we have to see what happens with 
branch-line abandonment and many of the other issues that are 
facing the transportation system in this province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. While I’m pleased to 
hear that this is in its preliminary stage I want to flag concerns 
for you from the town of Canora and others who have indicated 
that Highway 5, that there might be a situation where portions 
of Highway 5 will be classified in different classes. 
 
That kind of classification I’m sure is going to lead to changes 
in the amount of service, in the amount of maintenance, and the 
amount of work that is being done on it. I think it’s going to 
seriously affect the tourism industry. It will seriously affect the 
transportation of product. 
 
And I’m talking border to border when we look at No. 5. It’s a 
main arterial. Even though we look at it on a map and we see 
that there are classifications on the draft kind of preliminary 
work that you’ve indicated, that chunks of the highway may be 
classed as a 2 or a 3. 
 
And I think the town of Canora is flagging . . . as you said, 
you’re going to consult with the communities. They’re already 
concerned and the mayor has indicated to me that they have a 
strong concern about the fact that Highway 5 suddenly has a 
classification from Kamsack to Canora being a no. 2 for 
instance, and then from Canora to Watson it might be a no. 3, 
and then from Watson to Saskatoon it’s back to a no. 2. That 
kind of a classification I think is silly, and I’m hoping that your 
officials will heed the concerns of communities like Canora and 
address that, and I’m trusting that you will. 
 



1256 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1998 

Madam Minister, one of the other concerns that is actually 
related to my constituency, and I brought this to the attention of 
officials in your department awhile back, many small 
communities are a short distance off of highways — 1 
kilometre, 2 kilometres, the like. The community of Stenen is a 
short distance off a particular highway and one of their concerns 
of course was that a piece of that road has literally fallen apart 
and a surface — which was an oil surface, dust free — was 
there for years and years. The Department of Highways has 
come in and has resurfaced it back, raising it of course with a 
clay-gravel mixture and leaving it as a gravel surface. As a 
result the complaints from residents living along that section are 
extreme, and they raised that concern last year. 
 
The response I had was that the amount of money that’s 
allocated for those kinds of projects, of fixing those short little 
arterials was exhausted, and that they would have to look for 
the project on another year. I’m wondering if the community of 
Stenen and the residents who live along that road indeed can 
look forward to a resurfacing of that section back into an oil 
surface? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I did have the 
opportunity actually to meet in Canora also, and a couple of the 
issues you’ve raised were certainly raised to me at that time. 
And in speaking to the town of Canora and I know the 
municipalities and so on in that area also, we tried to reassure 
them on the reclassification and also said to make sure they’re 
talking also to the group, whether its SARM or SUMA, you 
know, on their concerns too in that. 
 
On the access road to Stenen, on the Stenen access road, it 
won’t be resurfaced this year. They do not feel . . . it’s still I 
guess graded to a level at which it can take the heavy truck 
traffic that’s on it. It needs to still be worked to make sure that 
that surface can accommodate the truck traffic that’s on it to 
heavier weight. So to resurface it right now wouldn’t be the 
time to do it. They’re going to continue to maintain that road 
and maybe in the future then there can be resurfacing done but 
there is not . . . they just don’t feel that it would stand up now to 
resurface that road at this time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
Madam Minister, while I appreciate the fact that, you know, 
stabilization of a base has to occur, I do though sympathize with 
the people that live along that stretch. And I’m wondering if the 
department, while they’re waiting for the stabilization to occur, 
would consider a treatment that many communities . . . many 
small towns treat a lot of their sections with I believe, a calcium 
chloride mixture. 
 
Will the department consider that immediate type of treatment 
to alleviate the concerns of these individuals that, you know, 
have some health-related concerns as well, living along the 
road, asthmatic conditions where that particular . . . the volume 
of traffic on that section of highway has caused major concern 
for those individuals. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, my understanding on the 
calcium chloride treatment, we would have to look into it. It 
doesn’t work on every area. It’s not necessarily that effective, 
but we certainly can take that under advisement and we’ll get 
back to you on it if it would be a suitable treatment for that 

road. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate 
your compliance there. A final question, Madam Minister. I 
believe it was last year that we discussed the . . . a Bill that 
talked about the responsibility of materials that are left on a 
highway or on a road surface, that fall off of vehicles or the . . . 
produce that’s hauled. The question that I have for you, Madam 
Minister, is who is responsible for cleaning up materials that, of 
course, no one can identify. 
 
What I’m referring to, Madam Minister, is many . . . with the 
increase of truck traffic, especially semi-trailer truck traffic, we 
see a lot of blown tires. We see huge amounts of rubber that’s 
left on the highway. And the concern that has been expressed to 
me by a couple of individuals is that while travelling, the car 
immediately in front of another car hits a piece of rubber that’s 
left on and it comes through and it smashes a car window. 
 
Number one, who is responsible for the damage to now the car? 
And secondly, is it the responsibility of Department of Highway 
crews to ensure that the road conditions are safe and indeed 
those chunks of rubber that have been left by a semi-trailer 
that’s long gone and unidentifiable, who is to ensure that those 
materials are picked up? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on any of the pieces that, like 
you say, of debris or something that might be on the highway, 
our crews, Highway people would like to be made aware of it, 
and they try to clear it as soon as possible. 
 
But specifically, we’re not liable for those . . . for pieces that 
have fallen off and end up on the roadway. And certainly if we 
can have notification and we try to track down, if it’s at all 
possible, if you can find, you know, where it did come from 
because the other party is liable. 
 
But I know that the Highway department workers do a . . . 
really do want to be notified. And I would say that to the public 
in the province: if there is debris or things that are on the 
highway, they do their utmost to get that cleared off the 
highway because it is a safety factor. But the department is not 
liable for debris that’s on the highway. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
while the minister’s indicated that departmental officials are not 
liable, nor is the department, I’m wondering if a directive can 
be given to Highway workers to ensure that when there is a 
crew that is actually doing sand sealing for instance and are 
driving by . . . and I’ve seen it happen — where a particular 
Department of Highways vehicle will drive by a chunk of tire 
that’s left on the side of a road and they don’t pick it up. 
 
And while I know that there are many projects around the 
province of Saskatchewan where community groups are given 
remuneration for ensuring that the grades and the ditches are 
cleaned — and I want to commend your department for doing 
that because I think that’s a way that we can ensure that our 
province is attractive to tourism — but that’s only done once a 
year. And as a result, the other 364 days, no one seems to have 
that obligation to ensure that it’s picked up. 
 
And while a phone call may be the only way that will bring to 



May 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

the attention, I would hope that workers in the Department of 
Highways will take it upon themselves as a responsibility, 
ensure that while driving, no matter what their job description is 
I guess, will they stop and ensure that those materials are picked 
up. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I believe that . . . Now you 
may have been citing an example where somebody didn’t pick 
something up. I think that most of our Highway workers take an 
extreme pride in keeping the surface of the roads as safe as 
possible and that they do have some obligation to pick up 
debris, articles, things on the road that shouldn’t be there. And I 
would believe the majority of times that that is done, but I will 
certainly bring it to the attention of Highway workers that I 
think that that is some obligation that they should have, is 
picking up things that could be a danger to the motoring public 
on the road surface. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1230 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1230 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1230 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Mill Improves Feed Quality 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
 Honorary Fellowship Recipient 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
 SaskEnergy Customer Financing Announcement 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
 Inequitable Treatment Concerns Raised 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1232 
 Prince Albert Pulp and Paper Mill 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1232 
 Health Care Cuts 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
 Norwegian Constitution Day Celebrations 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
 Grant for Renovation Construction at Humboldt 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Saskatoon School Board’s Proposed New Building 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1233 
 Potential Sale of Crown Life 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1234 
 Investment in Canamino 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1235 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1235 
 Additional Hiring of Nurses 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1235 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1236 
 
 



 

 SaskPower Infrastructure Maintenance 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1237 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1237 
 Child Prostitution 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1237 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1237 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 225  The Saskatchewan Regulatory Reform Act 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1238 
 Bill No. 747 — The Naming of Northern Municipal Airports Act 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1238 
 Bill No. 748 — The NORTHERN Act 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1238 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................................1238 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1238 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1239 
 Bill No. 55 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1240 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1240 
 Bill No. 54 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1240 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1241 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 49 — The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1242 
 Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1998 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1243 
 Bill No. 45 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1243 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1243 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1244 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1248 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1253 
 
 


