





























































Hansard: April 15, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 577 
 April 15, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of the community of 
Glen Ewen. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
These petitions come from the Redvers, Antler, Bellegarde 
areas of south-east Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions, and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these petitions are signed by individuals from the Redvers, 
Wawota areas of the province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Wishart, Foam 
Lake, Rose Valley, and Quill Lake. I so present. 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I too rise to present a petition and 
I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these are signed by the good people in Rose Valley. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise with a 
petition from members of the Saskatchewan community 
surrounding the issue of cancelling the severance payments to 
Jack Messer and asking for the calling of an independent public 
inquiry into all the facts surrounding Channel Lake. 
 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are mostly from the 
community of Melfort but also from communities in the entire 
north-east. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have petitions 
from people in the Spalding area: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks 
from Weyburn, Estevan, and Macoun. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of people in the province concerned about 
the closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

communities of Pilot Butte and the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a 
petition on behalf of concerned citizens with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from Weyburn and 
Yellow Grass. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I also present a petition this 
morning by citizens . . . this afternoon by citizens of the 
province concerned with the impending closure of the Plains 
Health Centre and praying that the provincial government will 
provide adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that 
essential services provided at the Plains may be continued. 
 
Your petitioners come from Mankota and Ponteix. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in bringing forth petitions in regards to 
stopping the closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from the Ferland and Ponteix area of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, roads 
continue to be a great concern for the people in the south-west, 
and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of 
Medicine Hat; Elkwater; Lethbridge; urban Alberta; Bindloss, 
Alberta; also from Alsask, Saskatchewan; and Richmound, 
Saskatchewan. And I’m happy to present them on behalf of 
those people today. 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions of private 
Bills have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) the 
following petitions are hereby read and received: 
 

Of the conference of Mennonites in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for an Act respecting the conference 
of Mennonites of Saskatchewan. 
 
Of the Fondation de la Radio Française et l’Association 
Culturelle Franco-Canadienne de la Saskatchewan, in the 
province of Saskatchewan, praying for an Act respecting 
the Fondation Fransaskoise, 1998. 
 

And according to order the following petitions have also been 
reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly 
regarding the twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; 
respecting saving the Plains Health Centre; and respecting 
the calling of an independent public inquiry surrounding 
Channel Lake. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, are 20 air 
cadets seated in your gallery. They are the William G. 
Kindrachuk Air Cadets, Squadron 888, from Wakaw. And they 
are accompanied by Captain B. Young, Lieutenant Joan 
Parenteau, Lieutenant Lucie Gaudet, and Marlene Kohle. I 
would like the members of the Assembly to give them a very 
warm welcome, and I look forward to seeing you a little bit 
later today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you to the House and to the members in your west 
gallery, I’d like to introduce a teacher from Harris, 
Saskatchewan, Virginia Mireau, and her daughter, who are 
down here, I think, taking advantage of the Easter break. So I’d 
like the Assembly to welcome you here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated 
in the east gallery are a couple of young ladies that I’d like to 
introduce to you and to all members of the House. This being 
spring break not only teachers . . . not only students but also 
teachers take advantage of the break. I’d like to introduce my 
wife, Gail, and my daughter, Lindsay. Thank you very much for 
coming into Regina and being part of today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for 
the opportunity to make several introductions this afternoon. 
First of all, in your gallery in the first and second rows are a 
number of the members of the Saskatchewan Professional Fire 
Fighters Association. It has become an annual event for them to 
come to Regina and hold meetings with elected members to 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

convey their, the concerns and issues that arise during the 
course of their work. 
 
So I’d like to ask all members to welcome them into the 
legislature, and as a token of our appreciation for the work that 
they do all year round to keep our communities safer and better 
places, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Also today in the gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, we have the president, vice-president, and director of 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, who 
have joined us no doubt to observe question period. And I’d 
like to ask the members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — And seated also in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, is Chala Heinemann, who is visiting her sister Vicky, 
who is a ministerial assistant in my office. Chala is from 
Strathmore, Alberta, and is a special needs teacher in Calgary. 
She is taking a well-earned Easter break and visiting 
Saskatchewan for her holiday, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like to ask 
you to welcome our visitor from Alberta. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister this afternoon in welcoming the professional 
fire-fighters here this afternoon and also the members of SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) that are in 
attendance today, on behalf of the official opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and to all members of the legislature, my sister, Jo Ann Nilson, 
and her husband, James Lokken, and their four boys, my 
nephews, Nils, Olaf, Torbjorn, and Knut. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my voice of 
welcome as well to the great fire-fighters association and to 
people from SARM. I’d also like to acknowledge as well the 
young people and the air cadet people that are here. Believe it 
or not, it was a long time ago, but I was a cadet as well, and I 
just want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to commend all 
the young people through their own initiative that avail 
themselves of this type of opportunity to belong to a cadet 
squadron of one type or another. 
 
I’d also like to commend all the volunteers, the parents, and the 
people that assist these young folks along their way in 
education and learning what it’s all about to deal with one 
another, belong to service clubs. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, two 

people in your gallery: Robin Gilbert, student at Eastend 
School, and she is with my daughter, Heidi Scott, who are here 
visiting on holidays. 
 
And during the past week some of you saw a pledge form going 
around for the Eastend Museum. Heidi works there on 
weekends and she would like to extend appreciation to all who 
contributed and she assures me the money will go to a good 
cause and not a summer holiday. I ask all people to join me in 
welcoming them here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the Saskatchewan Party caucus I’d also like to welcome the air 
cadets to the Assembly today and also to inform the House that 
I was also a member of the air cadets. That was after the 
invention of power flight, Mr. Speaker, not like the member 
opposite. So I’d like to welcome the cadets here also today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a 
very special guest in your gallery. I would like to have her 
stand. It’s my daughter Danis, and I’d like to explain that her 
name in Cree is . . . appropriately of course, means my 
daughter. And she has just come home after a 
two-and-a-half-year stint in Europe, Africa, and India. She 
actually arrived on my birthday approximately two weeks ago. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How old are you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — And it was a tremendous pleasure to . . . 
my 52nd birthday. And indeed it is a pleasure to have her back 
home with my wife Linda and I, and I think she’ll be trying to 
look for places to go to school. So I’m very pleased to introduce 
her to the House. Thanks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Speedy Recovery Wishes for Cannington Member’s Son 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on a 
daily basis, members of this Assembly get caught up in politics 
and sometimes forget what is truly important — the health of 
each of our friends, our colleagues, and our families. 
 
Sometimes it takes a tragedy to put things into some kind of 
proper perspective. The son of the member from Cannington 
was involved in a serious car accident during the holiday 
weekend, and is in hospital with some very serious injuries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition would like to send our 
wishes for a speedy recovery, and to the member from 
Cannington, our prayers are certainly with you and your family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games are currently under way in 
Regina. Twenty-five hundred athletes from across the province 
are participating in the games which are hosted by the 
Touchwood File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council this year. 
 
This year’s games will feature four medal sports and two 
demonstration sports. Medal sports include badminton, 
volleyball, boys’ hockey, and girls’ broom ball. The two 
demonstration sports are men’s basketball and women’s 
hockey. 
 
Participants will be coming from 10 different tribal councils, 
and will range in age from 10 to 17. For co-ordinator Glen 
Pratt, the games are about much more than medals. Glen feels 
that the games are also an important tool to be used to 
encourage participation, development, and healthy lifestyles for 
aboriginal youths. 
 
Guest appearances are expected by former NHL (National 
Hockey League) Coach of the Year Ted Nolan and former 
Canadian Heavyweight Boxing Champion George Chuvalo. 
The purpose of having Nolan and Chuvalo speak at the event is 
to demonstrate the importance sport can have in personal 
development, but also to encourage the young athletes to 
choose healthy lifestyles and to fight through the many 
obstacles facing them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to wish all the 
athletes good luck and congratulate them on their choices to 
become active in sports. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Home for National Seed Collection 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 11, 
Saskatchewan, and indeed Canada, witnessed an important and 
historical event. Important not only to the agricultural research 
and development community but also to Saskatoon’s growing 
agricultural biotechnology sector. 
 
Saskatoon residents who happened by the airport last Saturday 
afternoon would have seen a Department of National Defence 
Hercules cargo aircraft deliver the first instalment of 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada’s national seed collection to 
its new home in the expanded and renovated research centre on 
the campus of the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Plant Gene Resources of Canada, formerly located at the central 
experimental farm in Ottawa, represents not only a commitment 
to our province and our nation but it demonstrates a major 
international commitment by Canada to the preservation of the 
world’s genetic diversity and food supply. The entire collection 
includes 110,000 different varieties of plants and is considered 
of such significance that only half of the collection was 
transported by air, while the other half will come by land at a 
future date. 
 
The decision to relocate these genetic materials to 
Saskatchewan represents a recognition by the Government of 
Canada of the quality of our province’s world-class research 
and development infrastructure and also acknowledges the 
significant potential of research and development to generate 

the kind of economic activity . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member’s time has expired. 
Statements continue. 
 

National Appointment for Sylvia Maljan 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Often, getting 
involved in organizations can and will lead to national 
recognition. And, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what happened to 
Sylvia Maljan of Unity. Sylvia has recently been appointed to 
chair the National Women’s Task Force Committee. 
 
Sylvia is employed by the Landswest School Division in the 
capacity of secretary of the Unity Public School and is a 
member of CUPE Local 1972. The Canadian Union of Public 
Employees, or CUPE, has a membership of 460,000 in Canada; 
276,000 of the CUPE members are women. 
 
The task force which Sylvia will Co-Chair is composed of 
representatives from each of the CUPE provincial divisions. 
The committee will examine topics of equality and women’s 
issues. The committee has not met for six years and so has 
much work to do. 
 
Sylvia has been actively involved in CUPE Local 1972 and has 
always been supportive of equality and women’s issues. One of 
the main tasks that Sylvia will accomplish in her term is the 
planning of the national women’s conference for November of 
this year. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to both congratulate Sylvia 
and wish her luck in her tenure as Co-Chair of CUPE’s National 
Women’s Task Force Committee. I am confident that with 
Sylvia’s extensive experience and ability, she will be an 
excellent Co-Chair. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Best Wishes for Nicholas D’Autremont 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to share with all members of the Assembly a story of 
tragedy, but also one of courage, commitment, perseverance, 
and love. 
 
Nicholas D’Autremont is the 15-year-old son of the member 
from Cannington. I know that Nicholas is watching the telecast 
of these proceedings today because he really enjoys politics. In 
fact his mom and dad have been dragging Nicholas to political 
meetings for most of his life, so it isn’t unusual that Nicholas 
would be interested in watching the question period on 
television. 
 
What is unusual is that today Nicholas is watching these 
proceedings from his room on the 9th floor of the Plains 
hospital in Regina. On Friday, Nicholas was a passenger in a 
car that was involved in a serious accident on a grid road not far 
from his home at Alida. Nicholas was rushed to the Plains 
hospital where doctors diagnosed him with a serious neck 
injury. 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

Nicholas’s injuries have left him without the ability to move his 
legs; however, he does have some use of his arms and hands. 
Doctors are now waiting for some of the swelling around the 
injured areas to go down in order to assess the need for surgery. 
Nicholas will begin physiotherapy today. 
 
Nicholas is a very brave young man who has remained 
confident and positive throughout this difficult time. Through it 
all, Nicholas has been supported and cared for by his mom and 
dad, brother and sister, grandmother, and many other relatives 
and friends. 
 
I have with me a gift of encouragement that we will be 
delivering to Nicholas later today. It is a picture of all the 
members of the Legislative Assembly that I will be asking each 
of you to sign for Nicholas. 
 
Nicholas, I know that I speak for all members of this Assembly 
when I say that our thoughts and prayers are with you and your 
family. May God guide the doctors and nurses who are taking 
care of you and may God speed your recovery. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Provincial Sales Tax-free Fire Truck 
Purchase in Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First to the member 
from Cannington: our prayers and thoughts are with you today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember several occasions in this legislature 
when the member from Kelvington-Wadena stood up and 
complained that the local fire departments had to pay PST 
(provincial sales tax) for their fire trucks. I can understand her 
raising the issues here. What I can’t understand is her silence 
about the fact that Naicam fire department, which is in her 
constituency, is the first in the province to buy a PST-free fire 
truck. 
 
According to the Naicam fire chief, Carl Peterson, the Naicam 
fire department will save nearly $10,000 as a direct result of the 
1998 budget. The Naicam fire department is using these savings 
to buy a better-equipped fire truck than would have been 
possible before the good news budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to responding to the 
needs of the people of Saskatchewan. We continue to pay down 
the Tory debt, balance budgets, and provide incentives and tax 
breaks where we can and at a speed that we can afford. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cadet Honour Band 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I notice in the gallery 
we had introduced to us a number of cadets. Mr. Speaker, I 
think members of this Assembly are quite well aware of the 
cadet honour band and their travelling across western Canada at 
this time of the year. I’ve had the privilege of attending a couple 
of their concerts, and I can say they are very inspiring. 
 
And I’m sure that any member who’s had the privilege, any 

cadet who’s had the honour of attending that performance is 
certainly going to be . . . You leave there feeling real excited 
because of the dynamics that are presented by the cadet honour 
band. My only regret, Mr. Speaker, is singing in a group with 
three other gentlemen, our own quartet, I would think it would 
sure be nice to be able to sing along with that honour band 
playing the background music. I think they would really 
provide an excellent job. 
 
So I would just say to each and every one who’s been involved, 
congratulations and we’re certainly pleased to see that you do 
take the time to even stop in our fair city to give us the pleasure 
of being able to listen to such excellent and inspiring music. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Futures Pilot Project 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Youth Futures is a 
pilot project program in Prince Albert that has been operational 
since August of 1997. It is a holistic, community-based 
approach which focuses on helping youth make the transition 
from dependency on social assistance to becoming independent, 
contributing members of the community. 
 
The pilot program places direct responsibility on the youth by 
requiring them to plan their future and then take appropriate 
action. For example, each individual involved would start with 
an assessment of their skills, abilities, and ambitions. This is 
followed by the development of a plan to identify and achieve 
the desired goals. And once the plan is developed the 
appropriate programs and services available are used to achieve 
it. These may include necessary academic training or skills 
training, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government is partnered with local businesses and industry 
in Prince Albert to ensure community support for the program. 
Youth are given an allowance equal to levels of social 
assistance they were formerly receiving while they are 
developing and implementing their goals. 
 
Eighteen-year-old Tara Fleury is just one example of the many 
success stories associated with Youth Futures. She says, and I 
quote, “I actually just got a job . . . so I guess it has helped me 
quite a bit, because I never had a job before.” Tara is now off 
welfare and planning to get her first apartment. 
 
This program gives youth a hand up, not a hand-out, and our 
youth like that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, your old friend Jack Messer has now testified 
under oath that he told the former SaskPower minister 
everything. Messer briefed the minister on three occasions 
leading up to the June 20 board meeting, the meeting at which 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

the Channel Lake cover-up was put in place. On June 17 
Messer gave the minister a detailed review of the Channel Lake 
fiasco and the minister agreed with Jack Messer’s plan to keep 
the matter quiet. 
 
Mr. Premier, it is now clear the minister knew everything. You 
fired Jack Messer for his action in this cover-up. Are you going 
to be doing the same thing in firing the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, one thing I would 
urge the member, the member from Kindersley, to be aware of 
is that during an inquiry, one thing I would urge him to do is to 
listen carefully to all of the responses and witnesses who come. 
And I would anticipate that you will hear different views of the 
same circumstance from a number of different people, as was 
the case with the Deloitte Touche report. 
 
And at the end of the review, it would be my advice — for what 
it’s worth to you — to then review all of the comments made. 
Mr. Lautermilch will appear before the committee . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member will recognize 
of course not to use proper names of members who are current 
sitting members of the House, but to refer to them solely by 
their position in the House. And I’ll ask the minister to wrap up 
his remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I apologize for that. I want to indicate that the former 
minister in charge of SaskPower will appear before the 
committee. But I would urge you, sir, if you’re going to be a 
legitimate member of the committee and work on this file, that 
you wait till all of the review is completed before you jump to 
conclusions. 
 
The way you got into trouble is jumping from the Conservatives 
to this new party. It’s going to come back to haunt you. But 
wait till the review is over. There will be a report written and 
you’ll have a chance to make your comments as to what we 
should do about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, Jack Messer is testifying under 
oath currently. And he says that he gave the minister a detailed 
briefing on the Kenny legal opinions which found negligence 
on the part of Lawrence Portigal and other SaskPower officials. 
Messer, under oath, says he gave the minister a detailed briefing 
on the Milner Fenerty legal opinion which recommended 
immediate legal action against DEML (Direct Energy 
Marketing Limited). 
 
The minister had all of this information, and did he order a 
legal, any kind of legal action? Did he order any kind of further 
investigation? No, he did exactly the opposite and covered it up. 
The minister and Jack and the entire board of directors of 
SaskPower got out a big pail of whitewash and covered it up. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, your own Department of Justice said the 
SaskPower board and the minister should have immediately 
ordered a full investigation. And by failing to do so, they are 
every bit as guilty . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member has been 
extremely lengthy in his preamble and I ask him to go directly 
to his question now. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Premier, 
you fired, your government fired, Jack Messer for his actions. 
Will you do the right thing and let that minister go as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again to the member opposite, 
that Mr. Messer was interviewed by Deloitte & Touche and you 
will realize that, given the fact that the March 9 report was 
tabled in the House. I would expect that Mr. Messer is giving 
the same information to the committee that he gave to the 
Deloitte & Touche group when they interviewed him. And the 
former minister of SaskPower will have his day before the 
committee where he will be able to give his opinion. 
 
Now I wouldn’t be surprised if there were a differing of views 
as to the same circumstance. Your job will be, as the Deloitte & 
Touche report is, to try to find where the truth lies out of the 
opinions given. But the Deloitte & Touche report says this: 
“Documentations presented to the board at SaskPower was, at a 
critical juncture, incomplete to the point where the board was 
not being effectively informed.” 
 
That’s what Deloitte & Touche said. Now we’re holding an 
inquiry. Let’s listen to all the people who come before the 
committee before you jump to conclusions at what the results 
should be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, are you 
saying that someone then is not telling the truth? Are you 
suggesting that under oath Mr. Messer is not providing the 
committee with the truth as he has stated he would under oath? 
He made a very telling comment about Channel Lake and the 
$5 million loss. He says it’s no big deal — it’s no big deal. 
Saskatchewan taxpayers just got ripped off for $5 million due to 
SaskPower’s incompetence and Jack Messer says it’s no big 
deal — it’s no big deal. Let’s just keep it quiet. No one will 
ever know about it. 
 
Well your Department of Justice thinks it is a big deal and the 
Bogdasavich opinion says, and I quote: “If anything, the fault 
lies with SaskPower’s board in failing to pursue the matter.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, do you agree with the Justice opinion that 
says the SaskPower board and the ministers are at fault, or do 
you agree with Jack Messer’s opinion that the $5 million loss is 
no big deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — First of all I will refer to the 
statement that I made in the House some five weeks ago now, 
where I said this issue needed to be reviewed and I said 
mistakes were made. I couldn’t have been more clear about that. 
And the mistake was this — and the Deloitte & Touche report 
confirms this — that rather than making $7 million on the deal, 
$2 million was made. Let’s get that fact straight. Well read the 
report. Read the report, that’s what it says. 
 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

But to the member opposite, we have already dealt with the 
issue of whether mistakes were made or not. It is our 
government’s view that on this issue mistakes were made. 
 
But for you, sir, what I would urge you to do is listen to all of 
the witnesses who will come before the committee before you 
jump to conclusions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) as well, and it seems that 
mistakes are continuing to be made. 
 
This morning Jack Messer released his indemnification 
agreement which says that SaskPower has to pay all his legal 
bills. The agreement states that the only way SaskPower can get 
out of paying Jack Messer’s legal bills is if Jack Messer acted 
dishonestly or if he realized illegal personal gains from his 
actions. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve told this House that SaskPower is no 
longer going to pay the legal bills of Jack Messer. So would you 
please give me the grounds. Is it because he acted dishonestly 
or because he benefited in an illegal way, in a personal way? 
Under what grounds are you denying him access to his 
indemnification agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to make it clear to the 
member opposite that the statement I made about the 
indemnification and the payment of legal fees for Mr. Messer is 
that it is not our legal opinion in CIC that we are responsible for 
the legal bills. This does not mean that Mr. Messer cannot put 
in a bill and try to receive payment. 
 
But I want to say for the potential leader of the Conservative 
Party that when it comes to legal bills, you will learn a great 
deal about them if you become leader of the Conservative Party 
— a great deal. But I say to you as it would relate to Mr. 
Messer’s legal bills, we are not responsible at this time. This is 
a legal opinion we have. That does not stop Mr. Messer from 
exercising his potential to try to recover from SaskPower legal 
expenses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I quickly understand that this 
government has no problem breaking legal agreements at their 
whim, and this seems to be the case. So which way is it going to 
be, Mr. Minister? On one hand you said you don’t have to live 
up to the indemnification agreement because of whatever 
reasons you find that Mr. Messer is not entitled to it; and on the 
other hand you say you have to pay him a severance penalty. 
 
You can’t have it both ways. Either he’s legally entitled to his 
legal bills and severance or he’s not. If you’ve got grounds for 
not paying his legal bills, why in the world are you paying his 
severance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You see 
here the dilemma for the potential leader of the Conservative 
Party. Now he’s arguing that the taxpayers should pay for Mr. 
Messer’s legal bills. Now he’s arguing that we should pay the 
legal bills. Yesterday, or last week, he was arguing that the 
taxpayers shouldn’t pay. 
 
What I’m telling you very clearly is that at this point the bills 
are not being paid for legal counsel for Mr. Messer. And I made 
it clear at the time that the only way SaskPower and the 
taxpayers would pay the legal bills is if there were a legal 
requirement. 
 
Nothing has changed — nothing has changed — and what I 
would urge the member opposite to be careful of, becoming 
leader of the Conservative Party, you better study up on where 
your responsibility is as to payment for legal counsel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Emergency Services 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions today are to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, over 
the weekend there was a very serious incident in Regina in 
which one young man was murdered and four others were 
seriously injured. 
 
In light of the serious injuries involved, it was extremely 
disturbing to learn that Regina’s hospitals nearly couldn’t 
handle the sudden influx of five people. Five people, Mr. 
Minister, clogged up the system. The General was already full 
and these five victims completely filled the critical beds at the 
Plains, Mr. Speaker, leaving only one emergency room open in 
the whole city for the second time in two weeks. 
 
Mr. Minister, five people is not that many to be taken to an 
emergency at one time. That’s one serious car accident, one 
serious fire, or one violent incident as occurred on the weekend. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to admit that there is a 
chronic shortage of critical care beds in the city of Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to first advise 
the member that as I travel around the province, which I have 
been over the last several months and have visited almost all of 
the health districts in Saskatchewan, and particularly the 
southern health districts across the province, they have advised 
me that they have not had much difficulty in accessing the 
systems of Regina for emergency services. In fact the districts 
in the South tell me that they haven’t had any difficulty on an 
emergency basis to access any of the Regina services, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that unfortunately the 
incident that occurred with a young man, Mr. D’Autremont’s 
son, I want to today acknowledge as well on behalf of the 
government our sincere appreciation for the health system and I 
hope that your son is served well, Mr. D'Autremont; and to say 
to you that there were a number of people in Saskatchewan this 
weekend who were injured and arrived at the Regina system for 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

services. On no occasion, Mr. Speaker, have I heard that they 
haven’t been adequately met. 
 
We had a serious accident in our part of the world, in the 
Yorkton area, and people were transported to Regina, were well 
served, Mr. Speaker. And I say to the member opposite that to 
suggest for a moment that Regina’s not meeting the needs of 
emergency services is simply not fair and not correct. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Bed Shortages 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last month in this 
House we told the Assembly that there was an estimated 6,600 
people presently occupying surgery waiting-lists in this 
province — an all-time high, unprecedented high, Mr. Speaker. 
And as a result, people who require surgery are forced to put 
their health care needs on hold and in many cases lives are 
placed in jeopardy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining us in the legislature today is Meryl 
Bintner, whose 81-year-old mother underwent surgery last 
Wednesday to remove blood clots in her leg. Marjorie Bintner’s 
condition was described as a ticking time bomb, but she was 
forced to wait six months for surgery — six months, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell this House why any Saskatchewan 
resident should be forced to wait six months, hoping surgery 
will take place before that ticking time bomb goes off? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 
opposite I want to say, first of all, that in this province, the 
decisions — and across the country — the decisions about what 
people’s medical needs are, are determined by physicians. And 
when individuals require surgery they’re put on a list if they’re 
not emergency — if they’re not emergency, Mr. Speaker. If 
they are urgent or elective, they go on a list and the decisions 
about when people receive surgery are then made by those 
physicians. 
 
If sometime during the process, somebody who might be on an 
elective list for, let’s say, a period of six months, their condition 
changes, the family physician advises the medical system, 
including the specialists, and then the person moves up on the 
list, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that that surgery’s performed. That’s 
the way the process works. 
 
I want to assure the member that I have a great deal of 
confidence in the medical community in this province, and they 
serve us very well. Now if the member opposite believes that 
practitioners in the province aren’t moving people up fast 
enough on the urgent list, then he should be advising me in 
writing of that so that I can provide that to the medical 
community to suggest that they might ensure that that process is 
expediated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister is very 

adept at blaming the doctors and the nurses, who are worked to 
the max in this province, for their ill-begotten wellness model in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Margaret Bintner underwent surgery on 
Wednesday and she was sent home on Saturday. Nurses told her 
daughter that she should not have been discharged because her 
blood levels were not at a safe level. But she was released 
anyway because of a bed shortage, not because of the doctors. 
 
Mr. Minister, the same day Mrs. Bintner was released from 
hospital she suffered a stroke. Today she is in stable condition 
in hospital and encountering paralysis. 
 
Day in and day out you claim that there is no bed crisis, Mr. 
Minister, in this House. You say that the Liberal opposition is 
fearmongering. Can you honestly tell Meryl Bintner today, in 
the gallery today behind you, that our health care system is just 
fine and that her mother did receive the best possible care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure 
the member that in this province the kinds of medical services 
that we have, we believe are being well served. 
 
I have today with me a copy of the Canadian newspaper on 
primary care. It’s published as a Canadian issue, and they list 
the provinces from west to Manitoba and . . . or Quebec. And 
here they talk about the rocky road-map of government 
negotiations and they list what the issues are that are going on 
in British Columbia with physicians. They list the issues that 
are going on in Alberta with physicians and in Manitoba with 
physicians and in Quebec with physicians. 
 
But what they’ve done here is they have clearly highlighted that 
in Saskatchewan we have an excellent relationship and we have 
an excellent service in our physicians. So when the member 
stands up and says that Mrs. Bintner was discharged from the 
hospital because she was unstable, because she was unstable, he 
says to me that the physicians who are making decisions in this 
province are not able to do that adequately. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that that’s not what 
physicians across Canada are saying from west to Quebec. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All I can say, all I 
can say, Mr. Speaker, is heaven help us if Saskatchewan is the 
model of health wellness in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the Premier and the Minister of Health 
both stated that the solution to the current bed crisis is to simply 
discharge patients more quickly from hospital. Well this tragic 
case underlines why no one should be released from hospital 
before they are ready. 
 
Mr. Minister, what will it take to make you understand and 
admit that you’ve made a serious mistake with your 
ill-conceived wellness model, and what will it take to prove that 
you have finally crossed the line? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure whether 
or not the member opposite has the full appreciation of what the 
role of the medical community in this province is, or for that 
matter across the nation. 
 
Maybe he doesn’t have a full appreciation for that, but I will 
share with him one more time how it is that somebody gets 
admitted into an institution or for medical care, and that is that 
you need to be referred to a medical institution by a physician. 
Nurses don’t admit patients, Mr. Speaker; physicians do. And 
physicians are also responsible for the discharge of people 
today in the system, and has always been the case. 
 
For the member opposite to suggest, for the member opposite to 
suggest for a moment that the nurse says that somebody should 
not be within the system, the responsibility, Mr. Speaker, and to 
the member opposite, rests with the physician. 
 
And if in fact there is some concern about the ability for 
someone to return home in a fashion where they wouldn’t be 
safe, I tell you that physicians in this country would never have 
it happen — never have it happen — because of the huge 
insurance costs that they pay, Mr. Speaker. And they would 
never discharge anybody whose health would not be safe, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Community Homes Program Review 
 
Mr. Hillson: — An order in council released yesterday gives 
details of the government’s review of the community group 
homes program. The terms of reference, however, say that it 
specifically excludes an examination of the group homes which 
may be involved in any case presently before our courts. These 
restrictions will effectively exclude from the review precisely 
the cases which have given arise to the review in the first place. 
In that case it is very similar to the Justice review we had last 
year, which was initiated because of certain problem cases, but 
the problem cases couldn’t be looked at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, surely the difficulties we have had — the tragedy 
in North Battleford — could be examined without looking into 
the issue of the guilt or innocence of the girls charged. Will the 
minister explain why the review is taking place in the first place 
if he is not going to examine the tragedies which initiated the 
review to begin with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the community homes 
program, as it has enabled young offenders to move back into 
the community from secure custody and open custody and has 
served as a transition for young offenders back into their 
neighbourhoods and community, is 10 years old. I believe it’s a 
program that has served the province and our communities and 
young offenders very well. 
 
Having reached this 10th anniversary and because a number of 
questions have been raised about the community home program 
from a variety of sources, it seemed to me and it seemed to 
government the appropriate time to do an overall review of the 
community home process. In that review, Mr. Speaker, we have 

been guided by legal advice telling us that as issues are before 
the courts, they must be left before the courts and within the 
jurisdiction of the courts. 
 
That aside, Mr. Speaker, it is time for a review of the 
community home program. I’m hoping that we can see it be 
strengthened in fact by that review. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Surely though, if it is to be a general review, 
that general review has to include the cases which have given 
the most difficulties, including the tragedy in North Battleford. 
Unless the Montgomery home circumstances are included in the 
review, the review will fail. 
 
And surely the terms of reference can be broadened sufficiently 
to include those homes that have given rise to court cases, with 
the proviso that the guilt or innocence of any party presently 
before the courts is not to be investigated. 
 
I ask the minister, will you broaden the terms of reference so 
that you will get a true general review, a general review which 
will include those cases which have led to tragedies and court 
cases? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, a choice faced myself. We 
could have delayed a review process until all outstanding court 
matters had reached their conclusion. Given the process and due 
process of law — and the member will well know this — that 
may have taken some significant length of time. 
 
My view, Mr. Speaker, was that we should initiate a review 
with some very, very well-respected and competent reviewers 
selected from our province. I am very confident the work they 
do will prove beneficial to the program, strengthening of the 
program for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance Enforcement 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. I have been inundated 
with complaints from people frustrated with the lack of 
effectiveness and efficiency of maintenance enforcement. 
 
These people state that there is no listed telephone number for 
maintenance enforcement should they want to inquire about 
faulty child support payments. Nor is there a stated address for 
the maintenance enforcement office to which people may go or 
write to if they have concerns. 
 
Something is very wrong with this picture, Mr. Minister. Why 
is the maintenance enforcement office inaccessible to the very 
people it was set up to serve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to respond 
to the very first question this session that I’ve received, and it’s 
a great pleasure to be here. 
 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

What I would like to say is that our maintenance enforcement 
program in Saskatchewan is doing a very good job. When this 
program started, approximately 20 per cent of the orders were 
being followed. We’re now up to about 85 per cent of the orders 
being followed. 
 
Because of the large number of cases that are being handled, the 
people who have the orders registered have access to a new 
system which provides information via the telephone pretty 
well any time that they call. This system gives them access to 
whether the cheques are there, whether the amounts are paid. 
 
We don’t have a system that allows every person who is 
worried about their cheque to sit and talk to somebody. And I 
think the kind of question that I’m being asked here relates to 
that. We have made a decision to put our money in the place 
where we’re going to enforce the most orders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 26  The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
26, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1998 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Public Service Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 27, 
The Public Service Act, 1998 be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 28, 
The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day I’d like to have leave to introduce some special visitors. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a tremendous 
pleasure for me to introduce with us, Lawrence Yew, former 
member, MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
Cumberland, as well as Don Favel, the director for MNS (Metis 
Nation of Saskatchewan). 

Mr. Speaker, in regards to Mr. Yew, a lot of people will know 
that in regards to the health side, he had a heart and lung 
removed and had survived, you know, that operation. And it 
took a lot of grit and determination on his part and to move on. 
 
As we went in . . . Mr. Yew did a lot of standing up for people 
in my constituency through the years for which I have 
tremendous gratitude. As he moved in on his side, Mr. Speaker, 
he’s moving in on the issue relating to Metis and the Primrose 
Weapons Range. He continues to stand up for his people, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think he’s a tremendous inspiration you know, 
for all of us in this House. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like everybody to please give special 
recognition to Mr. Yew and Mr. Don Favel. And with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll say a few words in our own language. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, to ask 
leave to introduce guests as well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
guests to you and through you from various parts of northern 
Saskatchewan. These guests are in the city today to meet — and 
have met — with the Hon. Ralph Goodale. And they are part of 
the Primrose Lake Air Weapons Range negotiating committee. 
And I’ll just quickly read the names out to you. 
 
Up on our gallery we have Alex Maurice from Beauval, Ernest 
Gardner from Cole Bay, Edward Gardner from Cole Bay, and 
George LaRiviere from Cole Bay as well. And on the floor, of 
course, seated just over there, we have Don Favel, who is also 
from Ile-a-la-Crosse and is the area director. 
 
And of course, as we mentioned, the former MLA from 
Cumberland who served this Assembly most admirably and is 
certainly as an example of one of the first aboriginal people to 
ever grace this Assembly. He set the course for many of us, 
including the current member from Cumberland, I’m quite sure. 
And I want to pay a special tribute to him as well because he 
most certainly throughout the years, as the member from 
Cumberland indicated, committed his time, his energy, and now 
we see his health. And it’s not too often in this political world 
that you see individuals commit so much to such great causes 
for northern Saskatchewan people. 
 
So I’d like to ask the Assembly to pay a special tribute to 
Lawrence and also the elders who have for many years fought 
on this very issue, and the younger people like Alex Maurice, 
and Don, who have contributed time and energy as well. And I 
must say that I admire Lawrence so much because he suffered 
through the Tory years, Mr. Speaker, and now he’s here still 
standing strong. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I request leave to introduce guests. 
 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

Leave granted. 
 
(1430) 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if I could indulge in 
the members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming the 
elders from northern Saskatchewan, but particularly our good 
friend and the former member for one of the . . . Cumberland, 
who was also part of that small group of New Democrats who 
used to sit in opposition after the Devine party gave us a terrible 
shellacking in 1982. 
 
And I remember so clearly because . . . I remember so clearly 
because when Lawrence came into the Assembly, he was the 
only new elected New Democrat. Most of us, most of our 
caucus being wiped out, but Lawrence came and he was a great 
addition to the caucus. 
 
And I remember the Speaker, Mr. Swan, who was continually 
lecturing us on repetition, because with only seven members 
trying to carry the House in opposition, it was a very difficult 
time. And our hidden weapon was Lawrence Yew. Because as 
soon as he finished his one-hour speech in English, he would 
give it in Cree. And nobody could ever figure out what he was 
saying. And we would cheer: hear, hear! And when he would sit 
down, Lawrence would say, you’re cheering at all the wrong 
times. He says, from now on, I’ll give you a signal when to say, 
hear, hear! 
 
So Lawrence, I want to say — and fondly, we used to call 
Lawrence the Chief — welcome back to the House, Chief. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I’m pleased to supply the answer to question 
27. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to question 27 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Request that question 28 be converted to 
orders for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Question 28 is converted to motions for return 
(debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I am pleased to rise to move second reading of The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the subject of adoption arises today, the 
atmosphere, the process, and even the language is significantly 
different than it was 25 or 30 years ago. Rather than the secrecy 
of the past, Mr. Speaker, a discussion around adoption today 

would likely include such terms as openness, ongoing 
communication, and intercountry adoption. There’s no doubt 
that adoption has undergone a dramatic change. As a result, Mr. 
Speaker, we will be introducing three major changes to The 
Adoption Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one very significant change which has occurred 
over the past number of years is the interest and involvement of 
birth fathers in the adoption process. The Adoption Act 
provides a definition of who is considered to be a birth father 
for the purposes of adoption with the intent being that the 
majority of birth fathers will be included in the adoption 
process. However, Mr. Speaker, it is our view that the current 
definition ignored some birth fathers, a situation which may 
have implications for these birth fathers in the future. 
 
For example, when a birth father plays a role in the adoption 
process he is involved in planning for the child’s future. He 
must make a decision as to whether he wants to be involved in 
the parenting of the child or prefers that the child be placed for 
adoption. The adoption record reflects that he did not . . . that he 
did consent to the adoption. And should he, at some point in the 
future, wish to utilize the services of the post adoption program, 
he would have no difficulty doing so. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, if the birth father is not 
recognized at the time of the adoption, he would be unable to 
avail himself of post adoption services, including search and 
contact, without the permission of the birth mother — 
permission which might be very difficult to obtain 20 or 30 
years down the road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that birth fathers’ rights are 
protected and that as many birth fathers as possible are included 
in the adoption process. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will amend 
The Adoption Act to include under the definition of ‘birth 
father’, a person who is named by the birth mother as the birth 
father and who acknowledges that he is indeed the biological 
father of her child. One aspect of adoption, Mr. Speaker, has not 
changed and that is the need to ensure that all adoptions and all 
parties to adoption are dealt with in a fair and consistent 
manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the philosophy which forms the foundation for 
adoption in Saskatchewan is that when a child is adopted he or 
she becomes a member of the adoptive family unit just as if 
they had been born into that family. The adoptive parents enjoy 
exactly the same freedoms and accept exactly the same 
responsibilities for raising the child as they would if he or she 
were theirs by birth. And that, Mr. Speaker, is as it should be. 
Adopted children have the same right as biological children to 
feel secure, loved, and supported in a stable family situation. 
 
Today in most adoptions, both the adoptive parents and the 
biological parent or parents favour some degree of openness. 
That is, having some degree of communication and/or contact 
among adoptive parents, birth parents, and the child. In fact 
often adoptions which initially involve the parties meeting only 
on a non-identifying basis move to more openness over time. 
Education and counselling at the time of the adoption can help 
to prepare adoptive and birth families for successful, ongoing 
communication and the contact. 
 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

In situations where there is agreement for both communication 
and contact between the adoptive parents, the birth parents, and 
the child, the agreement may be put into writing. While it is not 
legally binding and therefore not enforceable, it does serve to 
remind the parties about their agreement. Mr. Speaker, some 
have suggested that when such an agreement for 
communication and access exists, it should be considered part 
of the adoption order. They further suggest this might be 
possible under the Act as it now exists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that if access orders were to be made 
part of the order of adoption, this would constitute a major shift 
in the philosophy of adoption. It would have the potential — the 
significant potential — to undermine the ability of the adoptive 
parents to make decisions regarding the adopted child in the 
same way that other parents make decisions in the best interests 
of their children, and reduce the clarity that surrounds the 
responsibility that belongs to adoptive parents. Inevitably it 
could result in the development of an adversarial relationship 
between the adoptive parents and the birth parents. Clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, any such conflict or dissension between the adoptive 
parents and the birth parents would clearly not be in the child’s 
best interests and in fact could result in significant problems for 
both the child and the adoptive family as the child gets older. 
 
A communication agreement, on the other hand, eliminates the 
secrecy of adoption and allows for information to be shared and 
for questions to be answered. It allows the adoptive parents to 
meet with the birth parents and get to know them. It allows the 
birth parents to see or read about how the child is doing, which 
helps to confirm that the decision to place the child for adoption 
was a positive one. It allows the child to ask questions about his 
or her past and have them answered in a natural way as they 
arise. 
 
And so while, Mr. Speaker, we fully support and encourage 
openness in adoption, we need to take steps to prevent the 
possibly damaging effect of a legally binding communications 
agreement. We will therefore, Mr. Speaker, amend The 
Adoption Act. We will amend it to make it very clear that 
communication access agreements are not part of the adoption 
order, that communication and access orders are not 
enforceable, and that birth parents cannot make an application 
for access. 
 
Legislation and processes have been implemented over the past 
several years which ensure that all parties to adoption are 
counselled and supported, and all implications of adoption are 
carefully and clearly explored. This includes expectations 
surrounding a communications agreement. Experience has 
shown, Mr. Speaker, that both adoptive parents and birth 
parents can be prepared for a successful open adoption 
involving communication and access. 
 
Let me turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the question of intercountry 
adoption. Over the past several years a number of 
Saskatchewan families have successfully adopted a child or 
children from a jurisdiction outside of Canada. These children 
have adapted well to their new families and to Canada and are 
growing up happy and well-adjusted. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, as intercountry adoption became 
an increasingly popular option for those wishing to add to their 

families, some disturbing problems emerged in some nations. 
Adoptions were sometimes arranged through fraud or for 
monetary gain. Parents, who often felt they had little choice, 
were pressured into relinquishing their child or children for 
adoption. 
 
These tragedies occurred, Mr. Speaker, because there were no 
legally binding international standards in place and no system 
for supervision to ensure the rights of children were protected. 
 
In 1998 discussions at the Hague Conference on Private 
International Law included creation of a system of central 
authorities who could communicate directly with one another. 
On April 12, 1994, Mr. Speaker, Canada signed an agreement, 
The Uniform Intercountry Adoption Act, commonly referred to 
as The Hague Convention. 
 
In 1995 this House passed The Intercountry Adoption 
Implementation Act, 1995 which established the Minister of 
Social Services as the central authority with sole responsibility 
for regulating and providing international adoption services in 
Saskatchewan in accordance with The Hague Convention. By 
becoming a party to The Hague Convention, Saskatchewan 
agreed to help to ensure that intercountry adoptions take place 
in an atmosphere of honesty and trust, and that the interests and 
the well-being of the child remains paramount. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the convention sets criteria for consent to adoption 
and for reports on adoptive parents and children, prohibits 
improper financial gains, and ensures the child’s legal transfer 
between countries. 
 
In order to clarify procedures for intercountry adoption and to 
ensure that our legislation is consistent with The Hague 
Convention, Mr. Speaker, we will repeal section 27 of The 
Adoption Act and replace it with a new section 27 which 
borrows the language and provisions from the Hague 
legislation. This will ensure that all intercountry adoptions by 
Saskatchewan residents will follow similar processes and 
requirements. 
 
These amendments will extend the protection enshrined in The 
Hague Convention to all children coming into Saskatchewan. 
They will as well benefit those interested in adopting a child or 
children from another county, Mr. Speaker, and that the 
Department of Social Services will be in a better position to 
support and assist them. The process for adoptive applicants 
will not, however, be significantly altered as a result of these 
amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, finally, The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 will 
make several other minor changes to The Adoption Act. These 
changes will be of a housekeeping nature and will not constitute 
any change in policy. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased today to move 
second reading of The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments before I move adjournment of debate on the Bill 
before us, The Adoption Amendment Act. In listening to the 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

minister, I hear a few — in fact I shouldn’t say just a few — I 
think that there’s a number of positive initiatives that this Bill is 
bringing forward, and I think that . . . I firmly believe that it’s 
time they were addressed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, through you to the minister, I commend the 
minister and his department for reviewing the whole adoption 
Bill and coming to grips with some of the changes that have 
been taking place. 
 
As the minister indicated earlier, the facts are that fathers are 
becoming more intimate and involved in the birth of their 
children, whether that’s a father who’s very near or whether the 
father is somewhat removed, and in different circumstances 
people face different situations. But each birth parent has a 
genuine interest in their sibling . . . in the child they brought 
into the world. 
 
(1445) 
 
And I think it’s certainly appropriate that birth fathers are 
recognized and that they’re certainly acknowledged, because I 
think, as I found in my own personal experience, Mr. Speaker, a 
person who’s been put up for — or I should say, use the word 
“put up for adoption” — but has been adopted by other parents, 
have in the past, we haven’t had the openness in regards to 
information about the birth parents. 
 
And many young people, as they’ve become a little older in life, 
have always been interested in finding out information about 
their birth parents. And so I think this redefining the definition 
of the birth father and acknowledging his presence as well, I 
think is appropriate and certainly important for the sake of 
individuals who may find themselves in the situation of being 
adopted and then want to find out more about their birth 
parents. 
 
And I think this certainly improves the channels for them to go 
about seeking that information, finding out who the father was. 
I think there are cases where maybe it was easier to find the 
mother but the father may have been left out of the case. And as 
the minister commented, I think that maybe goes to addressing 
that concern. I think that’s certainly appropriate. 
 
The commitment by the minister and the department to clarify 
communication and access agreements and make sure that 
they’re not part of the adoption order, because they’re not 
enforceable, I think is appropriate. And I would certainly ask 
the minister and his officials to really look at this one closely 
and really make sure that they, when we get into the Act, that 
the Act addresses that concern, because I think that it’s a very 
major concern, especially when you . . . Well let’s move a bit 
from adoptive parents. 
 
Let’s move to situations where people are separated and some 
of the problems that individuals run into, spouses run into, in a 
separation or divorce settlement where agreements may have 
been reached in the court setting but that doesn’t necessarily 
mean that either partner may actually be able to fulfil . . . or 
even have access based on the agreements that have been 
reached. 
 
And in the case of adoptive children, Mr. Speaker, I think for 

adoptive parents, they have adopted a child with the idea of 
providing that child with a good home and giving him a good 
home and a quality home to live in. And if indeed we started 
opening it up and giving access or communication, I think that 
destroys the ability of parents to really identify with that child. 
So this is an area, as the minister has indicated, that needs to be 
looked at, that this piece of legislation wants to address very 
carefully so that we don’t create an area of conflict that may 
create a situation where it’s uncomfortable for the adoptive 
parents, as well as the birth parents. 
 
In regards to the foreign adoption process, the minister is right. 
Through the past number of years, as a result of conflicts and 
situations in other parts of the world and the lack of children 
who are up for adoption in this province and in this country, 
different parents have started to look to — and with reaching 
out I guess I would use, like to use, the term, arms of love — to 
children who are in situations where there is really no one to 
love them, no one to care for them. 
 
And in that case they’ve begun to reach beyond our borders and 
reach out to children in other lands, children who are in 
orphanages because their parents aren’t around or because 
there’s no guardian, and have brought, offered, their home as a 
home environment. Number one, because they would love to 
have children themselves; because they would love to have 
more members in their families. But number two as well, I think 
anyone I’ve chatted with, they’ve done it and as they reached 
out they had some . . . were somewhat reticent to reach out to 
someone in the other part of the world. 
 
But as they reached out and after a long, tedious process to 
make sure the papers were in order and put the adoption process 
in place, to wrap their arms around that little child, with the idea 
of bringing them home into their home and offering them a 
loving, home environment, Mr. Speaker, I think anyone of us 
who’s been . . . had the opportunity of meeting parents who’ve 
reached out will certainly attest to the fact that we can see a 
genuine love that’s been offered. 
 
And so the intent to clarify and certainly make this Bill 
consistent with The Hague Convention, I think is appropriate. 
It’s certainly a way of . . . basically I guess what it says to us as 
well, Mr. Speaker, is we’re offering individuals in other parts of 
the world, even little children, those who are in the most 
vulnerable position, giving them a place of hope, an 
opportunity, if indeed they are fortunate and if indeed they 
would love to be part of a Canadian family or Canadian home. 
We’re offering them an opportunity to become and be part of a 
loving family and a great country. 
 
And that I think, Mr. Speaker, as I was listening to the 
minister’s comments, I certainly think it’s appropriate. I believe 
it’s fitting that we as well adopt and become . . . make sure that 
our adoption policies are quite consistent with The Hague 
Convention. And I think as well we, Mr. Speaker, need to look 
very carefully at the whole process. I think this piece of 
legislation is doing that. And there’s no doubt in my mind that 
maybe down the road we’re going to have to make a few more 
changes, as we find, even though we’ve identified a number of 
areas that this Bill, this piece of legislation, specifically dealing 
with the whole process of adoption, is in flux and in change. 
And we may have to look at some other changes down the road. 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

But I think in general, The Adoption Amendment Act, Bill No. 
14 before us, certainly addresses a number of the issues that 
have been coming to the forefront. And with that in mind, I 
would . . . as I indicated earlier, I am quite supportive. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a little more time to 
review the Bill and a little more aggressively before we get into 
questions in Committee of the Whole. And with that in mind, I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Electronic Filing of Information Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Electronic Filing of Information Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of this Assembly will be familiar 
with the increasing demands from the general public for 
improved computer access. The Government of Saskatchewan 
is not exempt from these demands. With this Bill, the 
government is moving towards easier computer access to 
government services by Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
The purpose of this Bill is to facilitate electronic filing of 
documents and information by members of the public with 
government agencies. This legislation will allow any 
government department to designate Acts under which 
computer filing will be allowed. Regulations will then be 
passed under those designated Acts, setting out the form and 
content requirements for the filing of electronic information 
with that government agency. Further, the Bill will allow for 
direct computer filing where appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an initial response to the public demand 
for one stop computer access to government services. To that 
end, a pilot project is currently under way in three centres 
known as the one stop business registry project. Under this 
six-month pilot project, Saskatchewan Justice corporations 
branch clients will, with the assistance of our community 
partners, be able to use a locally based computer terminal for 
certain applications. 
 
If the computer pilot project is successful, this Bill would then 
permit us to implement regulations to formalize and broaden 
this process throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is 
an important first step in allowing government agencies to 
move toward electronic filing as they become technologically 
capable of doing so. 
 
Rather than presenting a series of amendments to each existing 
Act to accommodate electronic filing, this Bill establishes the 
criteria and rules for electronic filing under a variety of Acts 
which may then be addressed through the regulations under 
those specific Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this Bill and pilot projects like the one stop 
business registry project, government agencies are moving 
toward the one stop electronic access to government services 
that new technology permits and that members of the 
Saskatchewan public demand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting The 

Electronic Filing and Transmission of Documents and 
Information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as the 
minister indicated, certainly we live in an age where technology 
has certainly changed and the use of computers is advanced to a 
point that . . . As I was chatting with a gentleman last night, I’m 
basically in the Stone Age when it comes to the use of 
computers. But I know many people across this province and 
certainly the young people, younger generation, are really up to 
using computers and then have gone beyond just what some 
would have termed buying a computer and getting into the 
game format, to the fact that there’s so much available on 
computers. 
 
And I think what computers do and what they offer and the 
electronic age has offered to us is the ability to access, in many 
cases, somewhat more readily a lot of information that would be 
very difficult. The volumes of books that you would have to 
have on hand and the accessibility to them, for many people 
they would find it quite cumbersome and certainly it would be 
quite time consuming. But to go to the computer and to just 
open up a file and get the information that they’re looking for, 
seek information, whether it’s a student at school or a university 
student seeking information to do a paper that may be requested 
of them, or whether it’s a business person who wants to keep up 
to the changes in technology . . . 
 
And I was interested in seeing how other businesses of similar 
nature are operating and functioning. It’s certainly important 
that we indeed take a look at the information that’s available, 
and an orderly process I believe is what the Bill is trying to do. 
Put in place an orderly process whereby people may offer to an 
agency, information, and allow it to be filed on computer so that 
it’s made available. 
 
And I’m not exactly sure if, in opening up this filing 
information Act, whether or not the agency that will be running 
it at the end of the day may start to shake their heads with the 
inundation of information that may come to them to be filed. 
But I’m sure once it’s filed it’s more readily accessible and that 
would be positive. 
 
I guess when we look at the information before us and we look 
at the Act, I’m not exactly sure, and this is a question we’ll 
certainly ask of the minister when we get into Committee of the 
Whole . . . is the whole area of privacy and information, 
whether or not provisions are being made if people offer some 
information, whether or not they would like some restrictions 
on it. I guess that’s some of the information and some of the 
questions that we would be wishing to ask the minister when we 
get into Committee of the Whole. 
 
But in general, I look at the Bill and what I see . . . I don’t see a 
lot of major concerns with it. However, Mr. Speaker, I think it 
would be appropriate to at least peruse it a little more in depth 
before we move into committee, and therefore I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

Bill No. 23 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Statute Law Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
This Bill makes several minor amendments to a number of 
existing statutes. It corrects inaccurate references, numbering 
errors, punctuation errors, and other minor mistakes in statutes. 
 
The Bill also corrects errors made in previous consequential 
amendments. These amendments ensure that minor technical 
errors in legislation are removed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Statute Law. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a couple of 
comments, because in reality this piece of legislation doesn’t 
really need a lot to be brought forward. I think it’s fairly 
straightforward. It’s quite self-explanatory. I’m not exactly sure 
I’m in a position to try and tie up 15, 20 minutes or an hour’s 
time of the Assembly to try and address every dot and tittle of 
the piece of legislation we have before us. 
 
But however, Mr. Speaker, if I could just make one comment. 
As I’ve been sitting here this afternoon I’ve been viewing the 
quiet behaviour of the minister’s nephews up there. I really 
commend them for having sat here for this time and have been 
so observant of the Assembly. And I’m not sure if that’s 
because of the formidable opponent or whatever that the 
minister would be as an uncle, but I think his family members, 
his sister, needs to be commended, and I would certainly 
welcome them to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
With that said, being said though, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest 
that this piece of legislation, we're more than prepared to move 
to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1500) 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 13 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
speak for a few moments today on Bill 13 because I believe it is 
not only important to have fair and sound regulations when it 
comes to liquor and gaming in Saskatchewan, it’s just as 
important to ensure our business owners and their employees 
are dealt with by the government as fairly as possible. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, owning a bar in Saskatchewan 
today, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, is not the most secure 

business around. As the populations in our smaller communities 
continue to dwindle — thanks in no small part to the policies of 
this government — it is becoming harder and harder to make 
ends meet as the owner of a local tavern in a small, rural 
community. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that these 
businesses, like all businesses in Saskatchewan, be preserved 
and in fact be allowed to thrive. 
 
In some communities the local hotel or bar is one of few places 
to gather in the community. Even for those who do not consume 
alcohol, these country bars are a place to come together with 
one’s neighbours. Go to any town which has lost their pub to 
bankruptcy or fire or either, and the people will tell you what a 
hole it leaves in their town. Though some people in our 
communities may choose not to frequent these establishments 
— a decision we all respect — there’s no denying that the local 
bar is very important to life in small town Saskatchewan. 
 
In the larger centres the bar may not play as important a role to 
the fabric of the community. But those who own lounges or 
nightclubs are in a very precarious position as well. The bar 
business, like the restaurant business, is a very tough one to 
break into. The failure rate among these businesses is very high. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, while not all of us make a habit of 
spending our spare time in these places, they are businesses that 
employ many people both in the city and the country. For this 
reason the regulatory burden on these establishments should not 
be so onerous as to make their survival even more difficult. 
 
However, when we’re talking about liquor and we’re talking 
about gaming, it is very important that we do strike a good 
balance between some . . . balance between too lax regulations 
and over-regulation. And government, particularly the NDP 
government of Saskatchewan, in particular has its responsibility 
in this area since so much of the money that flows into General 
Revenue Fund year in, year out, comes from liquor and gaming. 
 
If you’ll allow a slight digression, Mr. Speaker, this year the 
government estimates it’ll transfer $374 million from its liquor 
and gaming slush fund into General Revenue. When one 
considers that the government is only running a real budgetary 
surplus of 6 million, we can all see how important the liquor 
and gaming industry has become to this government, especially 
when you remember that the Minister of Finance has predicted 
17.25 for a barrel of oil this year. The last time I looked, Mr. 
Speaker, oil was well under $16 a barrel. Speaking of gambling, 
that’s pretty risky estimating. 
 
The NDP may want us . . . may have us believe the balanced 
budget, if in fact ends are being balanced, is due to the astute 
management of members opposite, but the people of 
Saskatchewan know better, Mr. Speaker. They have learned a 
great deal about this government’s astute management in the 
last couple of months with the almost daily revelations 
regarding Channel Lake. I believe this sorry affair, more than 
anything, speaks most accurately about the management style of 
the members opposite. 
 
Oh sure, the NDP is great at taxing the people. But when it 
actually comes to spending this money wisely, it ends up down 
the drain in Guyana or at the bottom of Channel Lake or in an 
NST-SaskTel deal. Mr. Speaker, the NDP has balanced the 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

budget with utility rate hikes, higher taxes, downloading, and 
most especially, liquor and gaming. 
 
Like I said, Mr. Speaker, $374 million this year into the General 
Revenue Fund. That’s why I always find it a little difficult to 
comprehend when members from that side rise and say they are 
concerned about things such as liquor consumption or 
over-consumption, or that they are worried about gambling or 
problem gambling, because without these the government 
would be running a huge deficit year in and year out. 
 
Yes, it’s true that alcohol has been with us for a long, long time 
and governments have been reaping the rewards off it for a long 
time too, just as they have with tobacco. But full-scale 
gambling, the type which we see with video lottery terminals 
and casinos, have only come to Saskatchewan in the last few 
years since the members opposite have deemed it okay to make 
money off yet another vice, another weakness of the people. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important to properly regulate those 
who are involved in the business of selling and serving liquor. 
And yes, it’s important as well to regulate the gaming business, 
including bingo halls. But it’s also important for the 
government to keep in mind that it too plays a role in the 
problems that exist in our society because of liquor and because 
of gambling. 
 
On the gambling end in particular, the government has shirked 
most of its responsibilities. VLTs (video lottery terminal) have 
been introduced in this province at the request of hoteliers, 
which is understandable, given they need more to bring in 
customers into their establishments. But it is the government 
that is the biggest winner in this newly found love for gambling. 
And it is the government which constantly shrugs its shoulders 
when questions are being asked about the increasing number of 
addicted gamblers in Saskatchewan. 
 
It is the government that shrugs its shoulders when we hear 
about more and more cases of people stealing from their 
employers to feed their addictions to the VLTs. And it is the 
government that scoffs when it’s suggested that the 130 million 
that’s taken out of our communities each and every year 
through their VLTs may actually hurt their communities. 
 
It’s the members opposite who refuse to return any of this 
money to the communities where it came from. This is harmful, 
particularly to our smaller communities, Mr. Speaker. You take 
a couple of million bucks out of a community of 5,000 and, 
believe me, it’s noticed. It wouldn’t be so painful, Mr. Speaker, 
if some of this was returned in the form of services, as those 
members claim. But that isn’t true. 
 
Our smaller communities are having to do without decent 
access to medical care, more and more are losing their schools, 
people in these communities have to do with worse and worse 
highways, and yet the government says this money is getting 
back into these communities. I guess they must know exactly 
where it’s going, but the people in these towns and villages 
certainly can’t see it. 
 
This is a government that is absolutely addicted to gambling 
itself, Mr. Speaker. It’s hit the jackpot since the introduction of 
the VLTs and it has no intentions of stopping the windfall now. 

And none of the rest of us have benefited. Perhaps it is the 
government that would think about its own use of gaming and 
liquor when it starts amending regulations for the businesses 
and the charities who also benefit from these two enterprises. 
 
Regarding this particular Bill and the changes that are made, I 
would have to say for the most part they are positive — for the 
most part. As I stated earlier, there are a great many people 
working in the bars in this province, many of them on a very 
low wage. Many of them, I would guess, relying heavily on tips 
they get from serving the patrons. For these workers the closure 
of their placement of employment, even for a short time, is 
financially devastating. 
 
Many of these people are students putting themselves through 
school, or single parents struggling to make ends meet. For 
them, the loss of even one night’s work may mean the 
difference of being able to pay the rent or being out on the 
street. That’s why I think it’s important that the government, 
through this legislation, is changing its penalty for 
contravention of the Liquor and Gaming regulations to include 
fines instead of the automatic closures we’ve seen in the past. 
 
This also applies to places like community bingo halls. While 
often owned by private individuals, it is the charities that use 
the bingo halls who are most often hurt when the hall is closed. 
Just as it was when the charities who were hurt . . . when the 
provincial government’s VLTs cut heavily into the bingo 
business in this province beginning in ’93. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for this reason I support the concept of fines for 
those who are guilty of offences and who have failed to heed 
warnings from the Liquor and Gaming Authority. I think that 
there may be times that the bars may have to be closed for a 
constant and flagrant abuse of the law from an irresponsible bar 
owner. 
 
I think this has to be the punishment in the end for those who 
simply will not play by the rules. The fines should be used for 
offences that occur after initial warnings, but if the abuse is 
continued on and on despite such crimes, the government 
should close these establishments. 
 
I believe as well that the option of handing out fines should give 
the Liquor Authority a little more leeway when it comes to 
punishment. Whereas in the past even the most minor offence 
would result in closure for a period of time, with the fine 
option, different levels of fines could theoretically be handed 
out for different types of offence, be they serving minors, 
opening outside of regulated hours, etc. I say theoretically, 
because like so many other Bills introduced by the government, 
important details like this are left up to regulations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s worrisome because I don’t think anyone should be 
handed a $10,000 fine. The exact nature of the offences and the 
fines must be outlined in full before we can decide whether or 
not the government has got it right. 
 
I noticed that in our neighbouring province of Alberta the 
maximum fine is much higher — a hundred thousand dollars. 
However that province also has a very specific schedule of fines 
that are to be levied depending on particular offence and the 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

number of times a bar has been cited. 
 
I believe this government must also set forth a similar schedule 
of fines. As it is, this legislation leaves it absolutely 
open-ended, so we don’t know. And I find it unlikely that the 
$10,000 maximum will be used in any but the worst cases. But 
other businesses should know what they are really facing in 
terms of fines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have a few concerns about the fine process 
when it comes to bingo halls. As we all know, many of our 
local charities depend on bingo for their fund-raising. And 
unlike the government’s VLT windfall, the money raised by 
charities and other community or any non-profit groups actually 
is used for the good of the community. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Speaker, the legislation makes it clear that the 
only owner . . . that only the owner of a bingo hall in question 
can be fined for violations that occur at the bingo hall. Now I’m 
the last one who wants to see community groups face onerous 
fines, but in all fairness if in some cases it is the groups who are 
using the halls who are breaking the rules, does it make sense 
that the owner is fined? Just as it is not fair to the charities when 
a bingo hall is forced to close because of violations of the hall 
owner, it’s not fair that the owner is fined for the violations of 
the group using the hall. Obviously this would be a rare 
occurrence — at least one would hope so — but I think it’s still 
a concern that should be raised here. 
 
I also have some concerns about the appeal process. While I’m 
glad one is in place, I fear that as was the case before, it’s very 
much of a case of the Liquor and Gaming Authority hearing an 
appeal on its own decision to the Liquor and Gaming 
Commission. I’m not sure if this is a completely fair process to 
business people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have concerns about the three-year statute of 
limitations placed on this Bill. It seems to me that this is a 
longer statute of limitations that is in place for far more serious 
offences and crimes. It also seems to me that this gives the 
Authority much arbitrary power. For instance, it is conceivable 
that government officials could hold the most minor of offences 
over a business person’s head for a full three years. This seems 
to be unnecessarily long time and I don’t see the value in it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a positive note, I am pleased about the changes 
in regulation regarding special occasion permits. This will allow 
the holders of these permits to purchase their beer and wine 
from off-sale vendors instead of from government-owned liquor 
board stores. This will be a convenient change especially in 
communities that don’t have liquor board stores. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s not often we see this government giving up a monopoly 
voluntarily like they are here. Hopefully we’ll see more of this 
kind of free thinking in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the most part I believe the changes in this Bill, 
while not perfect, will bring about a better system. We do 
however have a number of questions for the minister at such 
time as we see this Bill in committee. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 
move to adjourn. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 2 — The 
Correctional Services Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is certainly 
much one could say about the way correctional services are 
handled in this province. Unfortunately this Bill doesn’t say 
anything about them at all. 
 
Bill 2, An Act to amend The Correctional Services Act, focuses 
on a couple of very specific issues when it comes to those who 
are imprisoned in the correctional facilities in our province. 
And for the most part, I have no objections to the changes that 
are proposed in this piece of legislation as far as the 
administrative changes. I do, however, have some concerns 
regarding the alternative programs and the security that is 
entailed and the responsibility when something may go wrong 
with one of these programs. 
 
Before I get into the Bill in detail, I do have some comments to 
make regarding issues surrounding our correctional facilities 
and justice issues. In his remark the other day the minister 
stated that significant changes were made to correctional 
services in Saskatchewan in 1993 and that now is a good time 
to take a second look and see what’s missing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it hard to believe that the only thing the 
minister could find that is wrong with our current system is 
what is contained in this Bill. Surely the minister is not saying 
that the only thing that has to be changed when it comes to 
crime and prisoners in this province are the rules which govern 
how they are transferred from one facility to another in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Because from my discussions with people throughout this 
province, it has become clear that there are many things that 
people do not like about how criminals are handled in 
Saskatchewan, or how our prisoners are dealt with once they are 
caught and put away to serve their punishment. And while these 
issues may not fit in exactly what this piece . . . with this piece 
of legislation, I think it’s worthwhile noting some of these 
issues today. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in his remarks last Wednesday, the Minister of 
Justice spoke a little bit on the issue of public safety, and that is 
precisely what I’m concerned with as well. The safety of our 
law-abiding citizens is paramount whenever we are dealing 
with a Bill related to our justice system and to those who have 
broken the laws to our province or our country. 
 
Too often the citizens of this province feel that the system is set 
up entirely for the criminals instead of those who are victimized 
by the criminal element. And who can blame them? When we 
hear over the weekend that a man is let out of prison after only 
four years when he participated in the brutal killing of a senior 
citizen, who can blame people for losing faith in the justice 
system? 
 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

When we hear the members opposite deny that youth crime is a 
problem in Saskatchewan for the first six years they were in 
power, who can blame the people for having their doubts? It 
was not until the NDP’s own polling told them yes, youth crime 
and crime in general is a major concern of the people of this 
province, that they begin to act concerned. And I believe “act” 
is the operative word here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I mean that when people hear the Minister of Justice not a year 
ago tell this House that youth crime isn’t a problem when 70 
cars have been stolen off the streets of Regina, how can they be 
asked to believe that the government has suddenly done a full 
180 on this issue and now is concerned? Just find a safe place to 
park your car, he told us. That’s the amount of concern he 
showed last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So is it just . . . It just isn’t credible now for those people to 
pretend that this is really a concern to them. But it is true that 
people are very concerned about crime in Saskatchewan, and 
they’re concerned about how prisoners are dealt with while 
they’re in prison. And they are concerned with the system used 
to let them out of prison. Most of all they are concerned about 
their own personal safety and the safety of their loved ones. 
Who can blame them, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Recently we heard the startling news that the teenager accused 
of killing a seven-year-old La Ronge child in some grotesque 
ritual has simply walked away from the mental health facility in 
North Battleford where he is now staying. 
 
This escape, and that’s what it was, left the people of North 
Battleford and La Ronge and all people of Saskatchewan 
frightened and concerned for their own safety. This is a young 
man that police have called psychotic and dangerous, and yet he 
was in a position where he could simply run away from the 
facility while he was out for a nice stroll in the sun. 
 
Mr. Speaker, technically of course, in our curious system, this 
isn’t a Justice issue. In fact it was the Minister of Health on his 
feet in this legislature answering the questions about this case, 
about this unlawful escape. And what was his response to the 
concerns of the people of Saskatchewan that this person was on 
the loose for 16 hours? He said that everything was just fine and 
no changes in the system were contemplated at the facility. 
 
This was hours after Sandy Charles was apprehended and taken 
back to the mental health hospital. Only a few hours had passed 
and the minister felt he had sufficient information to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan that everything was just fine in the 
system. 
 
The minister told the people of Saskatchewan that he would not 
even consider changing the system that allowed Sandy Charles 
so much freedom that he simply ran away from his attendant 
while pretending to tie his shoelace. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if everything was just fine this kind of thing 
wouldn’t happen. This young man didn’t even have to put up a 
struggle. He was simply put in a position where he was simply 
allowed to go free. There was no struggle; there was no daring 
escape. He simply ran away. This is completely unacceptable. 
 
And the minister stood in this House and said the only concern 

we should have is for the dignity of Sandy Charles. Mr. 
Speaker, of course we have to have concern for all those who 
are confined to mental hospitals for various ailments and 
illnesses. However, when we are dealing with a person who is 
described by police as extremely dangerous, perhaps we have to 
have other concerns as well. Like the concern for the people 
who may have been put in peril because this person was free, or 
what the minister called, elopement. 
 
The people called it an escape, and I think I’ll go . . . The police 
called it an escape, Mr. Speaker, and I think I’ll go along with 
the police. Their terminology seems to be far more accurate. 
 
And the minister stood here and told us that while everything 
was fine, he would not guarantee us or the people of 
Saskatchewan that another escape by a person like Sandy 
Charles would not happen again. Mr. Speaker, if everything 
was fine with the system, the minister would have been able to 
offer us that guarantee. 
 
The minister talks about dignity. What about the dignity of the 
people who are afraid to leave their homes at night? Are they 
not entitled to dignity as well? What about the dignity and 
well-being of people who are constant victims of crimes which, 
though less serious than taking someone’s life, are making our 
province a less desirable place to live? Mr. Speaker, what about 
the person who has his car or home broken into constantly? Of 
course car thefts and vandalism are even more maddening now 
than that . . . now that the government has seen fit to raise our 
deductibles to $700, breaking a contract with tens of thousands 
of motorists in this province. 
 
And those guys over there just turn their heads the other way. 
Oh sure, they’ll fire off the odd letter to Ottawa. Whenever they 
can point the finger at someone else, the NDP will surely jump 
at the chance. But they will . . . have not, will not, and probably 
never will accept their own share of responsibility when it 
comes to our justice system, whether it is young offenders or 
adult crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on in vein for hours and I’m sure the 
members opposite probably wish I would. However, I think 
these are pertinent facts to bring up when we discuss any piece 
of legislation having to do with our correctional facilities or our 
justice system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regarding this Bill specifically, for the most part, 
the administrative changes that are proposed in this piece of 
legislation seem sound and reasonable. The minister told us 
there are approximately 2,200 transfers of prisoners in 
Saskatchewan on an annual basis. For one official to personally 
approve each and every one of these transfers seems very 
onerous. In most cases it is probably quite acceptable that the 
employees in the correctional system lower than the executive 
director be allowed to approve such transfers. The executive 
director of corrections, after all, probably has many more 
important things to do than to approve each and every one of 
these transfers. 
 
The minister stated that the executive director will still be 
required to authorize the transfers in cases where there is 
concern for public safety or concerns about the cost or concerns 
about the care and condition of the inmate. I guess I would have 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

a question here about who makes this determination. Who 
decides when a prisoner falls into one of these categories prior 
to his or her movement between correctional facilities? I am 
worried that a few of the more dangerous prisoners who are 
incarcerated in the system may fall through the cracks. And I’ll 
definitely be asking the minister for some assurances that there 
are enough cautionary procedures in place that there isn’t a 
mistake made when transferring prisoners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that for the most part — or at least a 
large part — prisoners who are transferred from one facility to 
another are moved so that they can take advantage of certain 
programs that are set up. And I guess I try to understand this 
and it’s to help rehabilitate them. Of course, Mr. Speaker, 
rehabilitation must be an important aspect of any prisoner’s 
time in jail. Society is not well served if prisoners simply sit in 
their cell all day or simply use their time in jail to take notes 
from their fellow inmates and learn to become better criminals. 
This does none of them any good. 
 
So alternative measure programs, in theory are positive. 
However, again public safety must be the first thing on our 
minds when we discuss such programs. Part of these alternative 
measures is the appointment of a community justice committee 
run by volunteers from the community. I commend the people 
who serve on these committees or will serve on these 
committees. Part of the reason for this Bill is that these people 
will be freed of liability if something goes wrong with a 
criminal who is taking part in these alternative programs and 
not spending his days and nights behind bars. 
 
I think it’s important that these volunteers from the community 
do not have to worry about liability. If this was a concern I’m 
pretty sure no one would be lining up to volunteer. They are 
volunteering for a very vital role and I will need some 
assurances from the minister about training for these people and 
backgrounds of those who are serving on such committees. 
When we do talk about liability we are saying that there is a 
potential at any time for something to go wrong. 
 
Once again we are back to the issue of public safety, Mr. 
Speaker. This Bill acknowledges that yes indeed there is a 
possibility that something could go awry when a person who 
would otherwise be in prison is taking part in a program in the 
community. When something like this happens we are left with 
the question: who is responsible? 
 
This Bill not only takes away potential liabilities in the 
community justice committee, as the minister suggested in his 
comments, it also takes away potential liability from the 
minister himself or the minister’s department for things that go 
wrong. Section (4)(b) of the Act states that even problems that 
arise due to neglect or default of execution of good faith under 
this system cannot be held against the Department of Justice. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if there is indeed neglect occurring and there 
is a threat to public safety because of such neglect, somebody 
has to be held responsible or those problems will simply 
continue on and on down the road. We are going to have to 
explore this issue in much greater detail with the minister 
before we can approve of this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I’m raising unfounded concerns 

when I raise the issues I have today. I think it’s incumbent on 
all of us to remember there are two sides to the justice system: 
there are those who become part of the system because of their 
own actions and there are those who are part of the system not 
of their own accord but because they are victims of crime. So 
much of the legislation we deal with in this House, and much of 
the legislation dealt with by the House of Commons, deals 
specifically and only with concerns from the criminals 
themselves. 
 
I think it’s time that all of our legislators remember that for 
every criminal in the prison system or every criminal enrolled 
in one of these alternative community programs, there is a 
victim out there. And while it is important that we do explore 
alternatives to simply locking up criminal element, we have to 
be ever mindful of public safety. We cannot be putting these 
criminals in positions where the public may be put at risk. 
 
And we will also be questioning the minister very closely about 
who exactly will be held responsible if something goes terribly 
wrong. These are the questions the people are asking and these 
are the questions we’ll also be asking, Mr. Speaker. So at this 
time I would like to adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 3 — The Public 
Utilities Easements Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
review this Bill and in many ways this Bill is actually fairly dry 
to say the least, we in the official opposition caucus actually 
have been noticing how few really substantive Bills have been 
brought forward so far this season . . . or this session. 
 
We would almost think that the members opposite were running 
scared and wanting to get out of the Assembly quickly. I’m not 
sure if that’s what their purpose is. None the less, Mr. Speaker, 
it is our job as official opposition to give every Bill thorough 
review and examination. And I see already, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
hit a nerve and I’ve got a response. And we intend to do that 
with every one of our Bills and every other piece of legislation 
before us. 
 
As the minister noted in his speech, the main intent of this Bill 
is to expand and enhance the provisions of The Public Utilities 
Easements Act. When the Bill was originally drafted in 1950, 
the range of services that require easements was not 
contemplated. These include such things as cable TV lines, and 
CO2 pipelines. Clearly it is in the public interest that such 
provisions should be made. The businesses that provide these 
new services need to have the security of knowing that they 
have perpetual rights when they lay cables, or lay pipelines or 
cables. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, landowners need to have their 
rights on these matters protected and enshrined. It needs to be 
very clear that the grant of these easements must always be 
strictly voluntary and not the products of expropriation or 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

coercion. 
 
Of course such reassurance cannot be given absolutely in this 
province. The right to grant easements as a form of property, 
since we still do not recognize property rights in this province, 
landowners will continue to be subject to government whims. 
So long as the government continues to have broad and 
unrestricted powers of expropriation, the minister’s words about 
the voluntary nature of this Act will always ring a little hollow. 
 
(1530) 
 
How were the easements handled at Condie, for example. Did 
our dear friend Mr. Messer go out and seek voluntary 
participation from the residents there? Clearly not. Instead we 
had communities and landowners up in arms about the power 
line. The NDP and Mr. Messer turned a deaf ear to these 
protests and simply deemed the project to be in the public 
interest. I guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s all part of that unique 
personality and management style of his that we hear so much 
about. 
 
The continuing problem with easements and with property 
issues in general in this province is that they depend on the 
goodwill of the government and its agents in the public utilities 
to deal fairly with landowners and that has certainly not been 
the history of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can look back to issues such as the GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program) debate and other pieces of 
legislation. Even the judges’ contract. Instead, this government 
has repeatedly shown its willingness to trod on the rights of 
landowners, use its vast executive powers to define public 
interest wherever they see fit, and to order expropriations at 
will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill does nothing to address these concerns. 
However, that is a broader, more philosophical argument that 
can wait for another day. Even leaving that issue aside, there are 
some areas where this Bill fails — by implication, if not by 
what it actually does. 
 
The Bill stands as a testament to the slow-moving wheels of 
government and to the dangers of micro-managing government 
regulation and red tape. To repeat the reasons given by the 
minister, this Bill was brought in because the 1950s Bill didn’t 
anticipate things like cable TV lines. 
 
Well Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring it to the minister’s 
attention that cable TV has been around for about 20 years now. 
And what have cable TV companies been doing to secure 
easements and other agreements from landowners up to this 
point? Why has it taken so long for this minor and obvious 
change to take place? And with the growing segment of the 
viewing public switching to satellite dishes, it seems like we 
brought this legislation before the Assembly just as the cable 
industry is struggling to avoid becoming obsolete. That kind of 
bogged-down, slow-moving government is simply unacceptable 
in this era when technological change is moving so quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is true enough that this Bill makes some effort 
to change that by allowing new types of companies to be added 
by regulation, but the original Bill is still rife with obsolete 

references. For example, the original Bill repeatedly refers to 
easement rights to telegraph lines. Yes, Mr. Speaker, for 
telegraph lines. In the age of the Internet we still have laws on 
the books defining the rights of anyone who wants to set up a 
telegraph line. I think it would be pretty safe in eliminating 
things like that from this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More importantly, this Bill is really only a stopgap to the 
solution or to the question of changes in technology and the 
property rights that go along with them. All the Bill does is 
move the red tape and paperwork from the legislature over to 
the bureaucracy. A new industry would still have to go through 
an elaborate process to get its transmission rights recognized in 
regulation. Perhaps that is a good make-work project for 
officials in the Justice department, but for anyone else it is just a 
hassle and a barrier to doing business in this province. 
 
The real question that this Bill should be addressing is why do 
we need to have these sorts of civil matters micro-managed in 
the first place? What this Bill should simply say is that anyone 
seeking to transmit goods or services across property or to 
otherwise erect a facility on that property should have the right 
to negotiate an easement with the owner that could then be 
registered with Land Titles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no need for the Justice department to keep 
great long lists of who can and cannot negotiate such 
easements. It should be recognized as a simple principle of 
contract law that is open to anybody, whether they are erecting 
a telegraph line, or maybe 20 years from now putting through a 
nuclear fusion power transmission line. 
 
This would not detract from the power of the Crown to regulate 
this or that industry with relation to safety standards and the 
like. This Bill does not address any of these issues nor should it. 
 
The lesson that we should have learned from the old Bill is that 
we cannot anticipate every circumstance where an easement is 
necessary. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we should not waste public 
resources either in this legislature or in the civil service to try to 
detail every circumstance that may come up. 
 
The government has made a commitment to reducing red tape 
and bureaucracy as it relates to business. So far we have seen 
very little evidence of that. This Bill, far from simplifying red 
tape, just perpetuates. 
 
For these reasons, our caucus will be proposing a number of 
amendments to the Bill at committee stage. Although we agree 
with the overall intent and goals of the Bill, we feel that it can 
be enhanced and streamlined even further. If this government is 
serious about reducing red tape, I would urge the minister and 
the members opposite to consider seriously the points that I 
have made today. 
 
With the support of all members, I think we can show the public 
that the parties in the House can work together to improve 
legislation like this. And, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to 
considering this Bill further at committee stage. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her staff, 
please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re a little early and so 
some of my officials have not yet arrived for these estimates, 
but to my right is Michael Littlewood, the director of third-party 
funding and legislative services. 
 
Before we get into the contents of the estimates however, I’d 
ask for leave to introduce some guests that have come here from 
Japan. 
 
The Chair: — Maybe we’ll just wait for the guests to get 
totally seated, if that’s okay. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, a 
group of exchange students who are seated in your gallery. 
These are 77 grade 11 students from Yamate High School in 
Yokohama, Japan. And they’re in Saskatchewan attending 
classes at the Saskatoon Catholic high schools. 
 
They are accompanied today by teachers, Mr. Jinmi, Mr. 
Takewaki, Mr. Sato, Mr. Takei, and Mr. Winskell, as well as 
chaperons, Mrs. Albers, Mr. Rowley, and Mr. Murdock. 
They’re also accompanied by David Knight, who is the 
international student program coordinator for the Saskatoon 
Catholic schools. 
 
Yamate High School is a private high school in Yokohama that 
was founded to foster global awareness and understanding 
among nations of the world. All grade 11 students in this school 
are required to participate in a two-week exchange. The 
students are staying with the families of Saskatoon residents 
and will be participating in all family activities during their 
stay. 
 
At this time I’d like to ask all of my colleagues in the 
Legislative Assembly to extend a very warm welcome to these 
students from Japan, and we hope that you enjoy your stay in 
our province and in our country. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the leader of the opposition. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — With leave, to also introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, I’d also like to join 
with the Minister of Education to welcome the students and the 
teachers from Japan. I hope that your two-week stay here in the 

province of Saskatchewan and in Canada is rewarding and that 
you learn a lot about our country and the people that are here. 
And of course I know that Saskatoon will prove to be an 
excellent city and I know that your hosts will do just a terrific 
job in welcoming you here to Saskatchewan. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition I’d like to welcome you to 
Saskatchewan and I hope you have a terrific stay. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
welcome, Mr. Littlewood, this afternoon, and I know that 
there’ll be other people that will be joining in. 
 
I’d like to begin, Madam Minister, and I didn’t have the 
opportunity to send over to you information that I’d like to have 
for estimates. I didn’t realize Education estimates would be up 
this soon in the session. So if I could have the assistance of a 
page. 
 
I have provided for you, Madam Minister, and your officials a 
list of information that has been shared by your department with 
the opposition before. And I’d like to indicate that the 
information that I’m requesting is a list of all senior 
management officials and responsibilities of each. 
 
Number two, a list of all Department of Education employees at 
March 31, 1998. 
 
Number three, salary average for people in the department and 
an employee breakdown for each of the sections of your 
department. 
 
Number four, enrolment statistics as of September 30, 1997. 
And what I’m looking for there of course, is the provincial 
statistics per the different classifications of school divisions. 
 
Number five, provincial statistics for the assessments, the mill 
rates, the number of schools, the number of students in those 
schools for each of the school divisions. And I understand from 
your comments last night we’re at 107 school divisions now. 
 
Number six, the provincial summary of the grant calculations 
for each recognized expenditure area. 
 
Number seven, the summary of grant amounts allocated to each 
school division under the foundation grant formula. 
 
And number eight, the summary of projects approved by the 
facilities department: major capital projects, and (b) repair and 
renovations. 
 
(1545) 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

With that . . . and I know that that will take awhile for the 
information to be made available, but I’m sure it will be 
available before we actually get into next estimates. And I see 
you have other officials arriving as well. 
 
Madam Minister, I guess, just before you rely on any of your 
officials to provide some of the documents, I guess this past 
year I think, has been one of change in the education 
community regarding school divisions. And the comment I 
made is the fact that we are now less in numbers, in terms of 
numbers of school divisions. 
 
Your department embarked on a survey I guess, of school 
divisions, not only parents and teachers but the public as well, 
and from that you concluded that voluntary amalgamations was 
a step in the right direction. And a number of school divisions 
have taken advantage of that, and I’ll say “advantage.” 
 
Could you indicate, Madam Minister, how you feel 
amalgamations have gone with those divisions that have 
experienced that? Where in the province are we having school 
divisions amalgamate? What do you see as some of the positive 
things that have occurred in amalgamations, and what kinds of 
difficulties have you been able to identify as far as the 
amalgamations, in that respect? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — To answer your question, we have had 
several amalgamations that took place in this past year. We had 
school board elections in the fall of 1997 whereby people were 
elected to several new school divisions. 
 
I’ll give you the names of the school divisions that have 
restructured. Obviously Canora and Timberline, which you are 
familiar with, has been restructured into Crystal Lakes School 
Division. Kerrobert and Wilkie have become the Landswest 
School Division. Long Lake and Last Mountain have become 
Sask Central School Division. North Battleford and Battleford 
School Divisions have become the Battlefords School Division. 
The North Battleford Roman Catholic School Division, Unity 
School Division, and Wilkie School Division have become the 
North West Roman Catholic School Division. Oxbow and 
Arcola have become Souris Moose Mountain School Division. 
And Prince Albert Rural, Prince Albert Public, Carleton Comp., 
and Kinistino School Divisions have become the Saskatchewan 
Rivers School Division. And Wood River and Gravelbourg 
School Divisions, and Mankota Our Lady of Fatima Catholic 
School Division have become the Golden Plains School 
Division. 
 
So we have moved from 119 school divisions to 107 — 79 
public divisions, 19 separate divisions, and 9 francophone 
divisions. And I can tell you that in this session of the 
legislature, as a result of the consultation that the francophone 
community has undergone, there will be amendments to The 
Education Act whereby francophone school divisions can 
restructure into one division in the province. 
 
As far as how has it gone? For the most part I think we’re just 
now into the process. School divisions are now just starting to 
negotiate the new LINC (Local Implementation and Negotiation 
Committee) agreements, because there were several local 
teacher collective agreements that have come into the new 
division so the process is just begun. However we have received 

many positive reports from parents and trustees, in fact people 
who weren’t sure that this was going to work well, and they 
have said for the most part it has meant more services for 
students in the classroom. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In the area 
where you’ve identified amalgamations and you indicated that 
school board officials, I think were elected for the first time last 
time, last year, based on the new school division, have there 
been any difficulties in the actual administration now being put 
in place in each of those school divisions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m advised that nothing that would be 
out of the ordinary in that we’ve had new divisions come 
together under one roof. There have been new trustees elected 
to take over the larger school division. But nothing that we 
would consider out of the ordinary. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — What role do the umbrella organizations, that 
is LEADS (League of Educational Administrators, Directors 
and Superintendents) and SASBO (Saskatchewan Association 
of School Business Officials), what role are they playing in 
terms of the successful amalgamations that you’ve had so far? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m advised that both SASBO, 
LEADS, the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation), and the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association are all involved on 
the restructuring committee of the department. And our 
observation has been one of helpfulness, that LEADS and 
SASBO and the other partners have been extremely helpful in 
the process. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, last night at the spring 
council you talked about criteria for amalgamation and 
probably being able to evaluate amalgamations as to whether or 
not particular school divisions should amalgamate or whether 
there’s an advantage. 
 
Has your department developed a set of criteria that you would 
expect voluntary amalgamations to adhere to, or are you 
looking at amalgamations from if there are two or three willing 
participants, then no matter what the set-up is in terms of 
numbers of students, numbers of schools, that those types of 
amalgamations will proceed and get support from your 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can say, thus far when school 
divisions have applied to the department and to myself to go 
through a restructuring process, the requirement has been one of 
consultation with the public and major public support in the 
area. 
 
We have not set up criteria per se, but what we have indicated 
to school boards, that if a particular area wants to go elsewhere 
and it makes sense in terms of the mobility of the people in that 
particular area, that’s something that could be accommodated. 
 
An example would be, when the Blaine Lake School Division 
voted to dissolve and go with the Saskatchewan Valley School 
Division, that folks in Hafford wanted to go with the Battleford 
division, and they were allowed to do that. 
 
And as you know, the Battleford division has now restructured 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

with the North Battleford School Division into the Battlefords 
School Division. So there hasn’t been a problem with people 
using common sense and going thus far where it makes sense to 
go in terms of restructuring. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You raise a good point, Madam Minister, that 
I’ve had a couple of contacts from, different school divisions 
who have already amalgamated. And I guess I look at the 
boundaries that are in existence right now for school divisions, I 
think are created somewhere in 1944. And what we’re seeing, 
and you gave the example of the two school divisions within 
my constituency, being of course Canora and Timberline, I 
think what has occurred there is the existing boundaries of both 
school divisions have just been put together into one block and 
now we’re referring to that as Crystal Lakes. 
 
How will the department be dealing with those concerns on the 
fringe areas where you have areas, because of economic 
change, because of demographic changes, where we have a 
need to have to address the concerns of boundaries not being 
necessarily in the right place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well first of all what I’ve said very 
clearly is that this is the restructuring process; this is not 
necessarily about amalgamation, amalgamating the same school 
division. In the case of your school division, at no time was 
there a request made to have part of either of those two 
divisions go with another division. 
 
In the case of the Blaine Lake School Division, they wanted, the 
people in Hafford, wanted to go to Battlefords and that was 
fine. So what we encourage school boards to do is respond to 
public concerns at the local level. If divisions feel that they 
need to go in another direction, a particular area of the division 
feels they need to go in another direction, then that should be 
seriously considered and looked at to make sure it makes sense. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Is the Boundaries Commission a functioning 
body right now and who are the members on that, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, this is a functioning committee at 
present. It is chaired by Jack Lloyd a former director of 
education and also someone who works in the department. As 
well, Dolores Neil, who is a person from Harris who is a 
member of the Saskatchewan school councils association, 
Tanys Penny and Valerie Porterfield. I believe Tanys Penny is 
the person that’s been involved as a secretary-treasurer, and 
Valerie Porterfield is a former school trustee. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, if there were concerns — 
and you’ve indicated that you haven’t had any requests from 
school divisions — if there are concerns with boundaries, 
regarding students that are crossing boundaries and attending 
schools in another division, would this be the commission that 
would review that boundary? And how would it go about 
making recommendations to you? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Boundaries Commission has not 
been used thus far in restructuring. It has been used to deal with 
issues of boundaries between school divisions. When school 
divisions can’t necessarily come together to determine what 
would be an appropriate boundary, the commission has public 

hearings and they issue recommendations to the minister. 
 
So the commission thus far has not been used in restructuring or 
for restructuring, but it certainly has been used in other 
boundary issues. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you’ve indicated that of the 107 school divisions that 
exist right now that there were nine francophone, I believe, and 
you said, you indicated that there may be potential for changes 
in those numbers and that we might be seeing some changes 
there. 
 
If we leave those out and look at the other existing school 
divisions, do you still see future amalgamations in 1998 and 
’99? And I guess what I’m asking you is to look ahead and 
indicate what you think will be the types of school divisions 
that we’ll have in a year, year and a half. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I would be reluctant to speculate 
on the numbers. What I can say is that there are many school 
divisions across the province that are having discussions with 
their neighbours; they’re having discussions inside their school 
division boundaries. 
 
We just had a set of elections in the fall of 1997. So I would 
predict that if there’s going to be more major restructuring 
initiatives in the province, I suspect that they will not formally 
happen until the elections in the year 2000. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You indicated 
that, over the winter I assume, that the new boards of education 
for those newly, newly created school divisions are busy 
probably with their various teacher groups in trying to obtain 
LINC agreements. And when we start to look ahead at LINC 
agreements, will your department be assisting the various 
officials? And I know that we’re talking about a representative 
of course of LEADS, as a director of education, and the local 
negotiating committee. 
 
If you will be providing assistance or if you’re not, do you have 
a timetable in place for when you see these new boards of 
education arriving at a negotiated contract? Is there a hope that 
those contracts will be in place by a specific time? Or are you 
just going to let it take its course if it takes two, three, four 
years to arrive at new agreements? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well as you know, the province does 
not involve itself in the local bargaining — the LINC 
agreements. I don’t know how long the process will take. This 
is entirely up to the local school division and the teachers that 
are involved at the local level. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, back in December, your 
department cancelled the protocol agreement between the 
trustees association and your government. And I guess, as a 
result of that, we’ve now . . . there is a negotiated contract in 
place for the teachers but there is also a contract in place that is 
not signed by the largest player in this whole, in this whole 
game, which is the trustees association. 
 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

And I’m wondering if you could identify what you see as a plan 
of action that you’re putting in place as minister or that your 
officials are putting in place to have a more cohesive approach 
to negotiation that involves, I guess, the support of all the 
partners — the teachers’ federation, the trustees association, and 
of course government. How will you arrive at a plan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have a collective agreement with 
teachers that will take us to 1999 — the end of 1999. As you 
know, we have had two protocol arrangements with the trustees. 
At the end of the day, in December after numerous meetings, 
we just weren’t able to come together in the collaborative way 
that we would have wanted to. And we ended up ending our 
formal protocol arrangement with the trustees. 
 
And the trustees were at the bargaining table with us when we 
negotiated the collective agreement with the teachers. They 
were involved in all of the process, the meetings. They were 
sitting at the table with the province, and on a point of principle 
I believe they’ve determined not to sign the collective 
agreement. 
 
As you probably know, the members of the government team, 
the five members, are senior people in the Department of 
Education. They are the assistant deputy minister, the director 
of third-party funding and legislative services, the director of 
OMLO (official minority language office), and two of the 
regional directors. And this took a lot of their time and their 
effort, and as a result of the significance of the bargaining and 
all the meetings that were held, these are officials that now need 
to do the rest of their work in the department. 
 
So I think what we will see is a bit of a cooling-off period so 
that the officials can get back to the day-to-day work of the 
department, because a lot of things were put aside because we 
were negotiating a collective agreement. I’ve continued to meet 
with the school trustees. I’ve met with them, I believe on two or 
three occasions in the last few months and I will be meeting 
with the trustees again. 
 
Do I have a formal plan? I would say, not yet. I think that what 
we need to do as government and trustees is sit down and talk 
about where do we go from here. And we’re not obviously at 
that point yet, but I think we will be in the future. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for those 
comments. I think that it’s critical that you arrive at a situation 
where there is support for a procedure past 1999’s contract 
because there’s no question I think, that there has been a 
fragmentation and I think it will mean that there will be 
conflicts throughout Saskatchewan between trustees as 
individuals maybe and between teachers as well. And I don’t 
think that that’s going to be the best for education. 
 
So I would encourage you to continue with your plan. As 
you’ve said, I believe that there needs to be a cooling-off period 
first and that, you know, negotiations will begin for a new 
contract probably in early 1999 and that should mean that 
everyone is at the table again. 
 
You indicated yesterday also first that the structure is as The 
Education Act currently indicates, which is a five/four 
relationship and that you have no desire to change that at all. I 

would ask then, if you are going to work in that kind of system, 
what kinds of changes can you make internally to involve all 
participants, that is all nine members, to feel that they are going 
to be able to participate and contribute to negotiating a contract 
that the current . . . that the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association) is responsible for over 60 per cent of 
those costs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I could say to the member is this: 
that — and I understand this from speaking to folks that were 
around in the ’70s and the ’80s — there has been a tension, for 
whatever reason, surrounding the make-up of the 
trustee-government bargaining team, even in the days when the 
government was funding 58 per cent of the cost of education, if 
you exclude pensions and benefits. Now if you include pensions 
and benefits, then obviously the province and the trustees are 
about 50/50 in terms of the overall costs of the delivery of K to 
12 education in the province. 
 
So there has been this tension that has existed long before I was 
on the scene, long before you were on the scene. It existed in 
the ’80s; it existed in the ’70s and I think it’s because of the 
legislation — the five/four — five government people, four 
trustees. And trustees have not appreciated that. And you as a 
member of . . . the president of the school trustees association, 
and as far as I’m concerned, the trustees came as close as they’ll 
ever get to a four/four/one, with a protocol agreement, without 
amending the legislation. 
 
Now what was clear from my experience in this — and my 
experience is practically five years long — is that it didn’t 
work. It did not work. And what we now have to do is figure 
out how do we deal with the tension, because I think these are 
historical tensions and they will be tensions that will go on into 
the future. How do we deal with these historical tensions, the 
tensions, in such a way that we can be more collaborative. 
Because it seems like there’s two competing interests here but 
we’re supposed to be the management team. 
 
The teachers are extremely focused on what their goal is and 
what we need to do as government-trustees is to figure out what 
our goal is in a collaborative way. And I’m not sure how we 
work through that, given that there is this clash that is historical 
from what I can gather from speaking to people who’ve been 
involved in the process in the past. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I guess where I’d like to 
begin with your comments there is to indicate that the 
relationship between the government and the trustees is a 
relationship that occurs away from the bargaining table. 
Because when you’re at a bargaining table you have two 
groups. The one group is the teachers’ group and the other 
group is the management group, as identified by the Act, and 
you’ve indicated that that’s a five/four combination. 
 
I’ve been part of that management group and have sat at that 
table. And I guess the things that go on before you enter into a 
negotiating meeting with the teachers are occurring in a closed 
room, where the teachers are not aware of what you’re planning 
in terms of strategy, and the government decisions that are 
looked at by the management committee to determine what is 
available for funding, what is available for non-costing type of 
clauses that may be negotiated, the expansion of an agreement 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

— all those things take place before you get into that 
negotiation session. 
 
So when you indicate . . . and you said the protocol agreement, 
and I won’t even refer to the protocol agreement, I’ll say the 
four/four/one relationship that existed didn’t work — those 
were your words. And I guess I’d like you to expand on that by 
indicating why you think that a four/four/one outside of the 
negotiation process, before it begins speaking with the teachers’ 
federation, why didn’t that process work? What kinds of 
difficulties can you identify that contributed to that agreement 
or that kind of an arrangement falling apart? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well the reason why the four/four/one 
didn’t work, the protocol agreement, where we had jointly 
agreed to chair in the last collective agreement in particular, 
was the fact that the person, the one could not cast a deciding 
vote. So it was a stalemate, and we just could not agree on a 
mandate change. 
 
I’m not going to go into all of the details here. But I can just say 
this, that we had nine meetings, nine lengthy meetings to try 
and get a mandate changed, and we couldn’t get the change. 
And at the end of the day ultimately the government is 
responsible. We are ultimately responsible for public education 
in the province. At the end of the day you have to make 
decisions. You cannot have stalemate, stalemate, stalemate that 
goes for a year. You have to make a decision. 
 
And that’s why I would say, and I was pleased to see Dr. 
Melenchuk from the Liberals said this last night, he doesn’t 
plan on changing the five/four if he ever becomes the 
government. We didn’t hear your view on this. You said you’d 
tell me today. 
 
Well I would say to you that we’ve had the Conservatives, your 
party, in the legislature, your party in the legislature in the 
1980s and they didn’t change the five/four. 
 
And so what I would say to you is, what is your intentions? Are 
you going to change the legislation? Sounds as though you are. 
What is your public position here, Mr. Leader of the Official 
Opposition? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I am not in government 
right now and the position, the position that I will take, the 
position that I will take will be one that will determine what is 
best for education. And if that is, if that is a five/four 
relationship, because the education is a provincial 
responsibility, that will be a decision that we will make in 
government. 
 
Madam Minister, you stated . . . I want to indicate, Madam 
Minister, that you pointed directly at me a number of years ago 
and you said, as Minister of Education I will make this 
agreement work. That’s what you said directly to me. I will 
make this agreement work. 
 
And it hasn’t worked. As a result, you’ve now indicated that it 
was because you couldn’t reach a mandate with the people that 
were at the table. 
 
Now I guess the question would be, is the mandate over 

finances? Is it over the fact that the government wasn’t able to 
determine what it would spend on this agreement? Is it to do 
with clauses that were being put forward on the table? 
 
You indicated that you don’t want to share those kinds of things 
today. But I think people in Saskatchewan, especially the 
trustees association, want to know what kind of a situation 
they’re getting into for 1999. Could you expand on that, please? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The member says that I said I would 
make this work. Well this is like a marriage — takes two people 
to make it work, takes two people. We are the management 
team. In order to make it work you have to have a willing 
partner. 
 
And I would say to you that, in the case of the protocol 
agreement, for a variety of reasons we became unwilling 
partners. We could not make it work. We wanted . . . our goal 
as a government was to get a negotiated collective agreement 
without a strike. We had a mandate. We had a number that we 
had in mind that would meet our goal to have a balanced 
budget, to deal with debt reduction, and to also have program 
decreases . . . or increases. So I would say that we were in a 
position where we just couldn’t get the trustees to agree to a 
mandate change. For whatever reasons they were not prepared 
to agree. 
 
And at the end of the day, after one year, after numerous 
meetings, after meetings, meetings, meetings, meetings, 
meetings, that went on and on and on and on, we decided that 
the time had come to get back to the bargaining table with a 
mandate so we could get a negotiated collective agreement. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I’m not sure whether you’re 
referring to one protocol agreement or two. As I understand, 
after the first protocol agreement . . . the negotiations that took 
place under that first protocol agreement arrived at a situation 
where the contract was also not signed by the trustees’ 
association, and could you explain whether or not there were 
negotiations and actual changes to that protocol agreement to 
arrive at what you felt would be a more workable protocol 
agreement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There were. There were people that 
were strongly lobbying the province not to enter into another 
protocol agreement with the trustees. We wanted to make this 
work. We thought that this could work, but at the end of the day 
with the second protocol agreement and after trying to bargain a 
collective agreement for a year, it just couldn’t work. It did not 
work. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Was this a fault of the conditions of the 
second protocol agreement or could you identify some of the 
unreasonable requests, I guess of your partner in your marriage 
here, and I guess that’s the trustees’ association. Could you 
identify some of the things that you felt and your team felt were 
unreasonable requests from the trustees’ association that made 
this second protocol agreement without the ability to survive? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As you’ll recall, before Christmas the 
teachers had applied to go to conciliation. We were heading into 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

conciliation just before Christmas and with a position where the 
government and the trustees could not agree to mandate, 
couldn’t agree to strategy, we couldn’t even table some of the 
things that we’d agreed to. So I would say that we were in, just 
in an untenable position. 
 
You cannot go into a conciliation process with the employer 
being in a position where they don’t agree on mandate and they 
don’t agree on strategy. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When you said 
that you couldn’t agree, were there concerns that your five 
members were putting forward before the cancellation of the 
protocol agreement that the trustees wouldn’t agree with, or was 
it vice versa? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We only had four members at that 
stage. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I apologize, Madam Minister. It was four . . . 
(inaudible) . . . prior to December 18. Was it the position of the 
four members that were putting forward some particular 
mandate to the trustees that was unacceptable to the trustees, or 
was it vice versa? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The four trustees, the four government 
department people, could not agree with each other. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, as a result of the 
cancellation of the protocol agreement, what steps brought 
down . . . You had indicated that the conciliation process was in 
place. Was that put on hold pending negotiations? Or was that a 
condition of the cancellation of the protocol agreement, that 
indeed the conciliation application by the teachers’ federation 
would be put on hold? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are absolutely no conditions. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, if we could turn to another 
area of concern that was expressed I think yesterday, and you as 
well as I heard the debate and the concerns around aboriginal 
schools and schools being built on reserves. There was some 
discussion about this last year at this time when you had 
indicated that you felt that the federal government, I think, was 
looking at a number of applications from different bands and 
that there may be additional schools. 
 
What has taken place in 1997-98 regarding numbers of federal 
schools? Do we see greater numbers? Are there projects in the 
planning stages right now? And what kind of arrangements do 
you have in terms of a working relationship with the federal 
department of native affairs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The federal government does not share 
any of their information with us. As you know, first nations 
people come under the jurisdiction of the federal government. 
Band-controlled schools do not come under the auspices of the 
provincial government. 
 
So I would say we have very . . . we have no knowledge other 
than to say that the Flying Dust Band in Meadow Lake has 
approached the department to assist them along with the 
Meadow Lake School Division in looking at the possibility of a 

joint facility for the Meadow Lake town and the Flying Dust 
Band which is located outside the town of Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Previously, Madam Minister, you’ve 
indicated that capital projects will probably receive a greater 
success rate if there are partners involved. Are you looking at 
the federal department as being a partner for the approval? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The partner in the case of Meadow 
Lake would be the Flying Dust Band which would receive 
funds from the federal government under treaty, and the 
Department of Education, and the Meadow Lake School 
Division. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — One other concern that has been raised by a 
number of communities where there are Catholic schools right 
now is around this partnership thing and the fact that you’ve 
indicated I think that capital projects will probably be much 
more successful if there’s joint usage, if there are more partners 
than just the one system. 
 
Is this a criteria that your facilities department will be 
following? That is that schools specific to Catholic education 
will not be approved if they are not with another partner? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Not at all. I’ve just approved or the 
government has just approved a Catholic school, high school in 
the city of Lloydminster, Holy Rosary, as well a remodel of 
Father Gorman School. So that’s not at all the criteria. It 
depends on the location. It depends upon enrolment pressures. It 
depends upon occupational health and safety and joint use. And 
there is a premium. You get a premium in terms of the criteria if 
there’s a joint use facility. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m very 
pleased to hear that indeed you will look at I guess the need first 
of all, and that if there is a structure that is required in one 
community or another, it will not be based of course on whether 
or not it’s, you know, solely public or solely Catholic, but in 
fact that it is needed. 
 
You’ve indicated before I think in a press release that I saw 
somewhere that there were about 200 projects that are before 
the facilities department right now — 200 applications. And 
I’m wondering what do you see in terms of your capital budget 
being able to handle all of those kinds of projects? 
 
And I’ve indicated in my request for information I’d like to 
have you provide the approved capital projects, the major ones 
as well as the minor renovation and repair projects. How do you 
see the amount of money that has been provided in this year’s 
budget for capital? Do you see it being able to address the 
immediate needs or are there some very serious concerns out 
there that this budget will not be able to address? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As the member knows, we have 
received a significant increase in capital, about $7.3 million. 
About $8 million will go towards block funding which is for 
smaller projects. We anticipate that there will probably be about 
100 block projects approved. 
 
We’re trying to get that information out to divisions as quickly 
as possible because we’ve been criticized in the past that this 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

information wasn’t necessarily shared with divisions until July, 
August, September. And so the plan is to get the information as 
quickly as possible to division so they can get at their 
construction or renovation immediately. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Good afternoon, 
Madam Minister, and good afternoon to your officials. 
 
Madam Minister, I have just a couple of questions, I guess 
concerns that I have regarding capital funding in the Humboldt 
constituency in the Humboldt area. The budget has come down 
and I have had no indication that in the budget there was any 
funding for a joint educational facility that was proposed by the 
community college and Humboldt Collegiate Institute. And 
from my understanding, the government has talked with 
representatives from those educational facilities, and that there 
would be some money coming I believe this year in order to 
facilitate renovations and an addition to buildings there. Can 
you tell me at this time whether or not there will be funding 
forthcoming? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell you is that the project is 
a high priority for the Department of Education and 
Post-Secondary Education because this project would bring the 
regional college and the K to 12 system together and it would 
provide wonderful opportunities for high school students to do 
for their training in high school and it would also provide 
opportunities for adults to do some adult basic education. 
 
What I can tell you is that we are . . . there is no money in this 
year’s budget for this project. But the departments are 
continuing to work with the Humboldt Collegiate and the 
Carlton Trail Regional College. 
 
We have money in this year’s budget to do North Battleford 
Comp and their regional college, to finish off some of the 
Estevan Comp and the regional college. And these are the only 
two projects that I’m aware of where there is committed funds 
to deal with this notion of joint use between regional colleges 
and school divisions. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. As far as I 
understand, there has been quite a lot of talk and consultation 
with government for quite some time now regarding this 
facility. And I know also that the municipalities have got some 
funding in reserve for this project. 
 
My concern is that some of those municipalities may withdraw 
that money by 1999 if there is not government money coming. I 
think it would be an awful shame because, as you well know, 
there are provincial training programs going on through the 
community college, etc., etc. And on top of that, the Humboldt 
Collegiate have got some, I guess some environmental and 
health concerns with that structure. From what I understand 
from Mayor Still, there are CO2 emissions, okay, that would 
jeopardize the health of the students. 
 
And I just wonder first of all, what was the amount of money 
that the government had stated that they would bring forward 
for this project. And, you know, can these people look forward 
to this being included in next year’s budget? 
 
(1630) 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Let me say this, that we have not yet 
approved this project. We know that the Humboldt Collegiate 
Institute and Carlton Trail have been talking for some time. In 
1994 we approved the concept and suggested that they go ahead 
with the design. I understand that about half of the design work 
has been completed. But we have never formally approved this 
joint use facility. 
 
We’re told that the preliminary cost estimates are about $10 
million, of which Education and Post-Secondary would share 
about $7.5 million. 
 
It has not been budgeted in this year’s budget for this project 
because there are other projects that are coming ahead of it, and 
I’m not in a position to share with you what could happen in 
next year’s budget. But obviously as projects are . . . About 
projects this year, some of the projects are in construction, some 
of the projects will be constructed next year. This project has 
not yet been announced. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
just one other question, and I guess it’s more a commentary. 
With reassessment having taken place in the last year, as you 
have heard I’m sure from a number of people, the property 
owners are really quite burdened right now by the kind of taxes 
they have to pay. The particular school division that I have 
some concern about is Saskatoon (East). Now Saskatoon (East) 
has got . . . the property owners are looking at 70 per cent of the 
share of education funding; that means 30 per cent by 
government. 
 
Now I understand why that happens with equalization, etc. I’m 
not sure that I totally agree that that’s something that should 
always be put on the table. But in conjunction with this whole 
issue in Saskatoon (East), I know that you have received a letter 
as I have from people doing home schooling. 
 
So because they’re engaged in their own home schooling and 
they’re not really using the educational facility, etc., and they 
are property owners, they find that this burden of excessive 
taxes is more than they can bear. And again I hear from them, 
maybe we should move somewhere else. People that would like 
to enjoy rural living that have engaged in their own home 
schooling are finding that it is becoming almost impossible for 
them to be able to make ends meet. 
 
So what would you say to those people engaged in home 
schooling regarding their level of taxes? And is there any 
reprieve for them on the horizon as far as possibly being 
exempted from some taxes. Could you comment on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think you raise a concern that’s 
certainly been raised with me. This is not unlike people in 
Saskatchewan that don’t have children in the public education 
system or the Catholic education system and they’re paying 
taxes — they either have never had children or their children 
are now grown. And there are those people in some cases that 
will argue, why am I paying school taxes when I don’t have 
children in school. 
 
Then you have people whose children go to private Christian 
schools who pay taxes, school taxes, and they would argue the 
same, why am I paying a tuition fee at the private Christian 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

school and my taxes are going to the Catholic or public school 
division. And then of course you have the home school person 
who would say, why am I paying school taxes and a grant being 
given to the school division for my child when my child isn’t in 
school? 
 
What I would say is that over the many, many years in 
Saskatchewan’s history, we have chosen to fund public 
education in two ways. We fund it through property taxes, and 
everybody pays property taxes; and we fund it through the 
provincial operating grant, the foundation operating grant. 
 
I think what I would say is that I don’t think that that principle 
of how we fund public education, the notion of school taxes on 
property is going to change. We raise a little over $550 million 
a year for all school divisions across the province from property 
taxes; $384 million comes from the foundation operating grant. 
 
To take school taxes off of property, the government would 
have to find $550 million in additional revenue, which is 
unlikely in the next several years. 
 
I guess what I would say to the person that is concerned about 
paying property taxes and also home schooling, that this is the 
way that we as a public in the province of Saskatchewan have 
chosen to fund public education — a combination of taxes on 
property and the grant. 
 
But I would say to that person as well is that over the years the 
province’s share of educational funding has dropped and 60 per 
cent . . . well, we’re hoping 59 per cent this year will be funded 
by property taxpayers and the rest, 41 per cent, funded by the 
foundation operating grant to provincial taxpayers. And what 
we need to do is reverse that. 
 
And we plan on doing that over a several year period and the 
notion being that as we increase grants to school divisions, the 
expectation would be that the school divisions would reduce 
property taxes on properties located within those division 
boundaries. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess, Madam 
Minister, we all wonder where this is going to end up in the 
years ahead. 
 
Last night when we were at the STF convention and the bear-pit 
session, as you well know, I noted a couple of comments by 
yourself and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . What was it? 
Whatever it was. I think it was a bear-pit session. 
 
There were comments from yourself, and also from members of 
other parties, that they all agreed with public funding of 
education. And there was a comment from one of the people on 
the floor that mentioned, well if they’re, because of equalization 
if they’re not going to be by the year 2000, if they’re not going 
to be funded, if their funding goes down to zero, how then can 
we say that there is public funding of education? It seems 
contrary to the statement. You know, what is happening seems 
contrary to that statement. 
 
So if government is proposing to move ahead back up to the 60 
per cent share, and still at the same time saying that by the year 
2000 some school divisions will have zero funding from the 

government, that contradicts itself. So could you comment on 
that please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well what I would say is that as the 
province moves its funding up, everybody is . . . funds are 
allocated to all divisions in most cases. 
 
Now there are some divisions in the province that have a huge 
assessment, there’s a huge value on their assessments within 
their school division boundaries, and they receive little grants 
from the province. And the reasons tend to be oil and gas. Or 
the reasons might be highly, highly assessed farmland. And the 
other reason might be very few students so they have a greater 
capacity to raise revenue locally relative to other parts of the 
province. 
 
And it’s not unlike — and I didn’t make this point last night — 
it’s not unlike Ottawa and the federal government where those 
provinces that have small populations and a small capacity to 
raise money, there’s equalization payments to them. And those 
provinces that have a large population and a greater capacity to 
raise money, they don’t get equalization. 
 
And the whole idea is to have a similar kind of health system 
across the country, a similar kind of post-secondary education 
system across the country, similar kinds of services. And it’s 
like the wealthier provinces assisting the lower, the poorer 
provinces. 
 
And it’s not unlike that in Saskatchewan where we don’t want 
to penalize people when it comes to their public education 
depending upon where they live. 
 
So I know it’s hard for school divisions where they pay very . . . 
they get very little grant to see all of this revenue coming out of 
their area and they say well you know this isn’t public . . . we 
don’t get much grant; this isn't public education. But it’s the 
whole idea of cooperation, sharing, and educating all of our 
students in the province not just some students in some areas. 
 
Ms. Julé: — And just one more comment, Madam Minister, 
regarding the closure of so many schools in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
There is the argument that the economics of it makes that 
feasible. However, I really want to pass the word on to you 
from many rural people that in fact the quality of education is 
declining not because the teachers are not trying to put forward 
a good form of teaching, but it is declining simply because 
young people driving on a school bus, or riding on a school bus 
for up to two hours sometimes. Even though there may be a 
short distance that they have to go to school, the school bus 
routes are long and those children are very, very tired when they 
get to school, and it’s impossible for their minds to be alert and 
for them to work. So I do hope that there will be no more school 
closures and that rural Saskatchewan can strive. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I certainly share your concern about 
school closures in rural Saskatchewan. And if I look at the 
numbers of school closures in our province in the last 30 years, 
there have been schools closed in every year in this province. It 
looks like in 1998 we will have the smallest number of school 
closures in several years. And I would think that that may have 
something to do with the way we fund small schools in the 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

province. 
 
We have tried to develop public policy where we ensure that K 
to 8 students are as close to home as possible, that they have a 
minimized bus trip as much as possible. The notion being that 
high school students can travel further and they can be on the 
bus a bit longer than smaller or younger students. 
 
So I would say we have some difficulties. I think I said this last 
night — 52 rural school divisions in the province lost 1,200 
rural students last year. You look at the September, 1997 
figures. There are a variety of reasons of why that is happening, 
but there is no question that there are some major demographic 
changes that are occurring in rural Saskatchewan, and we’re 
going to have to determine very quickly how we are going to 
deliver . . . continue to deliver a good quality public education 
as close to home as possible. 
 
And I think it’s becoming much more difficult to deliver a good 
quality public education to high school students when you have, 
you may have few high school students in a particular area with 
teachers trying to teach 12 or 13 subjects. And the demands of 
post-secondary institutions these days are such that you have to 
have people who know the subject area very well delivering 
those courses to students. And students are demanding that. 
 
So I think that if we were to look at our magic ball well into the 
future in this province, I think what we will see is a real attempt 
by school divisions to have schools as close to home as possible 
for K to 8 students. And I think what we will see is the coming 
together of high schools in a division so that they can have 
enough numbers to deliver good quality public education to 
high school students. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Minister, I want to welcome your officials here today and I take 
exception to what you just . . . the statement you made to the 
member for Humboldt. You said that funding small schools has 
slowed down the closure of small schools. 
 
I’d go a step further. I think funding for small schools is what 
started them to close in the first place. I believe if you go back 
to 1991, if you add up all the funding cuts you’ve made to date, 
it’s like $360 million. 
 
But when we go to health, because you didn’t have the ability to 
pass it on to the local governments, you actually put more 
money into Health. When we go to social services, I believe 
you just about doubled the budget in Social Services — once 
again because you had no where to pass it on. But with 
education, because you can pass that down through the 
municipalities and they didn’t run deficits, they were easy 
pickings. 
 
So I guess what I’m saying is that your . . . I don’t agree with 
your version of why small school closures are down a wee bit. 
 
I’d like to . . . It’s near and dear to my heart, Madam Minister 
because I have . . . last year I had five schools slated for closure 
— five schools. Now we’re down to where Bredenbury is on 
hold. Tantallon, Spy Hill are still in the process, may be closed. 
 
But let’s go, Madam Minister, you say what happened. Let’s 

talk about MacNutt School. And the question, I guess my first 
question for you is: is the reason that these small school are 
closing strictly due to the population drop of the number of 
pupils? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well what happened last year, member 
— and I’ll tell you what happened — what happened last year 
is we increased the small schools factor in this province for 
small rural schools to $1,000 per student. 
 
What else have we done as a government? We’ve introduced a 
rural technology factor for rural schools in this province. 
 
I have to tell you that you are dead wrong when you say that the 
way we fund small schools in this province has led to school 
closures. Ask your colleague. Ask your colleague. Your 
colleague will tell you that there are people in this province that 
say that our small schools factor and the way we fund small 
schools has meant that they’d like to have closed the small 
schools but they can’t. 
 
So I would say to you, member, that you are dead wrong in 
terms of what our policy has done. Last year we increased the 
small school factor significantly, we introduced a rural 
technology factor, and I predict that this year we may well see 
the fewest number of school closures in this province in 
decades. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Madam Minister, I go back and I 
disagree with you strongly, but I ask a question here. Is the 
main reason that small schools are closing because of the 
number of pupils just . . . the number of pupils that we’re losing 
out there — is that the main reason? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think that the main reason — and you 
have colleagues that have said this in the past — if you look at 
the numbers of schools that have closed in this province, just go 
down the list: 1971 — 9; ’72 — 18; ’73 — 20; ’74 — 11; ’83 
— 19; ’84 — 20; 1985 — 13; ’86 — 14; 1990 — 20. And just 
go down the list. You will see that schools have closed every 
year in this province for decades. 
 
Why do I think that’s happening? I think it’s happening — and 
I just said it to the member opposite: 52 rural school divisions, 
primarily rural school divisions, in this province lost 1,200 
students last year. 
 
The other point I would like to make that if you look at some of 
the reasons why people are . . . school divisions are losing 
numbers, for many years aboriginal people on reserves were in 
rural schools. And they are now building their own, their own 
schools on reserves. And that has had an impact upon rural 
enrolment. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Madam Minister, in the case of 
MacNutt who you so wisely pointed out to me a few minutes 
ago what happened in my area, well I’ll tell you what’s 
happening. MacNutt School is slated for closure along with like 
Theodore in my neighbouring constituency. The 10, 11, and 
12’s are being transferred to Yorkton. 
 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1998 

I don’t know if you realize or have took the time to realize what 
happens to a small school or community when that school is 
closed. It’s devastating to a small community. It’s one of the 
last straws to break the camel’s back out there. And I don’t 
think you people opposite even pay attention to that. You’ve 
found somewhere to cut funding and you’ve done it. And you 
really don’t care what happens to us out there. 
 
You say that the number of pupils dropping is one of the main 
reasons for schools closing. Well I’d like to give you the 
example of MacNutt School. Next year they’re going to have 
four to five more students than they had this year — or would 
have had, had your funding not helped close that school. 
 
On top of that we have a new hog barn being built in that area 
which is going to bring families in there and very likely bring 
young families in that would have kids that would help make 
this school viable. 
 
So, Madam Minister, when you preach to me and tell me across 
here I know absolutely nothing what I’m talking about, I think 
you’d better go out and talk to the people at places like 
MacNutt, the school board at MacNutt, a retired teacher out 
there who knows exactly how it works and is furious with your 
department. I think you’d better go out and tell them rather than 
me have to go home and try and explain what I don’t even 
understand what you’re doing in many cases out there, closing 
these schools. You go tell them. It would be easier. You give 
them that sermon and see if you come away without any scars. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I’m going to say to you, I’m 
going to indicate to you something that I indicated to the rural 
congress on education in the province. I grew up on a farm . . . 
I’m having a hard time speaking here but I just wanted to say 
this to you. 
 
I grew up on a farm that before it became the farm that it is 
today, 10 farm families lived on that farm. Now my 
grandparents had 10 children. And if you go down the 
half-sections that are now part of our family farm, the people 
that lived on those homesteads had seven children, eight 
children, nine children. That farm now has three children. 
Farms have gotten bigger in this province and you know that. 
Farms have gotten bigger. We do not have the population that 
we once had. 
 
Now I would say it . . . And the member says it’s because of 
me. Well I just want to say this, I want to say this to that 
member. The small town that I went to school in, Springwater, 
had a post office; it had an elevator; it had a grocery store; it 
had a hotel. The last thing to go in that community was the 
school. Now the post office wasn’t run by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. The elevator wasn’t run by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. The credit union and the banks weren’t run by 
the Government of Saskatchewan. They were either run by 
federal Crown corporations, grain handling companies, or local 
entrepreneurs. 
 
Now I know that it’s easy to blame the people on this bench. 
But I also know this, I also know this, that I see people in 
Saskatoon in the grocery stores buying groceries that come 
from rural Saskatchewan. I know this, I see people that could go 
and get a haircut in Biggar and they go to Saskatoon. I know 

people that go and buy their cars elsewhere. And if we’re going 
to look after our communities, then we have to think locally and 
shop locally to support our local communities because the 
wealth is created by us. And when we move that wealth that is 
created inside of that community elsewhere, that means jobs for 
our communities. 
 
And that’s why, sir, I do not shop at Alberta. I shop in 
Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan jobs. I get to go to the odd 
little ministers’ conference, and I don’t shop there because I 
shop at home because shopping at home means jobs and kids in 
our schools in Saskatoon, not elsewhere. And so what I would 
say that it becomes easy to blame the government, but we have 
to look at ourselves and what we do. That’s what we have to 
look at. 
 
Now the grain handling companies in this province are 
restructuring. The railroad companies in this province are 
restructuring. Demographics are changing in this province. And 
we can wring our hands and blame the benches here, but I have 
nothing to do with the changes to the Crow benefit, absolutely 
nothing. 
 
You did. Before you became Tory, you were a Liberal. And so 
were you. You were a Liberal, you were a Liberal, and you 
were a Liberal. I know you were a Tory before you became a 
Liberal. But anyway, and now you’re a Tory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — But I would say to you, sir, that in 
MacNutt there are 37 students in a K to 9 . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. I’m having difficulty 
hearing the minister, but before I turn the microphone back to 
you, Minister, I want to ask all hon. members to address their 
remarks through the Chair. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Now I would also say this, that The 
Education Act in the province of Saskatchewan makes it very 
clear who is responsible for making those kinds of decisions 
about whether or not a school will stay open or close or be built. 
It is determined by the local school division. 
 
In the case of you, sir, the Yorkdale School Division which is a 
democratically elected school board, and what the Yorkdale 
School Division did was they decided to close MacNutt, after 
going through all of the processes as determined by The 
Education Act. And they determined that they were going to 
phase out or end grades 10 to 12 in Theodore — 28 students. 
 
Now if you look at the numbers for the Yorkdale School 
Division, I believe that in the Yorkdale School Division, they 
lost 58 students this year in that school division . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . In a number of schools, that’s right. That’s 
right, they lost 58 students and when you lose 58 students what 
you do, what you do is that you lose funds from the province so 
there is a transition period, but you lose funds. 
 
And it’s not unlike . . . in 1968 or 1967 when the Minister of 
Agriculture was a student in that school division, in Saltcoats, 
and the high school students were . . . the school, high school 
was closed and the students were sent into Yorkton. It’s not 



April 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

unlike my situation in the ’60s when Springwater School was 
closed and we were sent to Landis and some of the students 
were sent to Biggar. 
 
This has been going on during Ross Thatcher’s time, during 
Tommy Douglas’s time, during Woodrow Lloyd’s time, during 
Grant Devine’s time, and during the Blakeney years, and during 
the Premier’s years — this has been going on for decades. And 
I would say that we have done more to support small rural 
schools in this province than any other government has ever 
done because we have a rural technology factor and we have 
increased the small schools factor to keep those kids as close to 
home as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Madam Minister, I believe you have 
a very short memory and I think you just find that as an excuse 
to forget what really has gone on in the last six or seven years in 
this province. I believe in ’91, when you came to power, did the 
government at that point not fund 60 per cent and the 
municipalities 40 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, but I 
believe they did. But we forget about that right away because 
that’s not a convenient thing to talk about because now you 
fund the 40 and the municipalities the 60, and then you say 
something like the protocol agreement won’t work. 
 
I think you made the statement here a few minutes ago, Madam 
Minister, that the ultimate responsibility for education lies with 
the government. When the protocol agreement wouldn’t work 
— in your words — you had to step in and just take over, 
remove the trustees, and push them out of the system, and then 
you decide what the teachers will get for an increase. At that 
point you took your responsibility. But the minute it comes to 
funding, you’re right there to dump it on somebody else — that 
somebody else kept their house in order and you found that an 
easy target. 
 
Madam Minister, you talked about families having 10 kids here 
a minute ago and that’s right, they did. Families were much 
larger. But maybe we should be looking at why they aren’t as 
large as they used to be. Did we ever once think on that side 
that maybe it’s because . . . a lot to do with high taxes; both 
members of the family, both members of the family have to go 
out to work. When the wife and the husband both have to go out 
to work, guess what? It’s probably one of the reasons we’re 
down to one or two or maybe three in a family. That hurts rural 
Saskatchewan far more than the cities. You’re draining kids out 
of rural Saskatchewan at a higher rate and trying to let on 
you’re really helping them. 
 
It all boils back, Madam Minister, to the things your 
government has done. You said that in 1991 you don’t agree 
that it was 40/60. You forget to also . . . you said how much you 
do for the school system out there; you’re forgetting to say right 
now you’re also collecting 800 million more in taxes than when 
you came to power. How come you found a wee bit more 
money for Health and a wee bit more for Social Services, but 
when it comes to Education, when it comes to closing the 
MacNutt School, the Spy Hill School, Tantallon, Esterhazy 
East, Calder, Saltcoats, Bredenbury — that’s one constituency. 
There’s 57 more — how come when it comes to those people, 
all of a sudden you have no idea what I’m talking about? 

Madam Minister, it’s time you woke up and smelled the roses. 
Everything doesn’t revolve around the city of Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I just have to tell you that I’m 
sure the women of Saskatchewan will be pleased to know that 
the reason why they no longer have 10 kids is because they 
don’t want . . . they are so highly taxed. 
 
I mean I just have to tell you that that is one of the most 
offensive statements that I have ever heard from a colleague in 
my 12 years in this legislature — that women don’t have 10 or 
11 kids any more because they can’t pay the high taxes. 
 
It’s ridiculous. Women don’t have big families any more 
because they don’t want to have big families any more. That’s 
why they don’t want to do it. 
 
Now the member said that when we came to government, that 
when we came to government in 1991, that the province funded 
60 per cent of the cost of education. And that’s simply not true. 
In 1991 when we came to government, the province funded . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. I can’t . . . The Chair 
is having a terrible time hearing the minister’s response. I 
would ask the House to come to order and let the minister 
respond, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think I heard the member say that 
when our government came to office in 1991 that the province, 
the previous administration, funded about 60 per cent of the 
cost of education. I think you said that. 
 
The point that I want to make is that no government has ever 
funded 60 per cent of the cost of education. The closest that we 
have come to funding 60 per cent of the cost of education was 
in 1975-76, 56.85 per cent under Allan Blakeney, the former 
NDP premier of the province. 
 
And what we saw during the Conservative . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:04 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................577 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................577 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................577 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................577 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................577 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................577 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................577 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................577 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................577 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................578 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................578 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................578 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................578 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................578 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................578 
  Whitmore...................................................................................................................................................................................578 
  Krawetz..............................................................................................................................................................................578, 597 
  Teichrob.....................................................................................................................................................................................578 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................579 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................579 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................579 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................579 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................579 
  Goulet.................................................................................................................................................................................579, 586 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................586 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................587 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................597 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Speedy Recovery Wishes for Cannington Member’s Son 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................579 
 Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games 
  Flavel..........................................................................................................................................................................................579 
 New Home for National Seed Collection 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................580 
 National Appointment for Sylvia Maljan 
  Murrell.......................................................................................................................................................................................580 
 Best Wishes for Nicholas D’Autremont 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................580 
 First Provincial Sales Tax-free Fire Truck Purchase in Saskatchewan 
  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................581 
 Cadet Honour Band 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................581 
 Youth Futures Pilot Project 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................581 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................581 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................582 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................583 
 Regina Emergency Services 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................583 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................583 
 Hospital Bed Shortages 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................584 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................584 
 Community Group Home Program Review 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................585 
 



 

 Maintenance Enforcement 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................585 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 26  The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................586 
 Bill No. 27 — The Public Service Act, 1998 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................586 
 Bill No. 28 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................586 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................587 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 14 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................587 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................588 
 Bill No. 22 — The Electronic Filing of Information Act 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................590 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................590 
 Bill No. 23 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................591 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................591 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 13 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................591 
 Bill No. 2 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 1998 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................593 
 Bill No. 3 — The Public Utilities Easements Amendment Act, 1998 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................595 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Education — Vote 5 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................597 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................597 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................603 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................605 
 


