





























































Hansard: May 22, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1289 
 May 22, 1998 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents concerned about the 
Channel Lake issue. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the 
community of Foam Lake. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure the survival of the Carrot River 
Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the north-east part of 
the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate actions to ensure the survival of the Carrot 
River Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitions are signed by individuals from Carrot River 
and Regina. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The community involved in this petition, Mr. Speaker, is the 
community of Gull Lake. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition and these are signed by the people from Handel and 
Landis and Dodsland. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to put 
an immediate halt to all investments in foreign countries by 
all Saskatchewan Crown corporations and instead invest 
Crown corporation profits in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens’ concerns about the possible closing of the Carrot River 
Hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate actions to ensure the survival of the Carrot 
River Hospital. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily from the 
community of Carrot River. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to put 
an immediate halt to all investments in foreign countries by 
all Saskatchewan Crown corporations and instead invest 
Crown corporation profits in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Govan and 
Duval. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, as well, have a 
petition to present to the Assembly this morning dealing with 
the issue of investments by Saskatchewan Crown corporations 
and the view of Saskatchewan residents that they do not want to 
see that take place. And this petition comes from the south-east 
part of the province of Saskatchewan — Estevan, Lampman, 
and Benson areas — and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to present 
a petition on behalf of concerned citizens from throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan with respect to the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

And the signatures are from all good citizens in the 
communities, Mr. Speaker, of Ituna, Yorkton, Saskatoon, Foam 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

Lake, Balcarres, Goodeve, Melville, Lemberg, Homefield, 
Kelliher, and Fenwood. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
rise to present petitions on the issue of the deterioration of 
health care in general, and specifically on the impending closure 
of the Plains Health Centre. And praying that the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government will provide adequate funding 
so that the Plains Health Centre maybe continued. 
 
Your petitioners this morning come from the communities of 
Ponteix and Cadillac. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned about the 
pending closure of the Plains Health Centre. I’ll read the prayer. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Ponteix and the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take immediate action to 
address the long-standing concerns of northern people in 
regards to accessing quality health care, proper education 
and educational opportunities, affordable quality housing, 
and most importantly through meaningful 
community-based economic development and access to 
quality jobs; 
 
and further that this be accomplished with the proper 
infrastructure such as safe roads, and affordable utilities 
being put in place to allow such economic development to 
facilitate once and for all our northern people joining with 
the rest of Saskatchewan in prosperity and social justice. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 
from Imperial. They’re from Melville. They’re from Moose 
Jaw. They're from North Battleford. They’re from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, and all throughout the land. And I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today in this House to present a petition on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 

so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are all from the city 
of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan I am happy to present the following 
petition. I’ll read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these folks all come from the community of Fox 
Valley, Saskatchewan. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order a petition regarding the high costs 
of power rates in the North presented on May 21 has been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) it is found to be irregular 
and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed, 
and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to cause the government to take 
immediate actions to ensure the survival of the Carrot 
River Hospital; to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; to save the Plains Health Centre; to call an 
independent public inquiry into Channel Lake; to have the 
Workers’ Compensation Board reinstate pensions; and to 
ensure equitable treatment to those injured and disabled 
through auto-related injuries covered by no-fault insurance. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker. This morning, Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I would 
like to introduce in your gallery, 29 grade 7 students from 
Carrot River. With them, Dave NeuFeld, their teacher, and 
Darcy NeuFeld, the secretary of the school; and as chaperones, 
Helena LeFebvre, Agatha Derksen, and Sharon Newstead are 
with the students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Carrot River’s about 250 miles north-east of 
Regina. And it’s the home of SaskFor MacMillan Sawmill 
which was updated in the last few years. It’s also home of Big 
Bert, the prehistoric crocodile. It’s known for its forestry, its 
farming, its tourism, moose hunting, tobogganing — it’s just a 
great place to live, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would want everyone to welcome to the Assembly the 
people from Carrot River. Enjoy your visit and have a safe trip 
home. 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
would like to introduce to you and to other members of the 
House in the east gallery, 53 students from Valley Christian 
Academy, just outside the community of Osler and they come 
from the Whole Valley area and from Saskatoon as well. This is 
a school that is well known for the high standards of education 
they put forward. These are grade 11 and 12 students and 
accompanied by their teachers, Scott Dyck and Trace Block. 
And I look forward to meeting them later on this morning and 
answering any questions they have from the activities they see 
here today. Give them a welcome, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a 
great deal of pleasure that I would like to introduce to the rest of 
my colleagues in the Assembly, 29 students seated in the west 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, who are here from Loon Lake, 
Saskatchewan. They attend the Ernie Studer School. They’re 
known by the way, Mr. Speaker . . . Loon Lake is known by the 
way for its wonderful, smart, good-looking students — and we 
have beautiful country aside from that — but they have great, 
intelligent students up there. 
 
And with them, Mr. Speaker, is their teacher — or one of their 
teachers, I should say — Mr. Terry Paley; chaperons: Helen 
Trimble, Myrna Molinger, Penny Adamson, June Lorenz, 
Donna Lantz, and Rodney Novak. I’ll be meeting all of them 
later for photos, drinks, questions; and certainly would ask all 
my colleagues to welcome them to the legislature here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Pasta D’Aurum Plant for Swift Current 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is not my nature to 
say nice things about Liberals, especially federal Liberals, but 
today I would like to make the exception that proves the rule. 
This is easier for me, Mr. Speaker, because an effort of the 
federal government which was roundly criticized by the Reform 
Party, the illegitimate twins of our Tories here, has created 
some good news in Swift Current. 
 
You may have read what the Canadian taxpayers’ association 
called the Tortellini Tour, a trade mission to Italy accompanied 
by some MPs (Member of Parliament) of Italian descent. 
Nothing like a little racism to spice up right-wing politics. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, an agreement was signed this week that 
puts the final touch on a project that’s been a long time coming 
to Swift Current, but at last the ink is on the paper. The deal is 
between Pasta D’Aurum of Swift Current and a company in 
Italy. Pasta D’Aurum is buying equipment from Italy to set up a 
pasta plant in Swift Current, to take advantage of the best 
durum wheat in the world. The deal is worth 40 million. 
 
And here’s the really good news. It will create many jobs in the 
already booming city of Swift Current. This, Mr. Speaker, is 
such good news that the Conrad Black papers neglected to 

cover it — all the evidence we need. 
 
My congratulations to Alan Smith, president of Pasta D’Aurum, 
and yes, my thanks to the Prime Minister and his trade mission. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Custody and Access 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
make a brief statement about a current study the Department of 
Justice is conducting on child custody and access. I applaud the 
fact that you are conducting this review, but I certainly have 
reason to question the process you have adopted. When just 
recently the joint Senate-House . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I want to remind the hon. 
member to direct her comments through the Chair and not 
directly to other members in the House. 
 
Ms. Draude: — When just recently the joint Senate-House of 
Commons committee looking at the same issue was in Regina, 
they held public meetings, allowing all interested parties to 
attend. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the meeting this government is holding today 
in Regina is a closed door meeting. It’s a closed door meeting, 
and according to the National Shared Parenting Association, the 
Department of Justice won’t publicize the lists of groups 
participating in the meeting. 
 
We’re concerned — and I believe it is quite a legitimate 
concern — concerned that fathers are being excluded from the 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would challenge the Minister of Justice to open 
up these meetings. If he is truly concerned about the welfare of 
children in this province, he will recognize the importance of 
both the mother and the father in raising a child. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

La Ronge Ice Wolves 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, the La Ronge Ice Wolves — 
this name now resonates in the hockey world of Saskatchewan. 
After two years of lobbying the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey 
League, La Ronge was awarded an expansion franchise with 
play scheduled for the ’98-99 season. 
 
Congratulations to the great support by local people, and the 
creation of the Northern Lights Hockey Development 
Incorporated, the non-profit, community-owned corporation 
that will hold the franchise. This team will provide first-class, 
family-oriented entertainment to northern Saskatchewan. The 
impact on La Ronge and the North as a whole will be 
substantial. 
 
There are economic gains to the area, with 34 home games. 
There will be an influx of people to the community, many of 
whom have never been there before. 



1292 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

Secondly, the La Ronge Ice Wolves will provide a positive, 
dynamic image to La Ronge. Missinipi Broadcasting 
Corporation will be covering the Ice Wolves accomplishments 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Thirdly, and most importantly, will be the tie-in with the local 
youth in the community. Playing for the La Ronge Ice Wolves 
will be an attainable goal that our youth can achieve. The Ice 
Wolves will become involved in the community, providing 
positive role models for the youth and bringing an anti-drug, 
pro-education message with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that I am an honourary member 
of the La Ronge Ice Wolves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Hot Line 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, there’s growing concern about 
the state of highways in this province and for good reason. You 
only need to travel our highways and see orange flags which 
mark potholes to know there’s a serious problem. 
 
In fact the situation is so bad the time may have come for the 
government to rethink its flag policy. It may be more 
appropriate to start placing these flags on smooth sections just 
so people know they can relax for a moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is falling behind on its 
commitment to provide $250 million each year for the 
Highway’s budget. The Tories are now indicating that they 
support reverting our highways back to gravel. We heard that 
from the Tory MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
from Saltcoats on Wednesday. Obviously this is not the answer 
and I wonder how Saskatchewan residents will view that 
position. 
 
Because of the mounting concerns about this issue, the Liberal 
opposition is reactivating its pothole patrol hot line. We invite 
the public to call 1 888 621 Bump to register their concerns and 
their comments. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nutrition Education Programs 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently had the 
pleasure of announcing on behalf of the minister for Social 
Services a $68,795 grant to the Midwest Food Resource Project 
Incorporated through the child nutrition and development 
initiative to support nutrition education programs. 
 
Programs like this one go a long way in helping families make 
the best use of the money they spend on food. Part of the grant 
will also be used to assist with the start-up and operation of a 
community kitchen. 
 
In addition, the Battlefords Boys and Girls Club and the United 
Church have provided kitchen space, Kanaweyimik child and 
family services has provided office space, and many other 
agencies and individuals have contributed in various ways to 
the program. 

Participants in the community kitchen access low-cost 
nutritious foods, learn about nutrition, budgeting, and food 
handling, and are able to stretch their food dollars further. 
 
A total of $1.2 million is being provided in ongoing funding to 
our communities. There are now five community kitchens, and 
grants are also provided to schools and community groups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the funding of these projects is obviously very 
important. However, they require the dedicated service of 
volunteers to be fully successful. Last year over 1 million meals 
were prepared and served by volunteers. And I want to say 
thank you to them for investing their time in this very 
worthwhile cause. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mid-west Conference of Legislators 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the last 
couple of days the member for Melville and the member for 
Battleford-Cut Knife and myself attended the mid-west 
conference of legislators in Columbus, Ohio and we want to 
report back briefly that we had a very enjoyable trip to Ohio. 
 
Interesting to see the types of issues that are on the minds of the 
legislators in Ohio. Deregulation and the many benefits that can 
be associated with that were a large topic. 
 
I had occasion to sit in on an ag committee down there and 
looking at Ohio as the largest cash receipts in the entire U.S. 
(United States). Obviously Ohio is an important player in 
agriculture to the economy of U.S. 
 
They were very interested in the concerns of people in 
Saskatchewan and what kind of issues we were dealing with 
and were quite surprised to learn that health care was very high 
on the minds of Saskatchewan people. Quite surprised for the 
fact that they thought in a system of state-run medicine that 
there were no problems; that they often hear that the system in 
Canada runs very smoothly. So they were surprised that there 
were issues surrounding it. 
 
Welfare reform was something that they have gone through in 
the last few years, Mr. Speaker, reducing their unemployment 
rates and welfare rates to the lowest in their history, down to 
about 3 per cent. 
 
We find that we had great company. I enjoyed the company of 
the two other members down there. Great hospitality. It was 
like receiving a transfusion of free enterprise, and the world’s 
unfolding just as it should, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Short Film & Video Festival 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
many of you are aware, the Yorkton Short Film & Video 
Festival is currently under way. The Yorkton Short Film & 
Video Festival was established by the Yorkton Film Council in 
1947. The first festival was held in 1950. This makes the 
Yorkton Short Film & Video Festival both the first and longest 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1293 

 

running film festival in North America. 
 
The work of Canadian film makers is on display there. 
Achievements of the Canadian film industry are both celebrated 
and rewarded at this festival. 
 
This year 413 entries were received, competing for 24 different 
categories. The Golden Sheaf Award will be presented at the 
gala banquet and celebration Saturday evening. 
 
I want to at this time congratulate the Short Film & Video 
Festival board of directors and staff and the many, many 
volunteers that make this event so entertaining and successful. 
The Yorkton Short Film & Video Festival is a world-class event 
and I look forward to joining the celebration of Canadian film 
makers on the weekend. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

No Rebate for SaskEnergy Users 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member for 
Swift Current was kind enough to rise this morning to tell us 
how the federal Liberals are keeping their commitments to 
Saskatchewan and keeping their promises, so I’m sorry to have 
to break this ecumenical spirit by rising to tell how the 
provincial New Democrats are not keeping theirs. 
 
Last January the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) hiked energy rates but he told the 
people of Saskatchewan they could anticipate a rebate if natural 
gas prices came in lower. Well we’re still waiting for the news 
on the rebate but unfortunately the rebate has evaporated. 
 
Ron Clark, president of SaskEnergy now says natural gas prices 
are higher than expected, and instead of a break on our bills 
we’re going to get higher bills. That’s NDP accountability. The 
minister announces the possibility of a rebate; it’s left to a civil 
servant to announce that the rebate is gone. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
this year it’s bad news time for Saskatchewan utility users. Next 
year I predict it will be bad news time for the Saskatchewan 
New Democrats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Natural Gas Rates 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the minister responsible for SaskEnergy. Mr. 
Minister, many other natural gas companies dropped their 
prices over the winter but not SaskEnergy. In fact they 
promised to rebate in July; now SaskEnergy president Ron 
Clark is saying there will be no rebate. In fact SaskEnergy bills 
will be going up this fall. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you justify gouging Saskatchewan 
families with another rate increase and how can you justify 
another back-door tax grab on Saskatchewan people? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I was just hoping that 
member would ask that question today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sat in the House in opposition in 1988 when that 
member and his caucus sold off the gas fields in Saskatchewan 
which the people of Saskatchewan had owned. And I remember 
members from Regina in opposition with me sat and argued 
with you, sir, that if we sold off the gas fields we would be at 
the hands of the market-place, the commodity prices, which 
now influences totally the price of gas. 
 
What Mr. Clark said today is, we control two parts of the gas 
bill: we control in Saskatchewan the freight rate on the gas 
coming through the lines and we control the billing. The big 
cost of the gas is totally at the vagary of the commodity market 
because you, sir, sold off the gas fields to your friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s an inquiry needed in this province, it’s 
into why they sold off the gas fields and who they sold them to, 
and now the biggest hypocrisy, they come and complain about 
the prices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find that 
answer very hypocritical. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Speaker, the minister knows that other 
jurisdictions, other companies don’t own the gas but they still 
offer lower gas prices because of their ability to go and buy 
from the market-place. You don’t have to own to offer lower 
gas market-places. 
 
Mr. Minister, the truth is you just can’t justify it. You cannot 
justify another increase to SaskEnergy rates. It’s an attack on 
Saskatchewan families. But worst of all, it’s an attack on low 
income families. It’s an attack on seniors on fixed incomes. 
And we don’t really know if we’re paying for an increase in 
natural gas prices or for NDP mismanagement of Crown 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you immediately stop this latest attack on 
low income families and seniors and will you give us the 
assurance that there will be no SaskEnergy rate hike this fall? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have here, and I will 
table, the rates and the comparisons on natural gas residential 
prices across Canada. In 1996 SaskEnergy offered the lowest 
price in Canada of any company selling gas in this great country 
of Canada — the lowest price in 1996. In 1997 we had the 
second, the second lowest price in Canada. 
 
Now I would ask that member, if he is worried about the 
commodity price of gas, which is what we’re talking about, 
because we are not increasing any portion where we have 
influence, I would ask him to phone his friends who he sold the 
gas company and the gas fields to, to ask them why they are 
increasing the price of gas, because we have no control over it. 
You understand that. 
 
We control the freight rate on the pipelines, the billing costs, 



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

and we’re not increasing 1 cent on the area that we influence. 
The increase is totally on the commodity side of your friends 
who you sold the gas fields to. Give them a call, ask them why 
they’re increasing the price of gas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Carrot River Hospital Closure 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, on Monday 
the North-East Health District Board is meeting in Nipawin to 
discuss the planned closure of the Carrot River hospital. 
 
This is not a public meeting but many members of the public 
plan on being there. The people of Carrot River are organizing a 
motorcade to Nipawin to protest the planned closure of their 
hospital. 
 
Mr. Minister, I plan to be in Nipawin on Monday to show my 
and the Saskatchewan Party’s support for the people of Carrot 
River and their hospital. Will you be there? Will the NDP 
member from Carrot River be there? Or are you going to hide 
and let the district health board do your dirty work for you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that first of all, I may or may not be at that 
rally. But I want to say this to you because I have a 
commitment on that night — I already have a commitment that 
night — to be at the Liberal rally. So I already have a rally that 
I need to attend. So I want to say to you that I likely will not be 
able to be there but my friend and colleague from Nipawin will 
likely be there. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that decisions around 
health care services in districts, as you well know, are made by 
district health boards. And if you’re of the opinion that district 
health boards aren’t serving the people of Saskatchewan very 
well, then when you get to that meeting you should be standing 
up and you should be saying to those people that have been 
elected through a due process, you should be saying to those 
people that they don’t have the ability to make decisions in 
serving our communities across the province. And I’ll be 
waiting to hear what your response is from that meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
knows that he’s pulling all the strings for the district health 
boards. You control the budget; you control the funding, and 
you can play politics with it at your discretion as you did with 
the extra appointment of money all of a sudden before a 
by-election with the nurses. 
 
You keep telling us that there’s more money for health care 
than ever before. If that’s the case why do you keep closing 
hospitals? Why are you closing the Plains hospital? Why are 
you closing the Carrot River hospital? When are the closures 
and the bed closures going to end? 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of Carrot River need their hospital. 

The people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan need the 
Plains hospital. Will you put an immediate moratorium on all 
future hospital closings, including the Plains and the Carrot 
River hospital, until after the next election where we can then 
take government and get the situation fixed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to just remind 
the member on how it is that he works at fixing the system 
within the province. First of all I want to remind the member 
opposite that in 1997 the member from Kindersley, who was 
then the leader of your party now today — and I think still is 
the leader of your party today . . . who said this, that during the 
opening comments of health care, and I quote: “Boyd again 
cautioned praise to the Romanow NDP for closing rural 
hospitals that need to be closed.” Now he said that. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that part of that 
wording is inaccurate because the NDP government didn’t close 
hospitals across the province. Many of those hospitals were 
converted by the districts. And I want to say to you, the member 
who sits, the member who sits with you now from Canora, you 
should have a chat with the member from Canora who goes to 
the facilities in Theodore, in Invermay, where they have 
community health centres, who speaks very highly of all of the 
multiple services they have there that they never had before. 
 
You should have that chat with him and then come to the House 
and talk about which facilities should remain as hospitals and 
which should be converted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rose Valley Emergency Health Services 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is talking about 
converting a hospital and then closing it. Well I have an 
example of what’s happening when you close a hospital and 
convert it to a health centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like 52 other communities in Saskatchewan, Rose 
Valley saw its hospital converted to a health centre by this 
government. However the people of Rose Valley have been 
fortunate to this point to have access to 24-hour emergency 
care. But it has come to our attention this may stop at the end of 
this month when the 24-hour emergency care may have to be 
withdrawn, and that’s because of the health district’s inability to 
recruit a lab-X-ray combined certified technician who meets the 
Department of Labour’s strict qualifications. 
 
To the Minister of Health, what is your department going to do 
to ensure 24-hour emergency service remains available to the 
people of Rose Valley? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I say to the member opposite, as she well 
knows, that across the province decisions regarding the services 
that are provided by health centres are made by district health 
boards. And your question is specific. Your question is specific 
of course as it relates to an employee who today is not able to 
practise in that facility because she doesn’t meet the standards 
of the professional association. 
 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

 

Now I think the member opposite has to have a full appreciation 
of how that works. And you know as well as I do that the 
certification of professional members is done by their 
association. And in order for that individual to practise in that 
community — in order for that person to practise in that 
community, that certification needs to be provided by the 
association. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, you need to take that issue not 
to the district health board or to this Assembly, you need to take 
it to the professional association and get direction from them in 
terms of how in fact that person might be able to practise based 
on their certification, not the district health board’s or mine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the health district will begin 
advertising withdrawal of 24-hour emergency service early next 
week. The town council in Rose Valley has approached a 
woman in the community to take on the duties at the Rose 
Valley health centre. This woman worked at the Rose Valley 
hospital for 15 years as a lab tech until the government closed 
the hospital. Because she left her job she was not grandfathered 
in after the qualifications for this position were changed by the 
government. 
 
All the town of Rose Valley is asking for is this woman, who is 
willing to take on the job part time, to receive the same 
grandfathering consideration as she would have had had she not 
left her job after they closed the hospital. 
 
Mr. Minister, this person held a job for 15 years. Rose Valley is 
losing its 24-hour services because of a technicality. That’s 
what’s keeping her from getting her job back. Are you going to 
fix this problem or are you going to close another health centre? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just finished 
answering that question on behalf of the member. And it clearly 
exemplifies, Mr. Speaker, the lack of knowledge and 
appreciation that this member has about how employees and 
how individuals are certified by the professions. She doesn’t 
have a full appreciation of that because if the individual, if the 
individual, Mr. Speaker, in fact had received her full 
certification, today she would be able to practise. The 
professional association has said to this individual that because 
you do not have your appropriate status you’re not able to 
practise as a CCT (combined certified technologist). 
 
And so I say to the member opposite, your argument and your 
discussion should be with the professional association which in 
fact will be that . . . and which will in fact be the professional 
association that will provide the certification for the person. 
That’s where it should go. 
 
And don’t play politics, don’t play politics with the district 
health board or the provincial government — have the 
discussion with the people who make the decisions, and get 
informed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Advertising 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP government is trying 
to solve one political problem by putting the Saskatchewan 
Health Information Network on the shelf and using SHIN 
funding to hire 200 nurses. 
 
In recent weeks the government has demonstrated it does have 
the resources for health care advertising. Full page ads are 
appearing in daily and weekly newspapers explaining the future 
of health care. Other half page ads claim that year-long surgery 
waiting-lists are acceptable. And a seven-minute cartoon was 
even produced just to gather dust on library shelves. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health: why not spend your 
time and taxpayers’ money on improving the system instead of 
wasting valuable health care dollars on advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well first, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
comment on the member’s opening comments where he says 
that we’re now making an investment in nurses, where we’re 
making an investment in the Saskatchewan information 
network, and the member says that this is a waste of money. He 
says this is a waste of money. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, this is exactly the same kind 
of language that Liberals have been using in this province and 
across the country repeatedly. And yesterday we have the 
Minister of Finance, the Minister of Finance in Saskatchewan, 
and what does your leader say? He says: certainly, his presence 
here is an indication that the Liberals in Saskatchewan is a 
federal Liberal and a provincial Liberal, noted Melenchuk. A 
Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal, irrespective of where they sit. 
 
Today you come to the House, Mr. Member, and you say that 
investing in nurses, investing in Saskatchewan health 
information is a waste of money. And you know what? That’s 
because the federal government took $7 billion out. You don’t 
support investment to health care and you need to make that 
clear, as your leader does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s try this one more 
time. We’re talking about valuable dollars being wasted on 
advertising. 
 
Well the Liberal opposition has been informed that yet another 
publication is being prepared for distribution to homes across 
Saskatchewan beginning this weekend. I’m told that all costs 
associated with the design, printing, and distribution of the 
Guide to Health Services in Saskatchewan will be borne by the 
Department of Health. I’m told health districts were provided 
little if any input. I’m also told that most if not all of the 
information contained in this publication is already available 
through health districts. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the total cost of these public relations 
exercises and why is your department involved in more 
publications than Conrad Black? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say to the member opposite 
that, first of all, I believe that there is a responsibility on the part 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

of the Department of Health to provide information to the 
people of Saskatchewan. I think that that’s our responsibility. 
And in concert with the district health boards, I think that we 
need to work together in harmony to provide that kind of 
information to people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the member is correct. There is a new guide that’s being 
published and that has been distributed to Saskatchewan people 
all over, from all the health districts — 32 health districts will 
receive this publication, and in Saskatoon, just recently, that 
publication in French. 
 
And the importance of this publication and the circulation of 
this of course, Mr. Speaker, is to provide people who live 
within districts an opportunity to fully appreciate what services 
they have available to them, and also what kinds of information 
is available to them and services provincially so that people 
know where they could go to. 
 
Because the member opposite, and his party, are going around 
the province today and they’re spreading all sorts of mis-truths 
about the health care system. So there needs to be a system in 
place today, Mr. Speaker, that ensures that the people of 
Saskatchewan get full, appropriate information that will guide 
them to the appropriate facilities they need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highways Funding 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since this 
government came to power in 1991, we’ve seen our road and 
highway system in this province crumble. 
 
A few years ago the member from Rosetown-Biggar came 
under fire when he talked about reverting our rural highways 
back to gravel. On Wednesday we heard similar talk, but it 
didn’t come from the NDP; it came from the Tory member from 
Saltcoats who also told this House that the highway should go 
back to gravel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Highways. Do 
you share the same feelings as the Tories who sit in this 
legislature? Do you support reverting our highways back to 
gravel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if they’d listen for a 
second, I’d tell them the answer to this question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question coming from the Liberals, the 
question coming from the Liberals, when the federal Liberal 
government has put an average, put an average of 5, the federal 
Liberal government is putting an average of $5 million a year 
for the last 10 years into our highway system when every other 
central government in the western world puts at least close to 50 
per cent or more in, Mr. Speaker, I find that a hypocritical 
question. 
 
With the money that we have we’ve made a commitment to two 
and a half billion dollars over the next 10 years on average, and 
we will be using that to maintain the roads in this province. 

We’ll use that to maintain the roads in this province. 
 
I would like that member to stand up, I’d like that member to 
stand up in his place and table the letters that he sent to the 
federal Liberal government telling them that $5 million a year is 
not enough to maintain their federal portion of the roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we’ve heard 
the Tories. They gave up on the Plains. The Leader of the 
Opposition said that’s the last nail in the coffin. We heard them 
give up on hepatitis C victims, saying the provincial 
government has no accountability to them. And now they’ve 
given up on the highway system and it sounds like the Minister 
of Highways has given up on our highway system as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re earmarking an estimated $181 million out 
of this year’s Highways budget for preservation and 
construction. And by the way, that 181 million is about the 
same figure as the 188 million that you stole out of farmers’ 
pockets in the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
program. Are you aware, Mr. Minister, that this is actually $1 
million less than was committed for the same project 10 years 
ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you I’m not 
going to . . . I won’t stand here and listen to this hypocrisy. I 
asked the member to table a letter that he sent to the Prime 
Minister or even Mr. Goodale, who represents this province as a 
federal MP (Member of Parliament), table the letter saying that 
we need some highway funding in this province at least in 
proportion to the number of . . . the proportion of tax dollars 
they take out. Let’s have them table that. 
 
I mean you can stand in your place, sir, and talk about the 
highways in this province, but stand in your place and tell us 
what you’re doing about it. Tell us what you’re doing about it. 
Unfortunately a Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal, and 
until the federal government stands up and puts some money 
into this province, you can’t say one word about it. So stand in 
your place and table the letters that you’ve written on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 
Minister of Agriculture doesn’t understand anything about 
highways. Mr. Speaker, the government is actually contributing 
$1 million less for preservation and construction than the 
previous government did 10 years ago. And that’s even before 
inflation is taken into account. 
 
Mr. Minister, the 1997 business plan by your department 
indicates only 58 per cent of the highway system is satisfactory. 
The goal is to ensure 85 per cent of highways is satisfactory by 
the year 2000. But that same study notes current funding levels 
are 40 to $50 million less than required just to maintain existing 
levels. 
 
Mr. Minister, how are you going to meet this target when 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

 

you’re actually spending less on preservation and construction 
than was spent 10 years ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, this man’s leader, Mr. 
Melenchuk — I want to give him a quote here from the 
Star-Phoenix — he says: 
 

Melenchuk admitted that he had pulled (a few) . . . strings 
to have Martin in Saskatoon prior to the announcement of 
the Saskatoon by-election . . . (the Eastview by-election). 
 

And I go on. It says: 
 

Certainly his presence (meaning Mr. Martin’s presence) 
here is an indication that a Liberal in Saskatchewan is a 
federal Liberal and a provincial Liberal, noted Mr. 
Melenchuk. 
 

So a Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal. You stand up, 
sir, and talk and ask about highway funding in this province 
when your federal Liberal cousins took a half a billion dollars 
out of Agriculture every year from two years ago to this year. 
He took $7 billion out of health care and then you have the 
audacity to stand in this House and ask us why we haven’t got 
enough money for roads. Mr. Speaker, that member is 
hypocritical and I ask him to table . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I think the 
hon. minister will recognize that he’s just used language that is 
beyond the standards of acceptable for parliamentary language 
and I’ll ask him to withdraw his re . . . Order! I’ll ask the hon. 
minister to withdraw the remark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that remark, but 
just to say that this man stands up . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now when . . . the hon. 
member is a veteran member of the House, I know, and he 
knows when requested to withdraw the remark to do it without 
qualification. I ask the hon. minister to withdraw the remark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I withdraw the remark unequivocally. 
However, this man stands up in this House and asks about roads 
when his federal counterparts have pulled hundreds of millions 
of dollars out of this province. I ask him again, table your 
correspondence to your federal cousins on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan. Use your influence to get some federal dollars 
back into health care and back into . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gambling Addiction Services 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the minister in charge of Liquor and 
Gaming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I received a phone call this past week from a lady 
who lives at Canwood, Saskatchewan and that’s a long ways 

away from my constituency. In fact it’s way up North. 
She related to me a very sad story, Mr. Speaker, about a young 
man in his 30’s who had gone to town and done some gambling 
and of course he lost everything. I won’t mention any names 
out of respect for the family because the result was that he went 
home and committed suicide. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is very simply this: what are you 
doing to address these very serious side-effects of gambling in 
northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a 
great deal of anticipation and excitement that I’ve waited for my 
first question. And much like in a hockey game you want your 
first goal to be a good goal, this is a good question. 
 
The Liquor and Gaming Authority, Mr. Speaker, for a long time 
now we’ve been involved in trying to find a balance as it 
pertains to this issue. We have in place many dollars for 
treatment to addictions. 
 
I recently just attended a conference, Mr. Speaker, where 
Saskatchewan is recognized as a leader in North America as it 
pertains to addictions treatment. I was invited to speak there and 
I think it is a story that many people in Saskatchewan are not 
even aware of. 
 
Saskatchewan provides treatment for addictions on a per capita 
basis much higher than any place else in North America. We 
have sympathy for any individual that finds themselves in a 
position of addiction and we certainly will continue to do as 
best we can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a supplement 
to the same minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, certainly it is a tragedy when people have to end 
their lives as a result of what they consider to be at first a form 
of recreation that gets out of hand. But the lady from Canwood 
asks some very pointed questions about what we could do to 
solve these very serious problems. 
 
She poses a question that I pass on to you, Minister. Is there 
some way that you can initiate a limit on the amount of losses 
that individuals can lose before the people who are running the 
gaming authorities or the gaming houses would put a stop to 
that person’s gambling for the night? 

 
She suggests that if her husband went to the bar and drank too 
much, that the bartender would be responsible to stop him from 
drinking and to point out to him that he should go and get a taxi 
to go home with rather than take his own vehicle or to drink 
more and cause trouble. Could that not be applied to gambling, 
she asks. 
 
She also of course would like to know if you’re considering a 
vote in the North for the communities that would like to stop 
gambling. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. And to 
the member opposite also, I thank you. 



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

The question is actually quite timely. There was some 
discussion about this recently in concert with the hotels 
association. We actually will be launching a program later this 
year that will receive . . . that will allow for training of people 
that work in the hotels and in the facilities where VLTs (video 
lottery terminal) are located to address exactly this sort of issue, 
so that on-site workers will easily be able to identify patrons 
that are having difficulty. 
 
And this and a number of other programs . . . as I said, we try to 
strike a balance. We’ve limited the number of machines in 
Saskatchewan to 3,600. And there are other things that we’ll 
certainly attempt to do in dealing with this and other issues. But 
again I want to remind all members that Saskatchewan does in 
fact lead the way in what we do here in fact in North America, 
and was just reaffirmed at a conference that I was just at in the 
United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, we have some very special guests in your west 
gallery that I would like to introduce through you to the 
Assembly. They are students from Caswell School in my riding. 
They’re in grade 6, 7, and 8. They’re accompanied by their 
teacher, Ms. Jodi Wilson, and by 12 parent chaperons. 
 
So I ask all members to give a very warm welcome to these 
young people and their chaperons from my riding. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 43  The Queen’s Bench Revision Act/ 
Loi portant révision de la Loi sur la Cour du Banc de la 

Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 43, The Queen’s Bench Revision Act be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
General Revenue Fund 

Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call the first subvote I will 
invite the minister to introduce his officials. 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. This 
morning I have with me . . . seated to my immediate right is the 
associate deputy minister, Mr. Neil Yeates. Over to my 
immediate left is Mr. Barry Lacey, who is the director of 
finance and management services. Behind Mr. Lacey is Lois 
Borden, who is the executive director of district support branch. 
Behind me is Carol Klassen, who is executive director of acute 
and emergency services; and Mr. Dale Bloom, who is the 
associate to the deputy minister. 
 
Also with us here today I have Leslie Parker, who is the 
manager of capital unit; Roger Carriere, who is director of 
programs support unit; and Bob Firnesz, executive director of 
medical services and health registration; and Kevin Wilson, 
who is the director of pharmaceutical services division, the drug 
plan and extended benefits, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Minister, 
welcome to you and your officials and the opportunity to 
discuss and debate some of the issues in health care. And I’m 
certain, Mr. Minister, we won’t have a major problem in filling 
up the amount of time we have this morning or even maybe 
going into a further debate at a later date regarding the health 
care issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, over the past number of weeks and certainly the 
past number of years, health care has and has always been a 
major concern for the population of Saskatchewan. As a 
government, the NDP have always taken pride . . . and they’ve 
always gone back to the implementation of medicare under 
Tommy Douglas, and how they have basically built what they 
have termed a universal health care . . . a health care plan that is 
accessible to all. 
 
And yet we find, Mr. Minister, over the past two, three years 
specifically, and certainly since the implementation of the 
wellness model, there are a number of concerns that have 
continued to arise, and arise on a daily basis. And, Mr. Minister, 
I think in the past you’ve argued we’re no different than what 
other provinces offer, as far as services in the area of health 
care, to their taxpayers and to individuals who live within the 
provinces. 
 
As well in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, on 
many occasions when we’ve addressed issues, such as today 
when we’re talking about the closure of the . . . imminent 
closure of the Carrot River hospital, or we’re talking of other 
communities in the province of Saskatchewan, I go back to 
what former ministers have indicated — and certainly the 
Minister of Finance last year in her budget indicating that — as 
a result of the province turning the corner, there will be no more 
bed closures, that there is more than adequate funding to 
address the difficulties we’re facing in health care. 
 
Mr. Minister, however, since that statement we continue to see 
reductions. We’ve seen reductions in nursing care. We’ve seen 
reductions in . . . and boards making decisions where they’re 
cutting services, they’re cutting acute care beds out of the 
system. These are some of the questions and areas we certainly 
want to get into today. 
 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

 

One of the questions I would like to ask of you, Mr. Minister, 
first of all, before we really get into some of the areas, many of 
the areas, I’d like to ask you, Mr. Minister, if you can explain to 
the people of Saskatchewan why you’ve continued to 
unilaterally cut services when, on the other hand, you continue 
to tell us you are putting more money into health care in the 
province of Saskatchewan than you have before. 
 
And yet for those . . . for us as users or individuals who are . . . 
due to no fault of their own — must utilize the services of 
health care find themselves on waiting-lists or waiting for the 
services that they have gone to medical professionals certainly 
to seek help for, only to find that they may be on a six-month or 
an eight-month or even a longer waiting-list, whether it’s 
waiting for to see a specialist or whether it’s waiting for, at the 
end of the day, specialized services such as surgery. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could respond to that. 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to the member for his question. And certainly we, like 
you, appreciate the opportunity that we have to talk about the 
value of health care services across the province because, as 
you and I both know, health care touches the lives of everyone. 
And through the course, of course, of our deliberations and 
discussions of the next several days, we’d be pleased to address 
many, many of the issues that I think that you’ve raised on an 
individual basis in this House, that individuals across the 
province have raised with me, in the way in which we’re 
delivering health care services today, in a very broad fashion. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that if I’ve been quoted by 
saying that our services are no different here, I want to clearly 
rectify that by saying that it’s my belief that in Saskatchewan 
today we have the best health care system in the world — not 
only in North America, but we have the best health care system 
in the world. And I say to the member opposite that on a daily 
basis, or at least on a monthly basis, we have individuals who 
contact us from across the country, people who come here to 
look at the model of health care system that we have in our 
province. 
 
And in fact I just want to share with you that in January of this 
year, I was invited to attend, along with my deputy minister and 
a small delegation of trade individuals, the countries of Taiwan 
and Hong Kong, who have been studying the level of health 
care delivery that they want to transplant in their system and 
have invited us to be a part of that so that we might describe 
and explain what we do in Saskatchewan. 
 
And it would be interesting for you to know, and I think the 
people of Saskatchewan to know, that they’re adopting our 
system in terms of what we do here in Saskatchewan after 
having studied various different countries and the way in which 
they deliver their health system. 
 
So I want to say to you that the message that I’ve been trying to 
give and continue to consistently give, is that we’re very proud 
of our health care system in Saskatchewan. We built it over a 
long period of time, and we say to you that we’re going to 
ensure that into the future that health care system stays strong 

and fluent and vibrant. 
 
I say to the member opposite when you talk about that there 
have been cuts in services across the province, you need to look 
closely at what that language really means. Because when you 
say that there have been — and I’ve heard this statement many 
times over — that there have been 52 hospitals that have been 
closed across this province, in reality many of those facilities 
today are still in place. They’re not designated as hospitals as 
you and I know the term, but they’re designated today as 
community health centres or joint-use facilities, and somewhere 
in your riding and somewhere in my riding and somewhere in 
the districts that you and I serve. And on a daily basis I have the 
opportunity of visiting some of these locations. 
 
And just yesterday I was in the communities of Borden and 
Hafford, which in both of those communities there have been a 
conversion of what you and I know traditionally as hospitals to 
health care centres — one being of course operational on a 
24-hour basis, the other on an 8-hour basis. But still having the 
full complement of services by and large that they had in the 
past, although not having the acute care beds availability that 
they did in the past, designated as hospitals, in some instances 
— but you see an enriched blend of services in their 
communities today. And people talk about that. 
 
And they talk about what they didn’t have before under the old 
system prior to reform and what they have today with reform. 
And they speak about . . . yesterday for example, in the 
communities of Hafford where now they have massage therapy 
as part of their services, where they have occupational therapy 
that comes out on a regular basis, where they have an 
ophthalmologist who comes out on a regular basis to provide 
some of those . . . or optometry they provide in their community 
on a regular basis. 
 
So when you talk about seeing your loss of services in the 
province, I think what you need to look at is that the services 
have been changed. There’s a different way in which they’re 
being delivered in the province today in communities across the 
way. 
 
And I’ve shared with you on a number of occasions that there 
have been more procedures that we’re doing today than we ever 
have in the past. And today we do for example hip and knee 
replacements in this province. They’re up by 51 per cent over 
what we did in the past, 1991-92. Today when you look at the 
ophthalmology services that we provide in the province today, 
they’re up by 81 per cent over what we did in 1981-82. 
 
And the way in which some of these services are provided to 
the public today, it’s changed significantly. Because where in 
the past people would come and stay for several days in a bed, 
that number of days has been reduced. We have way more, 
significantly more out-patient days today that we provide in 
terms of surgeries than we ever have in the past. 
 
And that’s not only Saskatchewan. But when you look at the 
entire health care delivery system across the country, this is 
what you see. You see a reduction in the institutional beds 
across the country and North America and you see an 
enrichment in the community-based side. And that’s the 
direction in which we’re moving as the Department of Health 



1300 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

over the last five years. 
 
This is the initiative with the districts, to more appropriately 
define how we can provide broad-based, community-based 
services. And that’s not a reduction in services in my opinion. 
What it is is a change in the way we provide health care 
services in the province today, not unlike what’s happening 
across other nations across the world. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials this morning. I appreciate the 
opportunity to bring forward some of the discussion points from 
people I represent. 
 
Mr. Minister, you made the statement that you felt that we have 
a strong and vibrant health care system. I would believe that 
there are many people in my constituency who wouldn’t agree 
with that. I think your own polling has showed that a large 
percentage of people feel they don’t have the same health care 
coverage that they did a few years ago. 
 
Many people are feeling scared and apprehensive about what is 
happening to the system. They don’t have the same sense of 
security that they used to have. And I guess I’m talking about 
rural Saskatchewan because that’s what I know the best. But I 
do know that there are people out there who are scared, seniors 
who are scared when they go to bed at night because they don’t 
know who would look after them if they had problems. 
 
The direction that you’re talking about is something that may be 
happening right across Canada. Maybe it’s happening right 
across the world. It doesn’t mean it’s right. People have to be 
able to count on something in their life, and if you don’t have 
the health care you don’t have anything. That’s one thing that 
you have to be able to count on; it doesn’t matter if you’re a 
senior or a young person. 
 
I mean you talked about the health centres and I brought up a 
point to you this morning, Mr. Minister. We have a community 
health centre that may be closing — it was a hospital. The 
people fought very hard to keep the hospital open. It didn’t 
work. They felt, okay, well at least we have a 24-hour 
emergency centre going for them. And people were using it. 
 
They actually built a seniors home onto that and it was actually 
allowing people to stay in that community. And they felt a 
sense of security because they did have the hospital or the 
health centre attached to it. And now that there’s a fear that that 
is going as well. The people that have invested money by 
moving their home into this seniors’ attachment on the old 
hospital and made a life there are wondering — now where do I 
go to? The continual upheaval is something that people are not 
asking for. 
 
When we also talked about the nursing staff, and I have lots of 
nurses in my areas that say there’re working full-time, but 
they’re working full-time because they work in three or four 
different hospitals. They work in Wadena and they work in 
Humboldt and they work in Kelvington or Hudson Bay, and 
they spend all their time on the road working full-time. They 
are stressed out. 
 
I guess my first question to you, Mr. Minister, is the nursing 

allocation that’s been allowed for the two . . . two of the areas, 
two of the districts in my area, in Pasquia and in Central Plains. 
Can you tell me if there’s an allocation for more nurses for 
those two areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Just to your last question first, Madam 
Member, just to say to you that the allocation of nurses across 
the province, or front-line workers across the province will go 
to the 12 larger centres across the province. And the two that 
you ask about will not be receiving an enrichment at this time 
out of the pool of $9 million that we’ve just allocated. 
 
But to remember, Madam Member, that in the 1998-99 budget 
that just recently . . . you and I are of course discussing, we had 
included in that budget presentation additional funding for all 
health districts across the province. And my interest and hope is 
that we’ll see some additional enrichments on front-line staff, 
particularly in the long-term care and in the home care side in 
some of those districts that you talk about and in others across 
the province. 
 
And so my short answer of course to your question is that to 
those two districts that you’ve identified, out of the pool of the 
new $9 million, there won’t be any additional staff. They will 
be added to it but out of the budget allocation you and I are 
discussing — hopefully some will make its way there. 
 
I want to say to you though that we should keep in mind 
though, that there is a fair bit of concern, I would suggest to 
you, from time to time by people around Saskatchewan about 
their ability to access and their assurance that they have quality 
health care services, and in rural Saskatchewan, I have a full 
appreciation as you do how some of those people feel from time 
to time. 
 
And I want to say to you that it doesn’t help when we have 
people who go around the province, of which you’ve been a 
part of, saying to the public that they need to be concerned 
about the value of health care that they’re getting today. And 
when you stand up at a public forum and say that their, for 
example, their hospital beds will be cut — if we use the Plains 
as an example, where we say on a regular basis and the district 
health board says that there’ll be 675 beds and you arrive at a 
public meeting and you say there’re going to be bed losses — 
when the district health board and I say to you on the best 
information that I have that there won’t be any loss of front-line 
nursing staff. 
 
We go around to these district meetings . . . or these public 
meetings and say that that won’t be the case. And you and your 
colleague stand up and say there’s going to be losses in the 
health care system of professionals. That doesn’t help the 
system. 
 
And so when you talk about the fact that there is from time to 
time some insecurity in the system, I think that we have a 
responsibility, as colleagues who represent our constituencies, 
to at least provide the appropriate and actual factual information 
so that people will have confidence in that. 
 
And you’re right. Some of the polling has indicated that people 
who do not have access to the health care system today are 
concerned about it. But when you look at the individuals and 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

 

folks who’ve actually had direct contact with the system, they 
say and the polling suggests, that 85 per cent of those people are 
very happy and satisfied that the health system is serving them 
well. 
 
Can we do a better job of enriching our health care system? The 
answer is clearly, yes, we can. And that’s part of why we’ve put 
the additional $88 million into the budget this year. And that’s 
part of why we’re going to see continued enrichments in the 
health care field. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. The Central Plains 
Health District that Humboldt hospital is part of has been trying 
to work with different opportunities that they see. And that is 
doing surgery in rural Saskatchewan to encourage the doctors to 
come out from Saskatoon and probably, more importantly, to 
see if they can attract doctors out to that area themselves so that 
they don’t have to just bring them in from Saskatoon. 
 
There’s an opportunity there to use these centres so that they 
will be vibrant on their own; that we don’t have to have the 
out-migration of money as people, or patients I prefer to call 
them . . . Although I see a lot of documentation now where 
patients are now called clients which scares the life out of me 
— when we take the word patient out of health care and call 
them a client then they’re more of a dollar figure than they are a 
health figure. And that is something that really annoys me. 
 
But I think that we have an opportunity to see some of these 
centres like Humboldt being used more, their facility used to a 
great extent, so that actually we can get money into the rural 
areas instead of seeing it go out. When we see that this area 
hasn’t been allocated more nurses, that’s a scary thought for 
them. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the status of the Humboldt 
hospital is at this time? There was expression . . . or there was a 
written request for capitalization so that they can add on or 
build their hospital. And I’d like to know what the status of that 
hospital is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to certainly support the, Mr. Deputy 
Deputy Chair, the comment that’s made by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena because I think she’s absolutely accurate in 
her comment that there is strong interest on the part of this 
administration and the department to try and ensure that we can 
provide more rural services through a physician recruitment 
process — particularly specialists. 
 
I don’t think that it is in the best interests of people, for 
example, who live in a Saskatoon to have to drive out to a 
Humboldt to have their surgeries done there. That’s not the 
intent of my comment. 
 
(1115) 
 
My intent is that an interest is to see some of those specialities 
make their way into rural Saskatchewan and to some of the 
larger centres and provide some of those specialized services to 
those communities; so that in fact people don’t have to make 
those long treks, as they often do, from your part of the world or 
our part of the world to the larger centre. 
 

And so if we can attract some of those people then to practise in 
rural Saskatchewan, that’s the initiative that we have under way 
of course. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that the capital request that 
you talk about for Humboldt, at this point in time it’s part of the 
mix. The capital announcements have not been made yet. We 
expect that they’ll be made within a short little piece. But 
certainly the Humboldt one continues to be a priority in the 
bigger piece of ensuring that people receive quality health care 
services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Johnson): — Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, with leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I 
thank the minister and the official opposition for allowing me 
the opportunity, on behalf of my friend and colleague, the 
member from Wood River, to introduce some very fine looking 
people in the Speaker’s gallery this morning who have come 
here to watch our proceedings. 
 
They are grade 10 students from Rockglen, Saskatchewan and I 
know they’ve travelled a long way to be here and be with us. 
And I want to make sure that they are, on behalf of the MLA 
from Wood River and all members and all my colleagues, are 
very warmly welcomed to this Assembly. 
 
And I notice that you have a meeting scheduled for 12 o’clock 
and perhaps I will also have the privilege of meeting with you 
at that time on behalf of my colleague. 
 
Please welcome them. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, you 
were just responding to some comments by my colleague, the 
member — oh I forget the place right now but I’ll just say my 
colleague — regarding scare tactics. 
 
And I would have to say, Mr. Minister, that coming from your 
side of the Assembly, and coming . . . other than the fact that 
you were not elected until 1991 — you can be excused for that 
— but I don’t know if there was a group of MLAs that was 
more better at creating fear and using scare tactics than the NDP 
caucus of the 1980s. 
 
And I don’t think, Mr. Minister, it’s just fair just to level at 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

opposition parties today, . . . because if you take a look . . . And 
you just have to go back to Hansard. And I could dig out some 
of the Hansards. I could dig out some of the comments made by 
the member . . . or by Ms. Simard, who was the Health minister 
in 1992, following the 1991 general election. I can dig up all 
kinds of areas and comments where she would come to this 
Assembly with fictitious accusations of problems in the health 
care system and two or three days later find out that they really 
weren’t true, the information that she was bringing forward. 
 
So to suggest that the opposition of today is acting in an 
irresponsible manner, in fact, Mr. Minister, I think if you . . . 
some of the meetings that I’ve had the privilege of attending 
regarding the Plains Health Centre, I’ve raised the issue that the 
675 beds you’re talking of, yes, is achievable — we’re not 
losing that — but the question we’ve been raising, Mr. Minister, 
is are 675 beds enough? Are 675 beds going to address the 
health care needs today and into the future? 
 
Mr. Minister, when we look at other areas and other 
jurisdictions, we find that other jurisdictions are now adding 
beds into the system. Now I know that in Ontario one of the 
areas they’re adding beds in, they’re adding beds in the heavy 
care field because of the fact that too many heavy care patients 
are ending up in acute care facilities, tying up beds that are 
more expensive to serve, as far as serving a heavy care patient, 
rather than a heavy care facility. 
 
And certainly in the province of Saskatchewan we had that. If 
we go back to the late ’70s and the NDP government of that day 
put a moratorium on any further heavy care bed construction in 
the province to the point that there was a real . . . there was 
pressure put on the system. And as a result of the lack of heavy 
care beds, there were a number of heavy care bed patients 
occupying acute care beds of the day; beds that could have been 
used, and should have been, and needed to be available to meet 
the acute care needs. 
 
The province of Alberta is now adding another . . . some more 
beds in its acute care facilities to meet the needs. And other 
jurisdictions are looking at . . . to try and meet those needs. 
 
Mr. Minister, to suggest that we have enough beds in the system 
or to suggest that we can deal with everyone through home care 
or sending people home early, I don’t believe, Mr. Minister, if 
you’re looking very carefully . . . And to some of the 
individuals I’ve talked to . . . In fact a couple of individuals who 
happen to be very close neighbours, the problems that 
associated and that they had to deal with as a result of early 
dismissal or being sent home from an acute care bed after an 
operation, Mr. Minister . . . a dismissal which resulted in a later 
stay — in one case of over a month, the other case of over six 
weeks — I don’t know if that is using and spending our health 
dollars wisely. 
 
Mr. Minister, you probably could have done more, the system 
could have done more to protect itself and to help itself, if they 
would have maintained that observation status in the acute care 
facility following the operation, an extra two or three days to 
make sure that there would be no complications arise as a result 
of surgeries. 
 
As a result of early dismissal and of freeing up the bed . . . 

which in certain cases, Mr. Minister, there are lots of 
opportunities I believe where stay in hospitals, acute care 
facilities, isn’t always necessary to stay that 10 or 14 days. I 
don’t disagree with you on that. I think it depends on the 
procedure. 
 
But I think we need to be very careful as to the type of 
procedures and how quick we’re sending patients home. Do we 
send everyone home early, or would you take a look at the type 
of procedure. Because at the end of the day if you’re looking at 
an additional cost to the system because you now have to keep a 
patient in an acute care facility as a result of a major infection 
for, like I’ve indicated, anywhere from four to six weeks or 
more, it means an added cost to the system. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is being done to address that? And what is 
being done to address the fact of waiting-lists and the fact that 
on many occasions we do have waiting-lists arising as a result 
of the inability to access acute care beds at the time of an 
emergency situation or even when a person’s operation has 
been scheduled. Such as the lady from Rocanville last year we 
raised, laying on the operating table, right in the operating 
room, only to be informed just before the anaesthetic is applied, 
we don’t have a bed to put this patient in for post-operative 
care; sorry, we’re going to have to cancel the surgery. 
 
And that individual had gone through a lot of work to make 
sure there was someone there available to run their business 
until the recovery period and she could get back into service. 
Then she had to reschedule that again. That’s inconvenient for 
that person, and how many other people like that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think you make a number of comments, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, that I think are important for us to respond 
to. And certainly some of them we concur with you with; others 
I think need broader explanation. 
 
I want to say to you that when you make the comment today 
about the waiting times for many of the procedures that people 
are experiencing or needing to have, are significantly reduced. 
Where you make the comment in the past where someone might 
have been in a hospital bed for 10 to 14 days, today many of 
those procedures have been reduced significantly. 
 
And in some instances there aren’t any waiting times for some 
of those procedures at all because people are experiencing a 
different way of which they’re having that work done. With the 
new technology that we have today, and laser surgery is of 
course on the leading edge of much of that, today you can have 
a procedure conducted within a few hours, and you’re back 
within your own home or within your own community. Where 
in the past you’ve had to lay in a hospital bed for three or four 
or five days and sometimes, as you suggest, ten days. 
 
And of course what’s happened to that is we’re adding another 
dimension, not only in Saskatchewan, but across the nation, 
about how you provide those support services to people who are 
having those immediate procedures done and go home. And 
home care has become very much a part of that. 
 
And as you know, there’s the national agenda in this country 
about developing a home care strategy, how we might be able 
to see additional enrichments, additional enforcements of 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

 

people on the ground who provide that support service to folks 
across this province and across the nation. 
 
And we’re going to try to lead some of that, as you can well 
understand, because the home care conference was in this 
province not more than three or four months ago. And we have 
a strong interest here in promoting that as a model to enhance 
the level of services that we provide to people within their own 
homes and communities and we have put significant money 
onto the home care side over the last couple of years to try to 
grow that. 
 
When you ask the question about, do we have enough beds, and 
I mean, and I’ve answered this question from time to time. 
When you look at the number of acute care beds that we have in 
the province today, that’s still running at about 31 . . . 3,100, 
3,150 acute care beds across the province. And when I examine 
my average daily census report against that number, it’s 
somewhere between 23 and 2,500 on a daily basis, which 
means that within the system today we have some slippage or 
some opportunity where we still have beds that are unutilized. 
 
Now if the question is, you know, whether or not those beds 
should be relocated somewhere else, I mean it’s one that really 
begs the discussion. It really does beg the discussion. But as 
you well know, the distribution of beds across the province is a 
very delicate debate. 
 
And so we’ll continue to work with the district health boards. 
And we’re promoting some of those partnerships today, where 
districts can work together. As you know, in your area and in 
ours — the one that I’m from — the Regina Health District is 
actively trying to ensure that discussions are broader, so that 
when in fact people require a early discharge, that there’s an 
opportunity for them back in those communities to accept those 
individuals. Or if somebody requires a procedure that might not 
be able to be done immediately in one part of the province, that 
maybe they can be directed to another larger tertiary centre to 
ensure that that happens. 
 
The accuracy today of the waiting-lists are questionable, to say 
the least. And it’s not an issue that we only have here in 
Saskatchewan, but one that we have nationally. And we’re 
looking at trying to provide some sense to, over the next little 
while, looking at how we might develop a national strategy in 
examining what the waiting-lists are. 
 
Because there are procedures today that we can’t do in 
Saskatchewan — we can’t do in Saskatchewan — and we have 
a dependency on our neighbours in Alberta or possibly in 
Manitoba or in Ontario. And so we need to get some 
appreciation of what the waiting-lists are, not only in our own 
provinces but certainly nationally. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And your closing 
comments about talking about the fact of working with other 
jurisdictions . . . I certainly think are some things we need to 
look into. And there’s an issue I’ll be raising a little later in 
regards to that. 
 
Because, Mr. Minister, I agree with . . . I would say I would 
agree with you and I would think if we’re looking at health 
care, not just on the basis of a province-wide system but 

certainly a national health care program, it would indicate that 
as provinces we can reach out and we can provide a service that 
maybe another province isn’t able to provide for the simple 
reason that there are some situations where you don’t really 
have a lot of individuals, so it’s difficult to justify the cost of 
trying to provide a specific service. 
 
So let’s take advantage of situations where we have specialists 
in other provinces who have done intensive research in certain 
areas and, indeed, help patients seek those services there, and in 
return offer something in our province. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I would also suggest that we don’t just stop 
inter-provincially and nationally, we look internationally. I 
mean that in regards to the northern states and some of them 
having probably more direct access to services here in places 
like Regina versus — if they would like to come here — versus 
maybe going to other areas in the United States. We have 
people going to the Mayo Clinic all the time, even from 
Saskatchewan. They take advantage of the specialized services 
there. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we talk about health care though, I think we 
need to look at as well how we utilize beds, and how the fact 
that district boards can maybe look at working together a little 
more in providing some of the services there as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you made a comment a moment ago about 
the fact that the average daily census, I think you said, is 
something between 2,300 to 24 or 2,500, I’m not exactly sure 
on that. But Mr. Minister, when it comes to an average census 
. . . and certainly boards look at the average daily census of 
acute care bed usage within the facilities that they are operating, 
whether it be the large centres like Regina, Saskatoon, or the 
smaller centres like, say, Pipestone, Moose Mountain, or East 
Central, whatever. 
 
Mr. Minister, the thing is, that’s an average. You and I know 
that an average is a balance between a low and a high. You and 
I know as well that when you’re doing an average, an average 
census, that doesn’t necessarily mean that those beds are 
utilized at that level on an ongoing basis. 
 
That means that there are times when facilities have a lower 
number of usage of beds, and on other occasions there are 
emergency situations or situations such as we see arising in the 
fall because of the weather and environmental conditions we 
face where you may have major cases of flu. 
 
Certainly this past winter in our area — and I’m not exactly 
sure of other areas of the province — it was amazing the 
number of severe pneumonia cases that arose, cases where 
people needed the institutional or the acute care facilities for 
that heavy care in order to battle the pneumonia that arose. 
 
And Mr. Minister, what bothers me is when we say because we 
only have an average of 23 to 2,500 acute care beds utilized on 
any one day, that we would cut down to that average rather than 
say leaving the beds available. After all those beds are already 
paid for. Those beds aren’t costing you anything. 
 
(1130) 
 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

Mr. Minister, the hospitals that I have chatted with on a number 
of occasions, if the usage . . . if the patients aren’t there they 
have working agreements with the staffing whereby they call on 
them if they need more or they don’t call everyone in to work. 
They have ways of working so that they just have the staffing 
available for the amount of services that are needed at that time. 
 
So I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, to cut beds to an 
average is certainly inappropriate, or to remove the beds 
physically from the hospital is inappropriate, because when 
we’re talking about an average, boards are basing their funding 
based on the average census, recognizing that there will be 
periods of low usage, recognizing that there will be periods of 
high usage. 
 
Now the one problem we have when we talk about average 
daily census, Mr. Minister, it becomes very easy and probably 
as we’ve seen in the past, whether it continues to be done today 
— because you talk of averages, and because facilities do not 
want to lose the beds because they’ve been seeing them 
removed because that average has been lowered — I shouldn’t 
say lowered, we’ve cut the beds to what the average is — you 
certainly leave in place the opportunity, if you will, for districts 
to utilize more beds to at least guarantee that they’re going to 
have so many beds physically available in the system if an 
emergency or a situation down the road says that we need so 
many beds available. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think it’s time to recognize the fact that districts 
have access and their funding is maintained at a certain level 
based on that average. But we’re not demanding that they 
remove beds out of the system simply because their average is 
lower because what you’re going to have is districts and/or 
facilities themselves making sure there are people occupying 
beds when maybe they don’t need to be, just to maintain that 
average so they don’t lose that funding. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do we address it? How do we say to boards, 
listen, here’s what your funding is . . . and I guess the question I 
asked you, Mr. Minister — is it’s about time if indeed boards 
are going to be held accountable and boards are going to be 
blamed if services are cut — it’s about time we gave them a 
block funding rather than a limited amount of acute care 
funding saying well if you’re short in acute care, tough luck. 
We don’t have any more money. But if you have a little extra in 
acute care you can move that into heavier home care services if 
needs are available there. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you address these questions? How do you 
address these problems of no. 1, making sure the beds are 
physically available for when they’re needed without penalizing 
districts by cutting the funding because their average may be 
down to the point that they start putting more patients in the 
beds just to guarantee that average census so that they can 
guarantee that acute care funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, just to the 
member opposite just a couple of comments. First of all I want 
to respond to my early comment about the number of overall 
acute care beds that we have in the province and the ADC, the 
average daily census. There is no intent by the department or 
the government to shrink that space that we have today between 
the 3,200 and the 2,400 beds that we have around the province. 

And so to suggest for a minute that there’s some sort of an 
agenda today, that we’re on a campaign to shrink that level even 
further than what has been suggested, is not the direction that 
we’re campaigning on. 
 
And so I say to the member that when you look at the number 
of people who work in the system and the number of beds, the 
number of staff that you have in the facility that are employed 
are clearly tied to the number of beds that you have. 
 
So I think it would be irresponsible for anybody, be it the 
district health board or the department, to suggest that what you 
do is you staff up for this month based on the number of beds 
that you might need, and then you might add another, if you 
have a particular need, an immediate need to add another three 
or four beds to the system, that you bring on a whole 
complement of staff to support those three or four beds. And 
then when you don’t need those beds again, that you take the 
staff out of the system. And so you have sort of a yo-yo effect 
where you have staff come and going with number of beds that 
you have. 
 
I don’t think that you or the district health boards or certainly I 
would agree with that process. I think you need to staff to what 
you would suspect would be the mean, and then try and ensure 
that from time to time you have appropriate staffing levels that 
come in that can support that. And that’s why you need a 
continuum of services. And hospital beds in my opinion don’t 
dictate the quality of services that people get or the quality of 
health care, which is clearly the case. 
 
I mean I say to you from my own experience, having moved to 
the community where I come from, in 1973, in the regional 
hospital in Yorkton we had 245 acute care beds; today, we have 
107 acute care beds, over a period of 25 years. 
 
Does that translate into the fact that we don’t have good 
specialists today? Do we not have quality health care in our part 
of Saskatchewan? And I would say to you that the answer is 
that we have excellent quality health care services in our area 
today. We have better specialities there today, we have better 
surgeons or as good as surgeons as we’ve ever had, and the 
people continue to access on a daily basis, their needs. So beds 
in themselves don’t translate into the level of quality services, 
health services, that you might be suggesting they do. 
 
In terms of how you utilize the beds, I couldn’t agree more with 
you that there needs to be a better working relationship between 
the districts. Because today in particularly some of the larger 
regional community hospitals, there are some pressures and 
demands on how they’re providing and meeting the needs on a 
regular basis. But in some of your smaller rural hospitals today, 
there isn’t a full complement of occupancy. And so what’s 
happening is that when someone goes for a procedure to a 
larger centre, to a larger centre, they then get transferred back 
out to the smaller community hospital to convalesce. And that’s 
a good practice and a good process but often it’s not within the 
same district. 
 
So when you have somebody who comes into a centre or 
community hospital or regional centre, to give you an example, 
has the procedure completed on them, then their immediate 
search is only within their own district as to where that 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1305 

 

individual might go back to convalesce. 
 
And there needs to be a growing partnership, in my opinion, 
between the districts. So that when someone comes in, has a 
procedure completed, it doesn’t matter if they’re within — and 
I’ll use my example — in the East Central Health District to 
convalesce. Maybe they need to go to the Assiniboine Valley 
Health District, which might be the same distance back to 
home, and convalesce in that facility. 
 
But the process today, in terms of the way in which the districts 
are structured, the relationships between the districts, some of 
that’s inhibited. And so when you make the comment that 
there’s an important role here to interface some of the districts, 
not only the large centres, the tertiaries of the Regina, 
Saskatoons, with the rest of the province — because that’s 
where two-thirds of the services are provided — we need to do 
a better job of how we coordinate some of that integration at the 
regional level, the community-based level, so that some of those 
services . . . or some of those individuals can move freely 
between the districts. And I support that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I’m pleased to hear you 
talking about the fact that we can look at convalescence outside 
of the large urban centres, especially when it comes to major 
surgeries. Because that’s something I’ve been chatting about for 
a number of years. I’ve been bringing that forward to 
government for a number of years, even back during the ’80s 
when I had the opportunity. 
 
Unfortunately it seems not too many people were listening at 
the time because there seemed to be the push to the large urban 
centres and the feeling that the services are better there. But I 
can guarantee you, Mr. Minister, that in our smaller 
communities, services, the quality of care, is excellent. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, if indeed, if you are really serious and if you 
really believe what you’re saying, you and your department, 
your officials will begin to take advantage of the quality of care 
we have in rural communities and certainly in our smaller 
regional centres that had smaller health districts. 
 
When a patient comes in for operative care and for 
post-operative services, rather than confining that patient to the 
bed and occupying that bed, as I saw most recently. . . couple 
patients — one patient from our area, another patient that I met 
from the Estevan area — for heart surgeries, had been bumped a 
couple times. And they got to the point where the specialist said 
he wasn’t prepared to release them any more. Because of the 
fact that they’re . . . how far they were from the large urban 
centre outside of the city of Regina — basically asked that they 
be held within the beds in Regina here, and it just so happened 
at the Plains Health Centre, until an operating room became 
available. 
 
Because he didn’t want to have to accept or have to answer the 
question, why were they sent home, if a major problem arrived 
as a result of a major heart attack. And then when a simple — 
well, I shouldn’t say simple because heart operations are not 
simple — but an operation would certainly meet the problems 
that they were facing. And 200 or 150 miles outside of the city 
is something that they didn’t want to face. 
 

So, Mr. Minister, I guess what I’m saying to you and what I’m 
asking, and if what I’m hearing from you is that’s you’re 
feeling, why we should be doing more to work with all health 
districts. When a person comes from, for example say Kipling, 
and they’re in for an operation and there’s some post-operative 
recovery period, once that patient has reached a point where 
they could be transferred, to transfer them back. That then frees 
up the bed that’s at one of the hospitals in Regina then for 
another bed available for that, for another operation to be 
conducted. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think it would be appropriate that we take 
advantage of this because it’s a way of making better use of our 
system rather than saying, at the end of the day, we’re going to 
have to put more beds into Regina to address the needs of the 
waiting-list. 
 
Now you talked about more operations for hips, that’s true. 
We’ve advanced a long ways in the area of hip and knee 
replacements. And there was a period in time where Yorkton 
was the place to go because it was the quickest place to get in. 
But as other patients began to hear of the specialized field of 
hip replacement in Yorkton that’s become . . . has now a long 
waiting-list as well. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what I would suggest to you is not just 
transferring patients back to local facilities for some 
post-operative care, but as well looking at means whereby we 
can provide some of the specialized fields in regional centres. 
And I believe you’ve talked about that as well. 
 
I believe we just saw recently in the area of . . . yes, Saskatoon 
surgeons operating in Humboldt because of the fact that there 
were beds available, that they weren’t available in Saskatoon. 
So they made arrangements to go to an area like Humboldt. 
 
I don’t disagree with that. There’s no reason why surgeons 
couldn’t operate in, if the beds are available, in places like 
Humboldt, and meet patients there versus always sending them 
to the large, to the large centres — the Humboldts or the Swift 
Currents or the North Battlefords, providing some of that 
service and allowing for that post-operative recovery out there. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think those are areas in which we can manage 
our system better. And what it does, Mr. Minister, while it 
doesn’t necessarily save you a lot of money, because you’re still 
performing a service, it certainly means more to the patient 
themselves in the fact of the cost, if it’s from the rural area 
transferring or going into Saskatoon for the service, of when 
they could receive it in a Yorkton, or in a Humboldt for that 
matter, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I would certainly suggest that we take a serious look at how 
we utilize the beds, and take advantage of the beds that we have 
overall within the system, rather than just saying we’re going to 
confine all the surgeries to Regina and Saskatoon when there 
are a number of surgical procedures that could be conducted in 
a lot of our regional centres. And even in some of our smaller 
centres. 
 
If you have the specialists, if you have doctors available who 
specialize and certainly are qualified to perform certain 
procedures, I think there are different ways in which we can 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

certainly manage how we provide health care services. And I’ll 
give you an opportunity to respond to that, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member for Saltcoats on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
introduce to you and the members of the legislature today, 15 
grade 3 and 4 students from Rhein, with their teacher, Mrs. 
Donna Dickie; and Mrs. Pihrag, and Mrs. Michalcewich, 
Mitchell Michalcewich. And I’m hoping to meet with them 
while they have their lunch very shortly and look forward to 
doing that. 
 
So I would ask the members to help welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, just to respond to some 
of the comments that the member opposite has made. Certainly 
the strategy and the discussion that’s going on today within the 
Department of Health, and with SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) and the district health 
boards, is to pick up on some of the thought that you’ve 
expressed and the direction of which you’ve expressed. 
 
There is a strong interest on our behalf to examine more fully 
how we might be able to use some of the larger community 
hospitals and regional hospitals across the province more 
efficiently and more effectively. And that’s why we’ve just 
completed in this province, led by the Department of Health — 
a couple of our employees — and the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and SAHO, a physician needs review. 
 
(1145) 
 
Because as much as we talk about how important it is to keep 
people and provide services as close to home as we can, you 
need to have individuals who’ll come and practise in those 
communities. And of course the physician is critical to that 
piece. 
 
And so in the 1998-99 contract we’ve just signed with 
physicians, one of the critical pieces in that discussion was to 
help them assure us and Saskatchewan people that there would 
be an effort to both recruit and retain physicians to this 
province, which is a very difficult task not only for 
Saskatchewan but across the nation, to try and get people to 
practise. And more so not in urban centres so much, but 

certainly in rural. And when I talk about rural communities in a 
province like ours, in many instances I am speaking about 
places like a Lloydminster or a North Battleford or a Yorkton or 
a Prince Albert. Because by and large the majority of the very 
specialized services today are provided in Saskatoon and 
Regina, and I think will always need to be there. 
 
But when we did our physician needs review, there’s been a 
very clear identification here that we have a shortage of 
specialties, particularly in this community here, Regina, and for 
the regional and larger community hospitals across the 
province. And so our effort with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and the Department of Health, and the new contract 
with physicians, is to try to encourage physicians to come and 
practise here. 
 
Because there’s no question that if you get a situation like the 
one that Humboldt physicians . . . or the Saskatoon physicians 
talked about where they go to Humboldt to practise on a casual 
or an interim basis, that it will ensure that the people who live 
around the Humboldt community who need a particular 
procedure will now go to the Humboldt facility as opposed to 
going to a Saskatoon or even a Regina, and reduce the kinds of 
pressures that you talk about and I talk about on the larger 
tertiary centres. 
 
Recently I was in the Melfort hospital and spent about two 
hours in that facility. But in the first 15 minutes as I walked 
through the facility, three of the individuals that were 
practising, they were from Saskatoon. They were specialists 
that were there from Saskatoon, travel out to the community 
and provide very valuable specialized service. Which means 
then that people who live in those areas of the province don’t 
have to travel to the larger centres and/or get better utilization 
of those beds in those rural areas. 
 
So some of the language that you use around the importance of 
building stronger regional community centres across the 
province are ones that we have as well. It’s almost as though 
you’re serving on our committee here and helping us to some of 
that strategy, because that’s certainly the direction that we’ve 
been taking this process. Now the key piece of it, as I’ve 
suggested to you, will be our ability to attract and retain 
physicians to practise in those areas. 
 
I want to also just share with you a piece of information as it 
relates to the percentage of day surgeries in the province, 
because I think they’re critical to some of the discussion that 
we’ve had about utilization, but when you look at the . . . or 
utilization of beds. 
 
When you look at 1991-92 or as far back as ’97-98 . . . or 
1987-88, there was about 29 per cent of our day surgeries were 
performed in the province. Today in 1996-97, there’s about 52 
per cent of our day surgeries. So there’s almost been a doubling 
of the number of day surgeries in the province over that period 
of about 10 years. 
 
So the technologies change. The system, in terms of how long 
we keep people within acute care centres, today has changed; 
it’s reduced. And so there’s some accountability of course 
around what’s happening in those areas as well. 
 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, I certainly 
appreciate some of your comments and the fact that you are 
beginning to recognize, or whether it’s the department or 
yourself as an individual out of the Yorkton area with the large 
regional hospital, beginning to recognize that we don’t 
necessarily have to provide all the services and consolidate into 
the two large urban centres. That there is more to Saskatchewan 
than Regina and Saskatoon. And I appreciate the fact that you 
recognize that. 
 
In fact from the column “More health change,” I believe this 
one is in the rural weeklies that have just come out, talks about, 
and, Mr. Chair, I’m quoting: 
 

What Serby believes would work better is a system of 
health districts where large regional or large community 
hospitals in places like Swift Current, North Battleford, 
Humboldt, Melfort, Weyburn, Yorkton, and Nipawin 
would play a far more significant role. 
 

And that’s something like I indicated earlier, I’ve chatted about 
for a long time. 
 
When we talk about that, Mr. Minister, as well, and we just 
talked about the regional centres, I would also indicate to you 
that there may be possibilities of some of even the smaller 
districts providing some specialized service. 
 
And I raise that, that whether or not that may happen in the 
future is something I don’t know. But I know the opportunity in 
the Pipestone, Moose Mountain area was certainly possible 
three years ago with two doctors, one at that time residing in 
Moosomin and one in Kipling, had both taken intensive training 
in gastroscopy. And we had agreed and were hoping that they 
could continue to function out of the two hospitals, working 
back and forth, if they could get other districts to send patients 
so that they could provide the service and indeed utilize the 
training that they had received. 
 
Unfortunately, there didn’t seem to be much of a willingness on 
the part of the boards to expand or even look at operating those 
services even though they had facilities. While there was some 
major construction may have been needed in one facility versus 
the other, they did have operating rooms and they did have a lot 
of equipment available. And the results were, Mr. Minister, 
both doctors left the province. And I think that’s unfortunate. 
 
It’s unfortunate in the fact that they chose to leave the province 
rather than even looking at the possibility of moving to a centre 
like maybe a Yorkton, or a little larger centre, or even a centre 
like Regina to work together to offer the service to the health 
care field. 
 
And you just talked about recruiting physicians. In that case, 
both of those physicians came from South Africa; both of them 
really liked the communities they were living in. We talk about 
recruiting physicians. We talk about some of the difficulties we 
have in recruiting even local, or trying to encourage more 
Saskatchewan young people to get involved or to become . . . 
look at the possibility of medicine as a vocation. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, the fact that we don’t have that many or 
at the end of the day a lot of our locally trained individuals 

choose to move out of the province . . . I think it’s important as 
well to look at other areas of the world, such as South Africa 
where physicians are coming from, and working through 
agreements that make it easier, if you will, for physicians to 
come to this province. 
 
And the reason I say that is because I was just involved with the 
community of Wawota. They had recruited a physician. They 
had actually put up $25,000 out of a foundation that they had 
been building for a number of years to recruit this physician 
with the hope at the time when they finally completed all the 
discussions the physician was hoping to be in the community by 
February 1. It was almost the end of April before we were 
finally, through Immigration, able to work out an arrangement 
where Immigration began to realize that this physician had been 
recruited locally, was being brought in, and would allow the 
physician to come into the province. 
 
And that’s just one of the many situations that I’ve had people 
come to me with, dealing with some of the problems they’ve 
had with Immigration and just travelling to this province . . . or 
coming to this province to practice medicine, when they’ve had 
communities like the Wawotas and Kiplings really aggressively 
seeking their services, only to find Immigration is holding up 
their ability to come and practice. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the department doing to address the 
problems of immigration when we look at . . . and as I say this, 
I’m not suggesting that we throw the doors wide open. But I 
believe, Mr. Minister, where there are jobs available, where 
there are opportunities available to practice, I think it’s 
atrocious that we have a Department of Immigration that seems 
to stand in the way of the province of Saskatchewan recruiting 
physicians to fill positions, much needed positions, in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well this issue is a very tender one, of 
course, as the member knows. And our strategy of course has 
been to work very closely with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and of course the College of Medicine because we 
recognize . . . and this isn’t only a — as much as it’s difficult to 
say this, but it’s accurate — it’s not only an issue that we have 
in Saskatchewan, but we have across the country, in terms of 
ensuring that we are able to attract some physicians from 
outside of Canada or North America to practice here. 
 
There is some extremely stringent criteria that’s in place today 
that’s both managed by the royal college . . . and certainly the 
immigration rules for people to practice in Canada are such that 
there is a process. And that process of course is currently 
managed by the college and the national college. I say to the 
member what efforts are we making? 
 
Just before Christmas I spoke with the registrar, Mr. Kendel, 
from the college of physicians and surgeons. He had just been 
to Ottawa and made a representation to the federal government 
about this very issue that you talk about, about the fact that we 
have physicians across the nation or across the world today. 
And I give you an example of my colleague from Manitoba, 
who just returned from Germany where today they have an 
abundance of physicians and practitioners, specialists in 
Germany who would be very anxious to come and practice 
medicine in our country. And in his case, he was trying to 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

recruit for Manitoba. 
 
The ability to get these people through the immigration process 
that you talk about, and in order for them to get the kinds of 
licensure and certification through the royal college has been a 
very, very difficult process. 
 
And our people from the College of Medicine and Mr. Kendel, 
have been to Ottawa, have had the discussions with the federal 
government about the importance of working with the 
economic community in terms of developing a different kind of 
a migration capability here for physicians into North America. 
And this has not been an easy task, I need to say to you. And as 
a result of that, that process has to some degree been stymied, I 
might say, in moving ahead. 
 
And this will be an agenda item that we have as provincial 
Health ministers. This is an issue that we’re taking up with 
Minister Rock, because it’s not only a provincial issue in 
Saskatchewan but it’s a national Canadian issue that we have, 
and it requires that kind of participation at the federal level to 
try and grow the number of foreign physicians that practice in 
this province and in this country. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
I guess when we talk about this, and you indicated this was a 
complicated issue and I’m not exactly sure why it should be so 
complicated. I really have a problem trying to understand why 
the colleges, whether it’s the royal college or even the college 
of physicians in Saskatchewan, would seem to almost in some 
cases almost put limitations or hindrances or road blocks in 
place of other physicians coming to practice in this — whether 
it’s in Canada or whether it’s in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The facts are, Mr. Minister, if indeed we are, and we do find in 
areas certain shortages, it would seem to me that even the 
colleges should be working at bringing physicians to this 
province or helping locate physicians. Or seeking services of 
specific physicians coming to Canada and certainly coming to 
the province of Saskatchewan to practice rather than, as we 
almost would seem to see on occasion, putting road blocks or 
hindrances in place which then affects the ability of 
communities and local district boards to provide services that 
they could if indeed the physicians were able to immigrate to 
this province to practise medicine in a way that they would feel 
real comfortable with. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the hon. member from Rosthern 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Permission to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I’d like to this morning 
through you and to all members of the House here this morning 
introduce to you, on behalf of Mr. Gantefoer, 68 students from 
Melfort Comprehensive Collegiate. 
 
They’re accompanied by two teachers and three chaperones, 
and they will be meeting with their MLA, Mr. Gantefoer, right 

after they’ve seen the activities that are taking place here this 
morning. And he may be buying them lunch, we’re not sure, but 
you’ll have to negotiate that with him. 
 
So would you welcome them to this House and to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I just wish to remind the hon. member 
for Rosthern, you cannot use names of sitting members. And I 
see that the veteran member recognizes that. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Just in response to the question as it relates to foreign 
physicians and the ability to come to Canada to practice. As you 
know the standards that are set today by national colleges — 
and in this case a Canadian college — need to reflect what 
would be our standards as a Canadian community willing to see 
people come here and practise medicine. 
 
And of course when you look at sort of European economic 
communities from which we would be recruiting physicians to 
practise in Canada, these standards are really set by, if I might 
suggest, by the peers themselves; the people who sit on your 
national body of your college of physicians and surgeons are in 
fact physicians and surgeons. 
 
And so their standards would need to reflect what’s acceptable 
in their opinion for individuals coming into Canada to practise 
medicine. And of course the criteria that they’ve established for 
themselves is such that makes entrance quite difficult, if I might 
suggest to you, based on those standards that they’ve set. 
 
And I use the example of my friend and colleague out of 
Manitoba who’s just been to Germany and was interested in 
seeing if he could recruit a group of individuals to come and 
practise in Canada. Because in fact — and in Manitoba — 
because in fact they have an abundance of physicians there. 
 
But when they come here or look at trying to meet the Canadian 
standard and need to write the royal college standard here, 
which is a federal one that’s established, their ability to do that, 
they have not been successful in achieving it. 
 
And so when I say to you that this a difficult and complex 
process, it’s primarily due to the fact that those standards are 
established by individuals who have tried to protect the best 
interests of Canadians and possibly their own environment — 
and I’d be careful to say that — and at the same time ensure that 
we have a sufficient supply today of physicians in the country. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, well in response to that, 
and I appreciate that because certainly that’s one of the things 
that’s come back and been thrown in my face time and time 
again when communities or groups or districts or individuals 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

 

come and bring to my attention a problem they’re facing while 
having recruited a physician in getting that . . . working towards 
bringing that physician into the country and meeting the 
requirements. 
 
And the reason I say that, Mr. Minister, is because I have found 
that in any community certainly in the last little while, I haven’t 
found at any one time whether it has any . . . been any 
dissatisfaction with the type of care and the quality of care of 
physicians who have come into the country. 
 
In fact recently, I would suggest to you that more people have 
been more than impressed with the quality of care and with the 
type of physicians that have come to our communities and have 
tried to establish themselves in the communities, only to, if you 
will, I would suggest, run into roadblocks as a result of the 
exams and some of the criteria set up by the college. 
 
And whether or not it’s a means of the physicians’ association 
themselves protecting their own environment, I don’t know. But 
it seems to me, Mr. Minister, with the need for physicians, that 
we need to find ways of indeed working with — and you 
indicated the Minister of Health in Manitoba going to Ottawa to 
lobby Mr. Rock and to discuss this whole question — it seems 
to me we need to find a mechanism that basically guarantees or 
at least opens up the doors and makes sure that we give 
physicians the opportunity to come and practise. To meet the 
needs of the Preecevilles or the Yorktons or the Shaunavons or 
some of the other areas, communities of our province. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I guess as physicians have indicated to me, 
they have felt at times it’s almost like it’s a personal attack on 
their ability because they’re maybe stepping on the toes of the 
college, because they’ve come here because they have 
expertise. And I guess that’s a question I don’t understand. I’m 
not exactly sure why we have what would seem to be almost 
hindrances. It’s almost like it’s become a protectionist field 
rather than, can we recruit the best and the most qualified and 
bring people to meet the needs that we have for doctors’ 
services, medical services in the province. 
 
That aside, Mr. Minister, I want to discuss the area of nurses for 
awhile. And we’ve heard the . . . We see by the headlines 
Tuesday, May 5, Nurses wanted, health districts looking for 
more nurses. We see the nurse shortage is growing. And this is 
something that I’ve heard from a number of individuals, and 
certainly in the last few years. 
 
I’m not exactly sure if people are, if young people are even all 
that interested in entering the field of nursing. I’m not sure what 
. . . I’m not really aware of the numbers in the last couple of 
years of where we’re at. But you certainly hear a greater 
concern about the fact that a shortage is growing in the field. 
Whereas I would suggest even three or five years ago there was 
an abundance of . . . were an abundance of nurses available to 
fill positions. 
 
Now just recently in response to the need for nurses you just 
announced a $9 million expenditure for 200 positions in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. Now, Mr. Minister, I 
find that very interesting. Interesting for two reasons. 
 
Number one, this has not been an . . . This is not a shortage that 

has just developed in the last month. This is a problem that’s 
been arising over the past number of months. And I find it also 
interesting, Mr. Minister, that up until just recently there was no 
indication whatsoever that there would be more funding to meet 
the needs of a shortage of nurses in districts. 
 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that part of this could 
have been addressed had again you looked at and allowed 
boards the autonomy to make decisions in regards to their total 
global funding to meet the needs of their districts without just 
recently announcing a $9 million expenditure into the area of 
nurses, to recruit nurses, which would seem to me was aimed 
more specifically at the fact of addressing a major concern just 
prior to an upcoming by-election. 
 
Mr. Minister, $9 million for 200 positions. How was that 
arrived at and where is the money coming from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well first I want to, Mr. Chair, address the 
issue of the importance of adding front-line staff to the system. 
And as you can appreciate, this is my . . . In my short tenure as 
the Health minister, I have been working closely with the 
department, and clearly a new team of individuals at the senior 
level of the department, on what some of our priorities might be 
within the health system. 
 
And when we looked at, at some length, at where some of our 
greatest pressures are today, my assessment is that it’s at the 
front line. And I’ve been saying that now for about eight or nine 
months as I’ve travelled around the districts and have visited 
almost all of the health districts in the province. And almost on 
every occasion when I’ve been there, front-line staff and district 
health boards are saying to me that the pressures of the front 
line are significant. 
 
And so what we did in our budget preparation for 1998-99, the 
one you and I are discussing today, we injected within the 
health care districts’ funding allocations some additional 
money, in our opinion, that would help relieve some of the 
pressures at least on the front line. Not a significant piece of 
money but certainly one that would send a signal that we are 
wanting to put some additional . . . to see some additional 
resources for employees who are working on the ground or on 
the floor, particularly in the areas of home care and long-term 
care. 
 
Now when you asked the question about how it is that today we 
make a decision or a couple of days ago we make a decision on 
an announcement, as you can well appreciate, and there has 
been some discussion around it, about four weeks ago or five 
weeks ago I attended the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
convention and from the podium on that date indicated, as I did 
a few days before that, that I had a strong interest of ensuring 
that we would add additional people to the front line. 
 
And on that date, it was around the end of March I believe, 
where I said that we would be adding additional staff, front-line 
staff, that would be assisting in the ensuring that we have 
improved-quality front-line services. So I did that about six 
weeks ago. 
 
And so to assume or to tie it to any kind of an agenda that you 
might think is there regarding a potential by-election, I want to 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

say to you that I had no sense or knowledge of whether or not 
. . . who the candidates were going to be or whether or not the 
fact remained that there might be some advantage here as you 
might put it. 
 
My interest as the Health minister from day one has been to 
ensure that we provide a broad-based health system that is 
efficient and is accessible and that serves the people of 
Saskatchewan very well. And I identified early in the day, as I 
say to you, a need to add additional resources in staffing. 
 
And so six weeks ago made the commitment to nurses in this 
province, the front-line workers, that by the middle of May we 
would make an announcement about additional front-line staff. 
And almost to the day, we were true to our commitment from 
the Department of Health and the ministry that we would be 
providing an additional $9 million. 
 
When you asked the question about where the money will come 
from, we, as you know, have within our budget this year 1.72 
billion. We have budgeted in this year around $20 million for 
the SHIN program. 
 
It’s our sense that we might be able to use some of that funding 
that was allocated specifically for SHIN and apply some of 
those valuable dollars to what we would see as enrichment in 
the front-line staffing and, at the same time, not suppress the 
work that’s being done on SHIN but possibly just to extend it 
out over a bit longer period of time to ensure that both systems 
can work in complement of each other, knowing that we need to 
have a health care system that is new and modern and state. 
 
And so SHIN is very much a part of that process, but at the 
same time reflecting the value and the needs of front-line 
workers and using some of those valuable dollars then to be 
added to the front-line complement. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
I beg to differ, and we will agree to disagree, but when it comes 
to announcements of more funding for nurses, this isn’t, as I 
indicated earlier, an issue that just has arisen. It’s been there for 
quite awhile. It’s been an issue that boards have been talking 
about for quite awhile. 
 
And to say that you were not aware of an imminent by-election 
even two months ago after the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview resigned — the legislation says within six months; 
you’re aware of that. 
 
I’m also aware of the fact that one of the candidates for the 
Saskatoon Eastview NDP nomination happens to be Judy Junor, 
who was the president of the nurses’ union. It’s my guess that in 
her discussions and certainly your meeting with the nurses, 
there was a strong message being sent that this was an issue that 
had to be addressed immediately. 
 
I would suggest to you as well, Mr. Minister, that the fact that 
you’ve announced it today, or announced it just recently — $9 
million, 200 positions — whether or not you want to suggest 
that it had nothing to do with the Saskatoon Eastview 
by-election, it certainly appears to me that would have some 
very strong implications, that it would be addressing some 
concerns of a candidate of the Saskatoon Eastview by-election. 

And the fact that it’s a strong signal to residents of Saskatoon 
Eastview that now the government is beginning to listen. 
 
And we have to ask, how long is the government going to 
listen? Until the by-election is over again, such as they did in 
North Battleford — the promise of a heavy care facility? And I 
believe that they’re still waiting for that heavy-care facility. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about $9 million coming out of SHIN 
this year — or the SHIN budget, the budget of 20 million; that 
means about 11 for SHIN for this year. One has to ask, how do 
you cover the nursing positions next year, these 200 positions? 
You’re taking 9 million this year — what happens next year? 
What do boards do next year if they’re still left to manage an 
acute care . . . (inaudible) . . . Are you going to take another $9 
million out of that project next year? Maybe there’s a strong 
indication that SHIN, at the end of the day, really isn’t as 
beneficial a program as is necessary. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think when we look at 200 positions, I 
think we need to give boards some flexibility in how they are 
able to utilize the funds that are presented to them in regards to 
the delivery of health services that are being required of them, 
or requested of them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, just to the member who 
refers to that, that there is . . . to the point that you’ve raised a 
couple times now this morning, and that is that there gives the 
appearance that boards don’t have the flexibility in terms of 
how they would expend their funding. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that clearly the only 
restriction within the base allocation to the district health boards 
is that money can’t flow from the acute care, the one-way valve, 
where the allocation of money that’s provided today 
specifically for acute care services can’t flow in the direction 
outside of that. 
 
Now aside from that, all of the other opportunities that they 
have for the expenditure of their global base budget is really left 
to them, and they make those decisions on an ongoing basis, 
and in my opinion, do an excellent job of doing that. 
 
So to suggest that there isn’t flexibility there I think wouldn’t be 
fully quite accurate, because there is a significant amount of 
opportunity for that to happen. 
 
Now I say to the member that I want you to be assured that the 
Saskatchewan Information Health Network, or SHIN, as we 
know it, is a very important piece to the entire continuum of the 
delivery of health care services in this province into the future, 
and we continue to view it as being one of the priorities that we 
need to work hard to advance and to develop in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1215) 
 
I’ve said on many occasions that it’s not unlike what’s 
happening in Alberta and Manitoba, where they’re developing 
that kind of technology, because the way of the future will be to 
ensure that we can connect communities and link them. 
Because as the diagnostic services and the techniques and the 
procedures advance themselves, we’ll need a mechanism so that 
we can provide those broad-range services to people, 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

 

particularly in rural Saskatchewan, which you and I represent. 
And the value of SHIN will be critical as we move down the 
way. 
 
So I want to assure you, and anyone else who’s interested in 
this particular piece, that this isn’t a decision by this 
administration or the ministry to make any decisions about 
abandoning the idea of addressing SHIN. We’re going to 
continue to do it in a progressive manner, carefully and 
methodically, and working closely with the medical community 
and the professional community to ensure that we get there at 
the end of the day. 
 
I want to say to you that when you ask the question or make the 
comment about the fact that we haven’t been listening to what 
health care professionals across the province have been saying 
and only heard this a couple days ago because of there’s a 
by-election going on in the province, I want to say to you that in 
this budget that you and I are debating today, we’ve added 
some money for front-line people. And it’s to the tune of about, 
we’re saying, 50 to 70 positions particularly in the areas — 
through the base budgets that we provide to the districts — 
particularly in the areas of long-term care and home care, 
because that’s what we’ve been hearing all along. But as well, 
we’ve been also hearing the fact that we want to add and need 
to add front-line workers in the province that are of the nursing 
profession. 
 
And so when I made the announcement, or made the comment 
six weeks ago it was, and I say to you, without the knowledge 
about who is going to be running or serving or wanting to serve 
politically anywhere in the province. Because my interest is to 
ensure that the people of Saskatchewan are well served in terms 
of a Health portfolio. That’s my number one priority. 
 
And if along the way people can use that benefit of that 
announcement to advance their future, I’m sure that the good 
doctor in Regina or Saskatoon, when he gets up on the podium, 
he’s going to be speaking about how important it is to see 
enrichments in the health care field today and that nurses will 
play a very valuable role in assisting doctors in their work in 
this province. 
 
Because as you well know, in January we also provided an 
additional $48 million for doctors in this province over a 
three-year period. And the good doctor has, as on many 
occasions, also indicated how important that contract has been. 
 
So when you make the comment that we’re advantaging people 
today in the by-election because of the announcement, I would 
say to you that it would be an advantage for all three of the 
candidates, their success, or four at the end of the day, however 
many there are, to be standing up in the province and saying 
that we’ve seen an enrichment in the quality of health care 
services at the field level or on the floors. 
 
And the addition of $9 million in the province has been well 
received not only by nurses, but by the general public. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. You talk about . . . just 
talked about injecting $9 million using SHIN funds. You’ve 
talked about 200 physicians. Mr. Minister, when will the 
nursing positions be put into place, in view of the fact, Mr. 

Minister, that during the summer months we have seen in the 
past, and I think the indication is already there, that there will 
be more bed closures during the summer months to facilitate 
holidays and what have you. 
 
And I’ve heard different nurses and even physicians indicate 
that they don’t need bed closures. They’re more than prepared 
to work because they have a system whereby they do offer their 
. . . and work together to accommodate each other for holidays, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, when are these positions going to becoming 
available; and if they’re coming available even by July 1, does 
that mean we’ll have a reduction in the number of beds that are 
closed during the summer months, normal closure? And also, 
Mr. Minister, can you give us a breakdown of where the 200 
positions will be placed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Just a couple of comments. I think there 
are two issues here that you’re addressing. One is that, when are 
the nursing positions going to be available? And the answer to 
that is that the district health boards are just completing their 
plans today and as soon as we get the district plans back, then 
the money will be flowing out to each of those districts to 
ensure that they can make their appropriate complement 
enrichments across the province; and that I expect all of those 
district board plans will be in by the end of June. 
 
I want to comment on the other point that you make about what 
was happening in the summer in this province, which is not 
unusual, where you have slow-downs in terms of surgical 
procedures. And this isn’t only Saskatchewan, this is a national 
kind of a decision that’s made by acute care facilities. And we 
do it . . . district health boards do it at Christmas time and they 
do it at Easter time and they do it over vacation periods. So 
there are slow-down periods, and that’s been consistent for as 
long as I know in this province, irrespective of who the 
administration of the day is. 
 
And when we were responsible directly for the operations or 
funding operations of union hospitals and regional hospitals and 
the large tertiary hospitals, we funded exactly on the same 
basis. So the funding formulas haven’t changed at all nor has 
the practice in terms of slowing down during some of those 
periods been any different today. 
 
In respect to where the funding will flow for the positions, they 
will go to these locations, and we can provide you with a list of 
these because I’m sure that you’ll want that. The locations from 
where the funding will go will be to Regina for 3.2 million; for 
Saskatoon, 3.6 million; Swift Current will get 280,000; East 
Central will get 360,000; Lloydminster will get 80,000; Prince 
Albert will get 280,00; the Battlefords will get 140,000; Moose 
Jaw-Thunder Creek, 240,000; North Central, 60,000; South 
Central, 60,000; Northwest, 60,000; Southwest, 80,000 — or 
sorry, Southeast, 80,000; and the Saskatchewan cancer agency 
will get 600,000. So that brings that total then to 9.4 million . . . 
or 4,000 . . . 9.004 million. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
then can you break that down into actual positions? Or is this 
something the boards will be then arriving at as they receive the 
funding? 



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I can provide the number 
of positions for you, too. It might be just better for me to send 
that over to you, and then you can have that rather than me 
reading it into the record. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, getting 
into . . . Oh there’s one area that I wanted to address and I want 
clarification on, on a comment you just made earlier about the 
fact that boards have the ability to manage the acute care dollars 
that are presented to them in their budget. 
 
And I was not quite sure if I was left with the impression that if 
the boards are short in the acute care side but they have extra in 
heavy care and home care, they can move some funds into the 
acute care side of their budget. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yes, I’m glad you’ve asked that question 
again for clarification. They can’t move it from community into 
acute but they can move it from acute to community. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, that’s why I 
wanted the clarification. Because I didn’t want . . . I’ve had too 
many boards saying that we do not have total control. 
 
And the reason they say that is because if the need in their 
district is acute care funding and their acute care . . . the funding 
that they received does not meet that total need, you’re right. 
They come back and say to me, we do not have the ability. We 
have actually a little extra in our pool for heavy care or extra in 
our pool for home care, but we can’t use that to meet the needs 
of the acute care services. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Minister, we have suggested giving the 
boards a global budget, allowing them to have then direct 
control of the total budget so that if indeed . . . You’re right. If 
they’re in a position where the acute care level that they receive 
is more than what they really need and they’re short in heavy 
care, they can move it into that, or they can move it into some 
home care funding. But if they’re short on the acute care side, 
they don’t have that ability if they have a few dollars on the 
other side. 
 
So it’s important I think, Mr. Minister, if we’re asking boards to 
make serious and sound decisions and suggesting that they’re 
responsible, that they have the ability to manage the total 
budget to meet the needs of their district and that they not be 
restricted on which way . . . restricted in one degree as far as 
funding flowing into the acute care side. 
 
Because basically what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, what the 
Department of Health is saying is we’re going to give you the 
ability. We trust you to meet the needs of heavy care. We trust 
you to try and meet the needs of home care services, but we 
really don’t trust you in the area of acute care; we’re afraid 
you’re going to put too much money into acute care. 
 
As a result, we see part of that shortage in many cases means 
positions. Now you’re just throwing some money out to 
districts to give them that ability to meet some of the shortages 
specifically in the area of nursing. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think it’s important that we allow boards, if 
we’re going to hold them responsible for their overall spending, 

that we allow them the ability to make those total decisions and 
have that global budget so that they can utilize the budget in the 
way they feel it would best meet the needs of their district. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well today, as you can appreciate and as 
you look at the Estimates, we’ll see that we’re already spending 
in this province or investing about 80 per cent of our entire 
health care budget in acute care services and support care 
services. And there is ability here to have . . . the district boards 
have the ability here to move funding between the acute care 
and the long-term care so they have some ability to do that 
within the institutions. 
 
Now just recently at the SAHO convention, we had this 
discussion about whether or not there’s a need for us to relieve 
the one-way valve. And district boards really support the fact 
that we need to enhance and enrich the community-based 
service side of the health delivery system. Twenty per cent of 
the expenditures that we make today are on the community 
health side which is our community-based side which is a very, 
very small percentage of services or funding. 
 
Giving consideration that that’s the direction in which not only 
we’re moving in this province but across the nation where we 
want to see stronger home care services, we want to see more 
respite services, more palliative, more mental health services, 
more addiction services, enriched emergency response services, 
you know, so there’s the tremendous interest here to grow and 
develop and expand the community-based side. 
 
And so it’s not the opinion of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations nor is it mine that we’re restricting some 
of the decisions of course the district health boards can make, 
giving consideration that 80 per cent of their funding already is 
targeted to the acute care side. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
I’m going to move into another area for the time being, and 
hopefully get to one more before we reach the end of discussion 
today. But, Mr. Minister, in regards to hepatitis C and the whole 
question that has raised, then raised as a result of hepatitis C 
and the funding for victims of hepatitis C and the fact that it’s 
been restricted to individuals between ’86 and 1990. 
 
In today’s paper we see that the headline is “Hepatitis C 
estimate may be too high” and I think one of the arguments you 
have raised and your colleague in Ottawa has raised is that we 
are dealing with too many individuals. 
 
A Toronto researcher today hired by federal Health department 
told a news briefing that there may be as few as 20,000 people 
alive today who are infected by transfusions before 1986 — a 
number which is substantially lower than the so-called . . . or 
the number used up to today of some 50,000 individuals. 
 
Now I can appreciate the fact, Mr. Minister, that when you start 
looking at numbers of individuals it’s easy to say, well, that’s a 
number and that’s going to mean a monetary figure that we 
really cannot meet or would have difficulty meeting. 
 
And yet on the other hand, Mr. Minister, people in Canada, and 
certainly in this province, are compassionate people and feel 
very strongly about reaching out to meet the needs of 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1313 

 

individuals who, as the result of no fault of their own — in this 
case tainted blood — are faced with a life-threatening problem 
as a result of infections to hepatitis C. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the province of Saskatchewan, how many 
individuals would there be today, based on this figure of some 
20,000 nation-wide, that would or should or have access to 
compensation as a result of their acquiring the hepatitis C virus 
through tainted blood? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. First of all, 
I want to say that the ability for us as a province and certainly 
as a national committee — and we’ve been working on this now 
for about 10 months to determine the exact number of people 
who were infected by hepatitis C in Canada — has been a very 
difficult process. And to ascertain what number of people that 
actually reflects is still, in my opinion, being reviewed. 
 
And I say that because there’s been a variety of different 
actuarials that have been performed in trying to determine what 
that number is. It’s been done by the Red Cross, and they have a 
series of numbers that suggests what that population is. It’s 
been done by the federal administration as well, and they have a 
number of what that is. The provinces and the territories in their 
look-back, check-back process have estimated what that 
particular number of individuals might be. 
 
So you have today about three or four sets of numbers that are 
out there, and today you’ve add yet another one to reflect what 
we think are the actual numbers of people who are infected by 
hepatitis C. 
 
And the debate continues to centre around whether or not 
governments can afford to provide the kind of compensation. 
And the debate is: how much should Ottawa pay and how much 
should the provinces pay. 
 
But there is a far more fundamental question that needs to be 
addressed here than the number of people that are infected by 
hepatitis C or the value that you attach to how much federal 
governments and provincial governments end up paying at the 
end of the day, and that’s whether or not provincial 
governments and federal governments should take 
responsibility for wherever there’s fault within the health 
system. 
 
This is the bigger debate that both you and I and others in this 
province, in this country, need to have. Because if there’s an 
expectation here that into the future all Canadians will have to 
take responsibility to pay for faults within the health care 
system, there needs to be some criteria of establishing that, 
because you’re really now moving from the current process of a 
tort system to one of no fault. 
 
And if there’s a suggestion here that we should be moving to a 
no-fault system in the health system, then clearly we’re 
indicating that taxpayers in this country will have a greater 
responsibility to share in where there is fault determined. And 
the ability to determine what that fault is into the future will be 
an exercise that will be one that future politicians at all levels 
and courts will need to spend a great deal of time in making 

determinations around. 
 
And that’s where the fundamental debate in discussion is today. 
Because when the decision was made in Toronto and the 
announcement was made in Toronto to select a window 
between ’86 and ’90, the decision was made based on, in our 
opinion, a sound rationale. 
 
It was based on the fact that there was testing available during 
the period ’86 to ’90, that in fact that governments of both 
levels, both provincially and federally, and the Red Cross, who 
were the agents that delivered the blood to Canadians in this 
country, failed. They failed during that period of time. And 
because we recognize that there’s been failure, we should take 
responsibility for that. And clearly the decision and the answer 
of all of the provincial health ministers and the federal 
government was to accept that responsibility front and centre — 
and took that. 
 
Now beyond 1986-90, and maybe further to add to that, there 
are three class actions today. Two have now been certified, one 
other soon to be certified in Canada. And the period that the 
courts have selected are the period ’86 to ’90. And they’ve 
selected ’86 to ’90 because there’s a criteria and a rationale and 
a basis for making a decision as to who should compensate and 
why you should compensate. 
 
Outside of ’86 or prior to ’86 and post-90, the evidence of who 
should take responsibility becomes really fuzzy, becomes really 
fuzzy. And if political parties and politicians today are 
demanding that governments take responsibility to compensate 
without a rationale or without a basis, because clearly Ontario 
or Quebec, they don’t have the corner on humanitarianism, 
okay, or they don’t have the corner on compassion. We all have 
the same feeling and we all understand the difficult situations 
that people live under today who in fact are infected by this 
disease. 
 
But there needs to be a rationale that governments today and in 
the future will need to be able to identify, that would make them 
responsible. Because taxpayers are going to demand that of us 
at the end of the day because this is a new way that we’re 
moving on today in terms of how we’re going to accept 
responsibility for fault and how we determine that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, for individuals infected 
with hepatitis C, whether it was prior to 1986 or the ’86 to ’90 
period or even since 1990 and, Mr. Minister, a gentleman was 
sitting in my office, he had had four tests. The first three tests 
said he wasn’t infected, but he demanded and got a fourth test. 
It finally showed that he was infected and in fact through the 
test they also were able to trace back where that infection came 
from. 
 
So it goes to show you, Mr. Minister, that ’86 to ’90, while it’s 
chosen as a period that’s just picked out of, it’s almost out of 
the blue, the facts are, Mr. Minister, that other individuals have, 
even though we look at and we say 1990, it should have been 
better, there’s still individuals who have fallen through the 
hoops. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, what you have is individuals, I suggest if 
you’d taken the time to really sit down with them, they do not 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

have the ability that everyone I see in this room today has. They 
do not have the same quality of health that individuals, whether 
it’s the Department of Health, whether it’s MLAs that are in 
this Assembly today, have to enjoy. 
 
We can walk out of this room at the end of the day, Mr. 
Minister. Some are going to go and pick up the golf clubs and 
they’re going to go and golf and they’re going to be able to 
enjoy it and enjoy a good round of golf. Others may go for a 
run, or whatever area of entertainment over the weekend may 
be, Mr. Minister. There are many individuals infected with 
hepatitis C who do not have that opportunity, such as Vicki 
Lissel — although you don’t really have to worry about her any 
more because I believe she’s left the province. 
 
So when I ask how many individuals in this province, and 
you’re indicating at this time you’re not really sure how many 
individuals I believe based on 20,000 people and the number of 
people in this province, it would be not that large an amount. 
But I would be . . . It would be irrational of me to say, that 
based on a million people and 38 million people in Canada, that 
it would be this percentage. I can’t say that because it could be a 
few more; it could be a few less. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think at the end of the day, as you’ve indicated, 
the public will certainly demand that there is some 
compensation shown for individuals who, through no fault of 
their own, have unfortunately been infected with hepatitis C as 
a result of tainted blood. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, for many people that has meant that they 
have lost life savings just trying to provide the finances needed 
to even meet the demands of the drugs that they are forced to 
use just to maintain some sort of a life, an average life, and a 
quality of life, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I guess, as you indicated earlier, the courts probably at the 
end of the day will decide. And that onus may fall on 
governments. In fact I don’t doubt it will fall on governments, 
and we’re going to be left to deal with that down the road. 
 
Your negotiations with the federal government through ’86 to 
’90 has arrived at . . . and I believe there has been an 
understanding and agreement that this seems to be an 
appropriate level of care and compassion shown through this 
package that’s delivered. And that, Mr. Minister, may at the end 
of the day be much better than what the courts would’ve 
awarded. 
 
And I guess what I would suggest to you, it’s important we look 
at the overall impact that may be held at the end of the day, and 
we look at how we can discuss, or continue the discussions in 
regards to hepatitis C and the compensation that may be faced. 
And maybe there’s a better way to achieve what level of 
compensation should be looked into before the courts sit down 
and award a larger amount and the governments are forced to 
deal with it, and maybe in some cases through retroactive 
legislation, because they feel they do not have the ability to 
meet that requirement put on them. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if I understand, is there ongoing discussion in 
regards to the compensation that may be faced and may be ways 
of arriving at something that would be fair in dealing with 

hepatitis C victims prior ’86 and past 1990? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, just for the member, we have 
re-engaged of course the working group that’s been in place 
now for about nine or ten months to go back and broadly 
examine five or six options that we think might be available to 
us in respect to what we do with the decision that’s been made 
out of Ottawa — or out of Ontario I mean — and the 
recommendation that it appears that Quebec is following to 
some degree. So the working committee has re-engaged itself at 
the national level to look at those five or six options and will be 
reporting back likely within the next four to five weeks in terms 
of what their findings are. 
 
I want to say to you that there are a number of inclusions in that 
option, of which we in Saskatchewan believe we are leading the 
nation in many areas. As you know, in this province already we 
provide the drug Interferon to people who in fact are infected by 
hepatitis C, and we have for some time. This isn’t the case with 
other parts of Canada. There are some provinces that don’t 
insure the drug at all. 
 
We have a very extensive home care program in Saskatchewan 
which in many ways exceeds what you’ll find in other 
provinces across the country. And we’ve made those services 
available to people who are in fact infected by hepatitis C. 
 
And we also as you know in this province, have an income 
replacement or an income supplement . . . I mean program. It’s 
through the financial assistance program that we have in the 
province. People are certainly eligible to be a part of that. And 
that’s why it’s there. It’s there to assist people when in fact their 
lives are affected in such a fashion that they need to have 
additional enrichments. And I say to you that in this province 
we provide some of those services as we do across the nation. 
 
I think that it’s important here to realize that the decision about 
1986 to ’90 was made on what we would perceive would be a 
legal responsibility that governments and the Red Cross would 
have across the nation. It’s based on that. And giving 
consideration then to the issues of compassion and humanity, 
all of the other public services that are included today in our 
complement as a province or as provinces are part of that, and 
we view that as being our compassionate contribution to how 
we’ll look after people who in fact have been infected or there’s 
a fault related. 
 
I want to suggest to the member that when you make the 
comment that there are people in this room today who are 
capable of performing and functioning in their daily lives in the 
similar fashion as most Canadians are, it’s not quite the case. 
There are people who even in this Assembly today can’t enjoy 
the same qualities and levels of life that we as individuals can 
and do appreciate, for a variety of different reasons. 
 
And if there’s a suggestion here, of which I think Ontario has 
opened the door to and which Quebec to some degree supports, 
that governments of the day are going to have to take 
responsibility for where there is fault in the health care system, 
where you can identify fault. This becomes an extremely 
important precedent, and sets on a new basis the way in which 
we’re going to be compensating people into the future. 
 



May 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

 

And the debate now has to shift, in my opinion, as to how 
taxpayers and governments are going to be able to administer 
that, how they’re going to be able to determine it, and that how 
we’re going to be able to put into place what would be in my 
opinion, suggesting that we would go to a full no-fault system. 
 
And I say to you that that jeopardizes to a large degree the way 
in which we’ll deliver health care in this country and change the 
face of it in a major way. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, no doubt that is 
going to impact governments of the future. That is a major 
concern. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, I think you mentioned something about 
the number of drugs that are currently covered under the drug 
plan. Mr. Minister, I think while we talk about the drug plan, 
your comments about governments being held responsible, I 
think I would have to suggest that yes, they are going to be held 
responsible because of the fact governments have also 
suggested that they have been the givers of this health system 
through medicare. We’ve been supporting . . . we’ve offered, 
we’ve built medicare and the universal health program, and as a 
result, people expect almost more of governments. 
 
But when it comes to MS (multiple sclerosis) patients . . . or 
hepatitis C patients, Mr. Minister, and we talk about the drug 
plan, as I understand it, the patient still puts up roughly $1,800 
out of their pocket initially. And I’m not exactly sure if I’ve got 
the numbers right — is it 35 per cent from there on in for any of 
the drugs? What would be the average that a patient suffering 
hepatitis C may have to put out of their pocket on an annual 
basis just to meet the requirements of the drugs they need to 
offer quality of life? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, this could be a difficult 
question to answer because there may be a whole host of other 
associated illnesses or health issues that an individual might 
have that’s associated to the disease that they might have, or the 
illness of hepatitis C. And so there would be a combination of 
different medical needs that they may have. It may be a variety 
of different medications that they would require. 
 
So on an individual basis . . . we could provide that on an 
individual basis, I would suggest to you, but generically this 
would be very difficult for us to provide for you. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, that’s true. In just 
chatting with a number of individuals, whether it’s hepatitis C 
or even certainly MS patients and sufferers in dealing with it, I 
can suggest to you that some families are facing enormous, 
horrendous costs with the so-called drug plan we have in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, another area I want to move on to and that is, one 
simple question here — I think it’s simple — what’s the cost of 
operating an acute care bed in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think the length of time to the response 
was to do specifically with the type of bed that we might be 
talking about here because some beds of course are more 

expensive. If you have an ICU (intensive care unit) bed versus a 
medical bed, there will be a difference in terms of what that cost 
is; where that bed might be located too, would be a difference, 
in terms of where that bed is located. 
 
And so I would suggest to you that that range might be — and 
I’m using a very arbitrary ballpark figure — that might be 
somewhere between, you know, 350 to 6 or $700 a day 
depending on what that bed is . . . or where it is and the type of 
bed. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I would ask if it would be possible 
to have a breakdown, and even if it’s not given today, maybe 
just send it across in writing, as to the different levels of acute 
care beds. Certainly some of . . . a lot of the regional centres 
I’m sure would be probably a lot less than you would have in 
the major centres where you have surgeries and what have you. 
And I’d appreciate having that information. 
 
Mr. Minister, as well, a moment ago you talked about tertiary 
beds. And I hear the words used, tertiary and primary beds, and 
I wonder if you could explain what we’re specifically meaning 
by tertiary and primary beds. 
 
And as well, how many beds in the large urban centres, if any, 
would be allocated based on rural needs. Or whether or not 
there’s a breakdown, rural and urban, and the allocation of the 
beds available for patients outside of the large urban centres. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think the comment, Mr. Chair, that I was 
making is more related to the centres and where the services are 
provided. So when we talk about tertiary centres as opposed to 
tertiary beds — and if I gave the impression that the tertiary is 
tied to the bed; it’s more tied to the centre — so the tertiary 
centres, what we would consider would be Saskatoon and 
Regina. 
 
And then secondary or community-based hospitals might be 
ones like the regionals that we talked about in the past — the 
Swift Currents, the Moose Jaws, the Prince Albert, the 
Yorktons, would be considered regional or secondary facilities 
around the province. And then community hospitals like the 
Melforts or a Humboldt or a Melville, that would be the 
designation. 
 
Now in terms of . . . and the designation of those centres would 
be based on the level of service that you would receive from 
them. And because Regina and Saskatoon have such a high 
level of specialized services where we do cardiac surgeries here, 
and certainly in Saskatoon, that would give it that type of 
designation in what we're doing in Saskatoon — for example 
kidney transplant — that would be the level of definition in 
terms of tertiary and not specifically to the bed but more to the 
facilities in the communities. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, is there, if you will, a bit of a 
breakdown in regards to beds that would be made available for 
rural patients versus urban patients? Or is it just one lump sum? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, what we could provide is, we 
can provide for you the, sort of the total utilization of the 
facilities’ beds and then try to give you a percentage of what 
migration might be from outside a larger centre to maybe a 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1998 

 

tertiary and/or secondary that are . . . people who are actually 
migrating from a rural area to a tertiary or secondary; so we can 
give you a percentage. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, another area I want to 
move into before we end discussion today and certainly get into 
some major discussion on the Plains Health Centre in the 
upcoming debate, but a question that was just raised recently in 
just chatting with some people about health care. Mr. Minister, 
the amount of funding that has gone into the upgrade of the 
Pasqua and the General Hospital in Regina, has the city or the 
taxpayers through property taxes been asked to contribute any 
funding towards these two facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There wouldn’t be any, to the best of our 
knowledge, wouldn’t be any participation, Mr. Chair, to the 
health district by the community itself on the operating side. 
 
Now there may be and there likely is, some participation by the 
community through the foundation’s work, because the 
foundations of course are out busy working at collecting 
finances for the purchase of capital equipment. And so through 
that process there would be some involvement, but it would be 
voluntary, by individuals or corporations or businesses in 
assisting with the purchase of equipment. But there wouldn’t be 
any, in our opinion, on the operating side. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I guess the question . . . 
My apologies for not getting it directly. I can appreciate that, 
yes, because I’m aware of the Regina health foundation and the 
work it’s doing. 
 
But when it comes to the area of capital construction, is there 
anything outside of the Department of Health as far as funding 
towards capital construction projects in Regina and Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, if it’s a provincial facility, then 
as you know the funding is 100 per cent. If it’s not, then we’re 
using the formula of 65/35 in terms of the capital construction. 
And that’s the case for some of the work that’s being done here. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So if I understand you, Mr. Chair, if I understand 
you correctly, Mr. Minister, what we have in Regina here with 
the current capital construction project taking place at the 
General and the Pasqua, you’re saying that there is some 
funding coming from the community via the district board — or 
is it all being funded directly by the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — For the facilities themselves, Mr. Chair, 
that’s funded 100 per cent. Okay? For some of the capital 
equipment that’s being included into the facilities, like the MRI 
(magnetic resonance imaging) for example, as you know there 
has been some participation by corporations and primarily it’s 
been largely the corporations. There’s a small injection I think, 
of about $2.2 million by the department on that particular piece, 
but it would be primarily for the preparation of site, but the 
capital purchases are mainly coming out of the foundation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I find it a little . . . 
somewhat disturbing, and I think you’re almost indicating that 
centres like Regina — these are provincial centres — but areas 
like Moosomin, who are currently discussing the idea of 
possibly rebuilding their hospital, they’re going to be asked . . . 

in fact the taxpayers — there’s been meetings with town 
council — going to be asked to foot about 35 per cent I believe 
of that capital project. 
 
And it seems to me, Mr. Minister, if we have what we call 
universal health care, that all taxpayers would be involved, not 
just when it comes to rural communities. All of a sudden rural 
communities are left, there again they’re left having to fund part 
of a capital project to provide a service to their community 
when large urban centres with a larger tax base have it all 
funded by the total tax base of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, it seems to me that is grossly unfair if we’re 
talking about a universal health care system in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that’s one of the reasons I raise the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . and the member from Regina South, 
barking from his chair, is suggesting we all . . . yes, we all use 
the facilities. 
 
But I would suggest to the member from Regina South that 
even members from the large urban centres are in the position 
of having to use smaller centres. It doesn’t necessarily . . . all 
accidents just don’t happen in centres like Regina and 
Saskatoon. There’s a couple were in a position of having to 
utilize some of the local facilities just recently in our 
community. If it wasn’t there, they would have had to wait that 
extra two or three hours to get to a major centre. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, it just doesn’t seem to be fair, and I guess the 
member from Regina South is totally insensitive to the feelings 
of rural people with his comments from the peanut gallery. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I think it’s totally unfair that we ask a certain 
level of the population of Saskatchewan to have to help in 
funding, when the large, major urban centres just have all of 
this paid for thoroughly via the tax base of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what’s important here is that we 
recognize that the tertiary centres really are provincial centres 
— they’re provincial centres — and that’s the rationale for why 
in fact it’s 100 per cent funded for those capital costs. 
 
And not unlike what you see in the regionals. The regional 
centres also serve large municipal areas, and there isn’t any 
expectation, for example, today from municipal . . . for 
municipal systems to participate into that funding. 
 
So it’s not really unlike that, because the municipalities around 
regional centres also use those facilities to a large degree, but 
there isn’t a call for, today, for that kind of support. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being the hour of adjournment, this 
House stands adjourned until Monday afternoon at 1:30 
o’clock. 
 
Have an enjoyable weekend in your constituencies with your 
families and your constituents. And I look forward to seeing 
your bright and shiny faces back here on Monday afternoon. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1289 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1289 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1290 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1290 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1290 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1290 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1290 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1290 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1290 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1298 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1301 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1306 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1308 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Pasta D’Aurum Plant for Swift Current 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
 Child Custody and Access 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
 La Ronge Ice Wolves 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
 Highway Hot Line 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1292 
 Nutrition Education Programs 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................1292 
 Mid-west Conference of Legislators 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1292 
 Yorkton Short Film & Video Festival 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1292 
 No Rebate for SaskEnergy Users 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Natural Gas Rates 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1293 
 Carrot River Hospital Closure 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
 Rose Valley Emergency Health Services 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
 Health Care Advertising 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
 Highways Funding 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
 Gambling Addiction Services 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1297 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1297 
 



  

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 43  The Queen’s Bench Revision Act/Loi portant révision de la Loi sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1298 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Health — Vote 32 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1298 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1298 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1300 
 
 
 


