





























































Hansard: March 10, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7 
 March 10, 1998 
 

7 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
a petition today to do with the twinning of No. 1 Highway. I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project. 
 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the towns of Moosomin, Broadview, and Pense. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

To the Hon. Assembly . . . Hon. Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan legislature assembled, a petition of the 
undersigned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
humbly showeth that the residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan are opposed to the practice of night hunting 
by any citizens of the province; and that night hunting at 
any time of the year is extremely dangerous to those who 
are hunting and others in the vicinity; and that night 
hunting is an extremely unfair and unsportsmanlike form 
of game hunting; and that the majority of citizens are not 
allowed to practice night hunting. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
work with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 
Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the 
destructive and dangerous practice of night hunting in the 
province for everyone regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise to present a petition, 
and I’ll read the prayer. 
 

Wherefore the petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly acknowledge this petition to aid in the ongoing 
problems with young offenders, with crimes such as 
murder, arson, rape, and robbery on the rise; at the hands 
of young offenders, these crimes have increased in recent 
years and, in light of the increased laws, have to be 
enforced. 
 

And I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present a 

petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan concerned 
about the health care system, and particularly the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signatures on these petitions are from Assiniboia, 
Limerick, Viceroy, and in addition to the thousands of petitions 
that the loyal Liberal opposition has presented in the past. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present 
petitions from citizens of the province concerned about 
deteriorating health services. If I may read the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential health services provided at the Plains 
Health Centre may be continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today to present petitions to add to the tens and 
tens of thousands of petitions . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member is well 
aware of the rules regarding the presentation of petitions that do 
not permit for the opportunity to engage in debate. Order, order. 
And I’ll ask the hon. member to introduce the petition in the 
ordinary fashion. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

The people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Congress area, Assiniboia; some from Regina — many 
from Regina — Fife Lake, Coronach, Kincaid; all over 
south-western Saskatchewan to join with the hundreds of 
thousands that have already done so. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens who are concerned with the state 
of health care in our province, and in particular with the closure 
of the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
And those who have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 
from all over Saskatchewan. Communities such as Willow 
Bunch, Assiniboia, Viceroy, Fir Mountain; a number from the 
city of Regina itself; Rockglen, just to name a few. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Assiniboia, they’re from Coronach, they’re from 
Humboldt, they’re from all throughout the land; and I so 
present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too today have a 
petition to present on behalf of people of Saskatchewan: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided by the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks in the 
communities of Assiniboia, Lafleche, Crane Valley, 
Glentworth, Bengough; the list goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions from the many concerned citizens, their 
concern being the serious problem of youth crime. 
 

To the Hon. Assemblies of Canada and Saskatchewan. The 
petition of the undersigned citizens of Canada humbly 
showeth that youth crime is a serious problem in our 
society; that we need more effective ways to deter youth 
crime and to protect society. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 
Parliament of Canada and the legislature of Saskatchewan 
enact legislation and policies to deal with the problem of 
youth crime. 

 
And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by citizens from 
Humboldt, Spalding, Leroy, Watson, Naicam, Middle Lake, and 
many, many communities throughout our province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy this 
morning, Mr. Speaker, to present the following petition with 
regards to the No. 1 Highway: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project with or without federal assistance. 
 

I’m happy to present this, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people 
of Maple Creek, the villages of Claydon, the town of Fox 
Valley, and I believe Consul as well. I’m happy to present 
these, Mr. Speaker. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 
your permission I would like to read notice of two motions, 
please. 
 
I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of 
a Bill, the Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
amendment Act, 1998 entitled, the free votes. And I give notice 
that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the 
recall of members Act, 1998. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’ll ask all hon. members to come to 
order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the 
Power Corporation amendment Act, 1998. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the 
Saskatchewan property rights Act. And further I give notice that 
I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the 
wildlife amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice as well that on Thursday next I shall move first reading 
of a Bill, the public inquiries amendment Act, 1998, health care 
system review. I also give notice that I shall on Thursday next 
move first reading of a Bill, the Saskatchewan health 
ombudsman Act. I give notice that I shall on Thursday next 
move first reading of a Bill, the health districts amendment Act, 
1998, fully elected health boards. And finally, Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a 
Bill, the health districts amendment Act, 1998, block funding. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move reading of a Bill, the regional 
telephone districts Act. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the 
referendum and plebiscite amendment Act, 1998. And I also 
give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a 
Bill, the public inquiries amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the Crown 
corporations amendment Act 1998, for investment prohibitions. 
 
I also give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first 
reading of a Bill, the Crown corporations rate review Act, 1998. 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 9 

I also give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first 
reading of a Bill, the Crown corporations disclosure Act, 1998. 
 
I also give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first 
reading of a Bill, the balanced budget Act, 1998. 
 
And I finally give notice that I shall on Thursday next move 
first reading of a Bill, the government accountability Act. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As part of an extensive 
legislative agenda, I give notice that I shall on Thursday next 
move first reading of a Bill, the trade union amendment Act, 
repealing successor rights. 
 
Also that I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first 
reading of a Bill, the right . . . pardon me, the Saskatchewan 
right to work Act. 
 
Also I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first 
reading of a Bill, the democratic unionism Act. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, to complete, as I’ve said, a part of an 
extensive legislative calendar for the official opposition, I give 
notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, 
the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement revocation Act. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the health 
care bill of rights. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the 
hospital beds waiting-list reduction Act — short title, additional 
hospital beds Act. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the Plains 
Health Centre preservation Act; short title, save the Plains. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the 
exceptional drug plan Act. And I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the 
doctor-patient confidentiality Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, an Act to 
amend The Local Government Election Act. 
 
I also give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first 
reading of a Bill, an Act to reclassify certain telephone rate 
designations. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I’m on my 
feet, I’ll give notice of three Bills. I give notice that I shall on 
Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, an Act respecting 
public presentations to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of 
a Bill, an Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act respecting the determination of sessional 

dates. 
 
I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of 
a Bill, an Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act, 1998, duration of Assembly. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask the Assembly 
to join with me in welcoming some friends of mine from the 
aboriginal community: Oliver Constance, Jim Favel, Stephen 
Constance, Milton Tootoosis, Rita Galloway, Marlene Fellows, 
Robert Whitehead, Doreen McKay, Lena Campeau, Nancy 
Whitehead, Terrance Whitehead and Treean Whitehead, and 
Jaylynn McKay. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask my 
friends and my colleagues in the Assembly here today on this 
first day of our opening of the legislature to once again 
welcome the Leader of the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan, Dr. 
Jim Melenchuk, who is sitting in your gallery. And he’s seated 
with our chief of staff, Richard Phillips. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce to 
you and through you to the legislature, 14 grade 8 students from 
Davin School here in Regina, along with — they’re in your 
gallery — along with their teacher, Mrs. Wynne Edwards and 
the chaperon, her husband, Rev. Larry Edwards. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you today, to you and through you, members from 
the RM (rural municipality) of Saltcoats who are in for a SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention. And I know these gentlemen are going to be very 
happy to hear the Minister of Municipal Government returned 
some of the money that they have cut from municipalities. They 
can look forward to that. 
 
I would like . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. Now all 
hon. members, I know we’re early in the session and we might 
just as well remind ourselves of the rules. And I know the hon. 
member is aware that in introducing guests it’s improper to 
engage in debate and I’ll ask him to simply introduce his guests 
in the usual manner. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you today the administrator of the RM of Saltcoats, 
Mr. Ron Risling, and two of the councillors, Jim Datema and 
Nelson Rodgers. Welcome. Would you join with me and 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to introduce my son Tyler in the west gallery. He 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

came down yesterday for the opening and assures me that 
there’s enough feed out there for the cows that he can stay 
today. So . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I want to welcome some very special guests that come from 
a long ways. 
 
We have some people from Bogota, Columbia. We have 
Federico Nieto, Patricia Laxdal, Claudio Nieto, Luisa Fernanda 
Guerrero, and also from Regina here we have Lori Hall. 
 
I’d like to ask the Assembly to put our hands together and 
welcome our very special visitors. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on the first 
day of the first sitting of this legislature, I had the pleasure of 
introducing Mr. Martin Draude of Watson. And I would like to 
take that pleasure once again today to welcome Mr. Draude to 
the legislature. Enjoy the proceedings. It should be interesting, 
Marty. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I beg your 
indulgence to do a second introduction of guests. I want to 
welcome the aboriginal people that are in the Assembly today. 
And maybe tell them that . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
  
And as an aboriginal member of the Assembly, I take special 
pride when the aboriginal people are here visiting the 
Assembly. And hopefully we’ll see many more of you out here 
in these seats. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Women’s Day 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 1998 is a special 
year for celebrations around the globe. Since 1911, every year 
throughout the world, International Women’s Day is celebrated 
on March 8. It is a symbolic day for women — a time to 
recognize women’s struggles and celebrate women’s 
achievements. 
 
This past weekend in communities all over Saskatchewan, 
many people took part in International Women’s Day activities. 
I would like to take a moment to recognize this special day and 
the achievements of women. 
 
Women-run businesses have become a significant and growing 
force in the Canadian economy. They provide jobs for more 
than 1.7 million people — more than the Canadian Business 
Top 100 combined. 
 

Women are making great strides in the area of post-secondary 
education. In Saskatchewan in 1993, 57 per cent of the 
graduates of all bachelor and professional degrees were granted 
to women. 
 
Through policies, legislation and programs, the Saskatchewan 
government will continue working with the community to assist 
women and their families in achieving social and economic 
equality. 
 
I would like to take a moment to congratulate our athletes. We 
have much to celebrate: the Sandra Schmirler rink team 
winning gold at the Olympics; Catriona Le May Doan won gold 
and bronze in speedskating. Congratulations. Happy belated 
International Women’s Day to everyone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
recognize International Women’s Day — a day set aside to 
celebrate the achievements of women. Our society has come a 
long way in breaking down the gender barriers for men and 
women in the workplace and at home. As a matter of fact today, 
in 1998, it is almost hard to believe that not so very long ago 
women were not even considered people under the constitution. 
Since that time we’ve seen incredible changes in people’s 
attitudes, and even in our most staunch of institutions. 
 
I was pleased to hear the recent announcement made by Queen 
Elizabeth, as she supports changing the past for succession to 
the British, and hence Canadian, throne, to the first born child 
— not the first born son — shall become heir to the throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this example may seem far removed from the 
reality of Canadian women, but just imagine for a moment if 
this gender exclusion had never been made. I would suggest to 
the members of this Assembly that the entire course of history 
would have been altered considerably. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the guiding principles of the Saskatchewan 
Party is individual freedom and equality of opportunity for all 
citizens. As women we have come a long way, but as we 
approach the new millennium we must recognize there is still a 
lot of work to be done. But I have no doubt that through the 
education and the hard work of our sons and daughters, we will 
achieve this much-needed equality. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Outstanding Young Athlete 
 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize an outstanding 
young athlete from my constituency who happens to be a 
neighbour of mine from the Peterson area, 18-year-old Justin 
Dauvin. This past summer Justin was selected to be part of the 
Canadian squad at the World Junior Softball Championships 
played in St. John’s, Newfoundland where Canada won the 
bronze medal. Justin is known as a steady hitter, and his 
remarkable skill at the plate was one of the big reasons he was 
able to secure a spot on the Canadian team. Justin led the 
tournament as top batter with a staggering .542 batting average 
and with a .792 slugging percentage. 
 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

Justin’s athletic ability has taken him many places throughout 
Canada — and the world, indeed. To New Zealand last 
February, which in turn . . . that experience, which in turn 
prepared the team to go on to the Canada Summer Games in 
Brandon, Manitoba. He also played with the Delisle White 
Socks at the Canadian midget tournament last August. The 
highlight of Justin’s softball career thus far happened on 
October 25 last year when he was presented with the Male 
Athlete Award of the Year by Softball Saskatchewan. 
Congratulations, Justin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Order of Canada Awarded 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to stand here 
today and to welcome all members back to the third session of 
the twenty-third legislature and to bring to the attention of this 
Assembly the fact that Dr. Orville Hjertaas, a highly respected 
resident of my constituency, received the Order of Canada 
award on February 4, 1998. 
 
I consider Orville Hjertaas to be the doctor of medicare. In 1960 
when Tommy Douglas was re-elected on his promise to 
introduce medicare in Saskatchewan, Dr. Orville Hjertaas from 
Prince Albert was named as Vice-Chair of the commission to 
oversee the implementation of medicare. He had previously 
worked to organize health regions in Weyburn and Swift 
Current. Dr. Hjertaas displayed his courage and his dedication 
of the concept of medicare when he did not join many of his 
peers who went on strike and withdrew their services in July 
1962 — supported, incidentally, by the Liberal Party. 
 
His work to promote one-stop caregiver teams in health centres 
to provide comprehensive, curative, and preventative health, 
served as a model for health reform, both here in Saskatchewan 
and across Canada. It may have been government that 
developed the programs, but it was Dr. Hjertaas and others like 
him who put medicare into action and made Canada’s health 
system a model for the world to aspire to. For his lifelong work 
Dr. Hjertaas received many awards, including the P.A. Citizen 
of the Year Award, and the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. I’m 
sure all MLAs (Members of the Legislative Assembly) will be 
with me when I say here today, congratulations, Dr. Hjertaas, 
doctor of medicare, Order of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kinsmen Telemiracle 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
with great pleasure that I rise today to congratulate everyone 
involved in the continued success of the Kinsmen Telemiracle. 
This past weekend, the hardworking and dedicated Kinsmen 
and Kinettes raised over $2.5 million. Mr. Speaker, the people 
of this province never cease to amaze me. Despite the fact that 
their pocketbooks are the most heavily taxed in all of Canada, 
the people of Saskatchewan continue to give generously to this 
wonderful cause. 
 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there may even 
be a lesson here for the government. The people of 
Saskatchewan are the most generous people in the world if they 

know that their money is going to a meaningful cause, and they 
know their money is staying right here in Saskatchewan to help 
the people of this province. 
 
As a current Kinsman, I understand the huge amount of 
volunteer time and energy needed to make Telemiracle a 
success. Having been involved, and having felt the pride and 
gratification that comes with being part of the Kinsmen 
Telemiracle, I think I understand the exhilaration the senior 
girls’ volleyball team from the Canora High School must have 
felt when they had the honour of putting up the final total: 
$2,546,637. A job well done, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
praise the Kinsmen and Kinettes on their fine work over the 
past weekend. We’re all aware of the success the Telemiracle 
has had in the past and that this year was no exception. The 
Kinsmen and the Kinettes . . . which was held at the Centre of 
Arts in Regina this year raised over $2.5 million. 
 
We’re always grateful to the stars who turn out for this 
wonderful cause. It is generally the stars we see on the stages of 
the Centre of Arts and the Centennial Auditorium. Let us not 
forget however, what truly makes Telemiracle a miracle — the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Kinsman and Kinettes, along with many others, spend 
countless hours in preparation for this event. From them a spirit 
of voluntarism washes over us like a great wave. 
 
To those who give their time, our sincere thanks. To the great 
majority, who give their money, we thank you for your 
generosity, which has come to symbolize the caring attitudes of 
the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Honour Band Concert 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It always does me a 
great deal of pleasure to hear people recognizing the 
achievement of youth in our communities throughout the 
province and throughout Canada. 
 
Each year here, the Honour Band of Prairie Region, made up of 
sea, army, and air cadets, will present a concert tour to include 
the cities of Thunder Bay, Winnipeg, Regina, and Edmonton. 
This is the fifth of its kind. And I recall having had the pleasure 
of attending one of these most entertaining concerts at the 
Centre of the Arts a couple of years ago. 
 
Today I would like to acknowledge and congratulate a Melville 
youth, Jay Stanley, son of Larry and Jackie Stanley, for having 
been selected once again from across the Prairies to be a 
member of this honour band. Jay is a member of 752 Campbell 
Royal Canadian Air Cadet Squadron under the command of 
Captain C. Mervin Ozirny. Jay plays the trombone and is one of 
100 cadets chosen from the 210 cadets from across the Prairies. 
My good friends Larry and Jackie have good reason to be proud 
of Jay’s achievement. 
 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

The performance in Regina, by the way, will be at the 
Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts on April 15. I am pleased to 
bring this to everyone’s attention so we can acknowledge and 
congratulate all the young people who participate and make 
these kind of commitments to achieve their goals. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meadow Lake Tribal Council soon to own Techfor 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to 
rise and speak about another successful first nations business 
venture in Saskatchewan. Today you are going to hear about 
Techfor, which will soon, as I understand it, be 100 per cent 
owned by the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. Techfor owns 40 
per cent of NorSask Forest Products Inc. This deal is worth an 
estimated $20 million. 
 
The Meadow Lake Tribal Council is one of the most 
progressive tribal councils in the country, if not in the world, 
Mr. Speaker. This deal may well be the largest financial 
transaction involving a first nations group in the history of the 
province outside of government transactions. Many predict in 
the not-too-distant future that NorSask will be involved in 
producing value added products. When this happens, jobs will 
be created and a lot of those jobs will go to first nations people. 
 
We all know that more jobs are being created and more people 
are working here in Saskatchewan than ever before. This 
statement is not only true for southern Saskatchewan but now 
for northern Saskatchewan people as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Meadow Lake Tribal Council is another proud 
example of first nations people contributing towards 
self-determination for aboriginal people in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower President’s Resignation 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is to the minister responsible for 
SaskPower. Mr. Minister, it is now clear that neither you nor 
the Premier are telling the full story as to why you fired Mr. 
Jack Messer. You can’t just fire the Premier’s long-time buddy 
and campaign manager for the party in 1991 unless he messed 
up something pretty severely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Minister, it’s not too late for you to come clean. 
Will you tell us the whole truth today? Will you tell us why you 
fired Jack Messer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
will know that Mr. Messer resigned a few days ago under 
mutual agreement between Mr. Messer and the government, 

with the understanding that was very clear in his letter and in 
press statements that have been made, that the reason is that Mr. 
Messer is looking for a change, another opportunity, and the 
government and SaskPower is looking for new direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Channel Lake Petroleum 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, last week you 
confirmed that the mismanagement of the Channel Lake 
Petroleum deal was one of the major factors where . . . after 
Jack Messer was fired. But that’s all you said. You flatly 
refused to provide the official opposition and Saskatchewan 
taxpayers with any details at all about the purchase and sale of 
Channel Lake. In fact you kept the whole deal under wraps until 
the Provincial Auditor exposed it last fall. 
 
Mr. Minister, taxpayers have the right to know how you 
managed to lose millions of dollars on this deal. In ’97 you sold 
Channel Lake in a secret, untendered deal for about $20 million 
— $5 million less than you should have got for it, and what you 
paid for it four years ago. Will you release the asset sale studies 
and any other sale studies that you used to arrive at the $20 
million purchase price? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 
the member opposite that following question period today, as I 
indicated to some of the members of the press yesterday, that I 
will be making a statement under ministerial statements. And I 
will be asking for leave to give an extended ministerial 
statement because I think reporting on this issue is crucially 
important. And I say to the member opposite, if he’s patient — 
and I ask this sincerely — I will do my best to explain the 
situation surrounding Channel Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Minister, I want to make it very clear what we expect you to 
come clean with in this ministerial statement. We want to see 
all of the asset sale studies and any other reports that were done 
into the purchase, management, and sale of Channel Lake. We 
want to see the Durand report in its entirety. We want to know 
how the Channel Lake fiasco was reported to the board of 
SaskPower, the board of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan), and the cabinet. We want to know how this 
contributed to the firing of Jack Messer, and we want to know 
who else in SaskPower and CIC and the cabinet were negligent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers deserve all of this information. Will 
you commit to giving all of it your statement, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite — to all the members opposite — I intend to 
make a full ministerial statement. It may be a bit longer than 
normal and I will be asking for leave to do that, but I will be as 
forthcoming and open with the issue as I think the member is 
wanting; although this is a complicated issue, but I will do my 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

best to explain as the best of my ability. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Financial Accountability 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs. Mr. Minister, this 
morning the Saskatchewan Party caucus met with members of 
the first nations accountability coalition. These are first nations 
men and women from across the province who believe that 
millions of dollars are being mismanaged by band councils and 
they’re not getting to the ordinary band members on the 
reserves. They have brought with them documented instances 
where members of band councils have received hundreds of 
thousands of dollars in salaries, honorariums, contracts, 
expenses, forgivable loans, and even welfare payments. At the 
same time, people on the reserve live in the most deplorable 
conditions imaginable. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government provides millions of dollars a 
year in funding to Indian bands. And what are you doing to 
ensure accountability? What are you doing to ensure that money 
given to first nations people gets to the people who really need 
it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, these are very serious 
matters. They are not matters to play politics with; they’re not 
matters for grandstanding. They’re serious matters of 
accountability. Nor, Mr. Speaker, are they partisan issues. 
 
I want to say to the members opposite and to the House, that all 
of us agree on all sides of the House, that if there’s any fraud or 
impropriety by aboriginal people or others with respect to the 
handling of government funds, whether federal or provincial, 
we are all unwilling to tolerate any kind of misapplication of 
public monies — any kind of fraud, Mr. Speaker — we will not 
tolerate it. And it should be a fundamental tenet for every 
political party, Mr. Speaker, to be on guard against any kind of 
misappropriation. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, and to anyone else in the 
province, that if anyone has evidence or information to offer of 
any kind of misappropriation of public funds, that should be 
provided to the police, and the law officers of the Crown will do 
their job, Mr. Speaker, in pursuing these matters to the utmost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister, there are people here that do have some very 
important information and they do want to meet with you. And 
they do want to meet with you very soon. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government and the federal government is 
failing the first nations people. We spend millions of dollars a 
year yet there is no accountability as to where this money is 
going. Mr. Minister, the members of the accountability coalition 
say that Indian bands don’t need more money. They’re not 
asking for more money. What they’re asking for is 
accountability to ensure the money that they’re receiving right 

now is going to the people who are supposed to get it. 
 
Your brand of cheque-book politics is failing. It’s simply not 
good enough to write a cheque and turn your back while funds 
are mismanaged and Indian people continue to live in 
third-world conditions right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you tell the people here today what 
you’re going to do about it? What are you going to do about the 
accountability that the first nations people need so that their 
standard of living is up to where everyone in Saskatchewan 
should have? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat again: this is not a 
matter for partisan politics; this is not a matter for 
grandstanding. If there is a concern with respect to the manner 
in which federal Indian Affairs money from Ottawa is being 
dealt with, let us agree, Mr. Speaker, that as a matter of law and 
jurisdiction, it is the job of the authorities in Ottawa — perhaps 
the federal Auditor General or perhaps someone else — to look 
into it. 
 
The members opposite know that no provincial government can 
audit federal Indian Affairs money that goes to Indian bands, 
Mr. Speaker. The opposition knows that very well. Let us not 
grandstand or play politics with this issue. Let us join together 
in this House and with Indian people in calling upon the federal 
government to ensure that federal monies are properly spent, 
whether by Indian people or non-Indian people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, that’s 
exactly what we’re asking for. We’re asking that the 
government and opposition work with the aboriginal people to 
make sure that everyone has a decent standard of living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the first nations accountability 
coalition have dozens of examples of mismanagement and 
corruption by band councils. For example, they have records 
showing how Pelican Lake Band councillors paid themselves 
welfare at the same time they were paying themselves salaries, 
honorariums, expenses, and loans — which were never repaid. 
 
Meanwhile, the people on the Pelican Lake Reserve live in 
third-world conditions. I know — I’ve been there. Because 
governments refuse to deal with an issue of accountability, the 
people have to live in these kinds of conditions. And this is just 
one example. 
 
Will you please meet with the coalition . . . (inaudible) . . . first 
nations accountability today immediately after question period 
to review this information? And will you immediately begin to 
address the issue of accountability of this money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the member should 
understand that if there are allegations of fraud or 
misappropriation of funds, those matters should be dealt with 
by the police and the proper law authorities. They should not be 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

dealt with by politicians in a legislative chamber. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is highly inappropriate and the member should know 
that. 
 
I can only say to the member, Mr. Speaker, that if she, any of 
her colleagues, or anyone else has information of fraud or 
misappropriation, they should report such matters to the police 
authorities. 
 
In specific answer to the member’s question: will I involve 
myself in that kind of investigation? The answer is no, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
Indian bands in Saskatchewan receive about $400 million a year 
from the federal government, and they receive millions more 
from the provincial government to look after the 47,000 first 
nations people who live on reserves in Saskatchewan. 
 
Yet the province’s 70 bands are more than $50 million in debt: 
35 have deficits; three are in receiverships; six are operating 
under co-management regimes; and 34 have been asked to draft 
a debt-management plan. Only 12 bands are actually balancing 
their books. 
 
And where’s the money going? We don’t know because there is 
no accountability. And, Mr. Minister, we ask if this afternoon 
right after question period you do meet with this group to 
understand their very serious concerns. I ask you sincerely. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, if the member is not simply 
interested in grandstanding and playing partisan politics for 
reasons which are well aware to all of us, then I think the 
member should acknowledge that if the $400 million going to 
Indian bands — the member is talking about coming from 
Indian Affairs — are going to be audited, that audit, Mr. 
Speaker, will come from the federal authorities. It cannot by 
law or jurisdiction come from the provincial authorities. 
 
And I note in today’s Star Phoenix, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Canadian Taxpayers Federation wants the federal government 
to undertake independent financial and operational audits of all 
Indian bands. I would say, Mr. Speaker, that all people, whether 
Indian or non-Indian, responsible for public funds should be 
properly accountable, should be properly audited. 
 
But when it comes to federal funds, Mr. Speaker, that will be a 
job for the federal authorities. It will not be a job for the 
provincial government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
countdown is on. If this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government has its way, in 235 days they’ll take the wrecking 
ball to the Plains Health Centre. The NDP has closed down 53 
rural hospitals; it scrapped almost 400 hospital beds in Regina. 
We have waiting-lists which are unacceptable to say the least. 
 

Health care professionals in Regina tell us our emergency 
rooms are already flooded. Surgeries are being cancelled. 
Stretchers are being lined up in hallways in all of our hospitals. 
On one occasion — at least one occasion last week — there 
wasn’t a single available bed in this city. 
 
Mr. Premier, everyone knows that health care will suffer more 
if the Plains is allowed to close on October 31. What are you 
going to do about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, we have launched the 
renewal of the health care system in Saskatchewan which is 
going to guarantee its stability and its top-notch qualities well 
into the 21st century. And this involves readjustments, and it 
involves new technologies and new procedures, and I believe 
that it is the model which other provincial governments and 
jurisdictions facing this problem are following. 
 
But I want to say to the hon. member that there is another 
dimension to this problem. His federal Liberal counterpart, Mr. 
Rock, Mr. Rock . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now now, listen 
to me on this — himself last weekend said that what he urged 
all Canadians to do — get this — Allan Rock said all Canadians 
should be writing to Mr. Chrétien and the Liberal Party in 
Ottawa, urging them to raise medicare as the first fiscal 
dividend payment from the fact that Ottawa has balanced its 
books. 
 
Where you should start is to join Mr. Rock by writing to the 
Prime Minister and getting more federal funds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Supplementary question to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. So the pattern’s already set, Mr. Speaker. Everything’s 
fine in health care except, when there is something wrong, we 
blame the federal government. 
 
But as the head of orthopedic surgery in Regina indicated in an 
October 3 Leader-Post news item, every time something like 
postponed surgeries makes the press they say, oh no, this is a 
singular item, a singular event. We say, B.S. Until you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member will 
recognize that he just engaged — Order! — that he just engaged 
in unparliamentary language. I will ask him to withdraw his 
remark and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — I withdraw my remark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s bad enough that this government forced proposed closure of 
the Plains. But it’s just as bad . . . is the fact that you’ve ignored 
thousands and thousands of people who have signed petitions 
opposing your plans. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you prepared to tell these people — that 
they don’t understand or that you don’t care about what they 
have to say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well we’ve been telling the people 
the truth, something which you are very allergic to. We’re 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

going to tell them the truth about health care reform and what’s 
taking place with respect to medicine. 
 
Don’t tell me that I’m blaming Ottawa. Allan Rock is blaming 
Ottawa. Allan Rock said this weekend he called on all 
Canadians to join him in his battle against Paul Martin to get 
the federal funds devoted to medicare and not to a millennium 
scholarship fund. All the premiers, including Liberal premiers 
of the Atlantic region, the Conservative premiers, NDP 
premiers, every premier unanimously — I wrote the letter on 
their behalf as Chair of the premier’s conference — said to the 
Prime Minister: pay the dividend to medicare. I’m not blaming 
Ottawa. Ottawa is accepting blame. 
 
Why don’t you join us in seeking to get more funds from 
Ottawa for health care? That’s what we’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Second supplementary to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s not what people are telling us. 
They’re telling us that the health care system must be saved 
from this NDP government. And we have to start by saving the 
Plains hospital. There’s a feeling out there that while medicare 
was born here, it will surely die here if left in the hands of the 
NDP government. 
 
During this session, we’ll introduce a private members’ Bill 
which would place a moratorium on your plans to close the 
Plains until the next provincial election. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you let the people which . . . who you are 
supposed to represent have their final say in this crucial 
decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the only way that 
medicare would ever die in this province — one of two ways — 
is if the Liberals or the Tory Party over there got ever re-elected 
to the government of this province of Saskatchewan. If ever the 
Tories over there or the Liberals over here had the occasion to 
sit in the front benches, that would be the end of medicare. 
 
And I can guarantee the hon. member that it will never happen 
because the people of Saskatchewan will never place their trust 
in medicare in the Liberals, who fought it tooth and nail in 
1962, with a doctors’ strike in 1962, not like the Dr. Hjertaas 
who defended it. 
 
And they won’t trust the Tories, who right now want to 
privatize it and dismantle it and turn hospitals into profit. 
 
That’s the only way it will go. 
 
And one other way it will go: if Ottawa continues to cut back in 
its transfer payments to the provinces — from 50 cents on the 
dollar to medicare to 13 cents on the dollar on the medicare. 
Shame on you Liberals, shame on you Tories for attacking 
medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower President’s Resignation 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is obvious that 
finances are a serious concern in this province, and therefore I 
need to continue with some questions that are related. Not long 
ago the minister in charge of the Crown Investments portfolio 
and Jack Messer were referred to as the organ grinder and his 
monkey. Now while the monkey is now off our back but the 
question remains why. Mr. Premier, does it have to do with 
what Leader-Star columnist Mark Wyatt has referred to as the 
bungle in the jungle or does it have to do with SaskPower’s 
operation, an untendered sale of Channel Lake Petroleum, 
which cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan at least $8 million. 
We’re talking about dollars that might have gone to the Plains. 
Or is it a series of other embarrassments during the course of 
his seven years at the government trough? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat for the 
member opposite that as it relates to the resignation of Mr. 
Messer last week, I think his letter, which was included and the 
statement that was made by the individual mentioned, that 
obviously the parting of company was of mutual consent. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite, as it relates to the 
issue of Channel Lake, again, I will be asking for leave to make 
a longer statement than normal so that I can have the full 
attention of you and the members of your caucus in explaining 
as best I can that situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — I would like to ask the Premier, if Mr. Messer 
resigned, as you and the minister in charge of CIC have 
indicated, then there is no reason that he be provided a 
severance package. And we’re again talking about financial 
problems here in this province. If Mr. Messer was dismissed 
with cause, there is no reason, there is no reason for a severance 
package. 
 
Mr. Messer has already collected $1 million in total salary from 
the government since assuming his position at SaskPower. And 
that is all the taxpayers of Saskatchewan should be on the hook 
for. Mr. Premier, will you confirm that taxpayers will not have 
to dole out another dime for your friend Jack Messer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, my comment regarding the resignation of Mr. Messer 
is the same as it was last week when asked about the possibility 
of any severance payment. I indicated that that issue had been 
referred to the Vice-Chair of the SaskPower Corporation, Mr. 
Milt Fair, to determine what is appropriate in that circumstance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — As I stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, the monkey is 
now off our back but we believe that the time has come for the 
organ grinder to step up to the plate as well. 
 
Mr. Messer has been made the scapegoat for many of the 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

problems that SaskPower . . . when the buck should stop with 
the minister in charge of Crown Investments Corporation, who 
obviously was not in control of his department. Surely the 
minister knew firsthand what was happening in Guyana. After 
all, he took junkets to involve himself in the negotiations, or 
perhaps to take advantage of the warmer climate. 
 
On the issue of Channel Lake, no one can suggest that the 
minister was not aware of this debacle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Premier once again, the monkey is 
off our back, isn’t it time for the organ grinder to go the same 
route? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member is 
asking whether or not the government has full confidence in the 
Deputy Premier and the minister in charge of Crown 
Investments Corporation, the answer is we have full confidence. 
 
And in the statement which will be made here very shortly, 
there will be a full revelation of Channel Lake. The member has 
heard the answer taken by the minister respecting other matters 
unrelated to Mr. Messer’s resignation, and that’ll be looked 
after in the appropriate occasion of this House proceeding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Financial Accountability 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
address a question to the minister responsible for Indian and 
Metis Affairs. Mr. Minister, as you heard earlier on, my 
colleague addressed a very serious issue. We’re listening to the 
Minister of Finance; the Minister of Finance is suggesting that 
the federal government is totally responsible. However, I 
believe your government is responsible as well. Because there 
are people living in this province who face a serious problem, 
are bringing it to your attention, have brought to our attention, 
and are bringing, I’m sure, to your attention, the fact that they 
are facing a problem; they need some help. 
 
Mr. Minister, a number of individuals have walked to this 
Assembly, have come to this Assembly and are looking for 
some support, are looking for some help. Mr. Minister, will you 
and your colleague, the Minister of Finance, take a moment this 
afternoon to sit down with the group of native leaders, the 
aboriginal leaders here this afternoon, and discuss and get an 
understanding of the problems they’re facing. So that you can 
indeed do and follow up what the minister was talking about, of 
addressing this matter with the federal government, 
representing the people of the province of Saskatchewan. Will 
you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, one of the great privileges of 
this portfolio is to meet with people across Saskatchewan of 
every background and, especially in the Aboriginal Affairs part, 
to meet with aboriginal people, to work with them to help build 
our province and to help improve the state of being for all 
Saskatchewanians. And I’m more than happy to meet with any 
group that has the time to schedule to meet with me. So we’d be 
. . . we make ourselves available at a time that’s appropriate. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the 
Assembly to make a statement and to use a little more time than 
might be normal in doing so. And therefore, I would ask the 
indulgence and leave of the Assembly to do so. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Channel Lake Petroleum 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I will send to the members opposite, as soon as we 
can, copies of the statement and say to them that in getting 
prepared for this, we have a number of documents that I will be 
tabling on the completion of my remarks and obviously my 
statement as well will be tabled here in the House and we will 
get it across to you just as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, late last year the Provincial Auditor raised 
concerns about the sale of Channel Lake Petroleum and the 
company’s gas trading activities while it was owned by 
SaskPower. On December 9, I instructed my officials at Crown 
Investments Corporation to conduct a thorough review of the 
operation and sale of Channel Lake. Their report is now in and I 
will be tabling it today. And I would like to report the major 
findings to the House and to brief members on what we are 
doing about the findings that were filed. 
 
First, a brief review of the state of affairs at SaskPower, taking 
into account all of the activities of the corporation and its 
subsidiaries. SaskPower is doing very well at its number one 
job of providing safe, reliable power to the people of all parts of 
the province at the lowest possible price. By controlling its 
costs, the corporation increased its net profit for the people of 
the province from 107 million in 1992 to 139 million in 1996. 
 
(1430) 
 
And over the same five years, SaskPower financed a 268 
million increase in capital assets while its debt to equity ratio 
went down from 68 per cent to 63 per cent. Improved efficiency 
made it possible for SaskPower to finance both significant 
expansion and improvements to its system, and to reduce its 
debt. In short, SaskPower has vigorously controlled its cost, 
reduced its debt, improved its system, and produced a solid 
return for its owners, the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SaskPower has been well managed overall and is in much better 
shape today than it was in 1992. And I might say the credit for 
that goes to the people who work at SaskPower. 
 
SaskPower purchases an average of about $16 million worth of 
gas each year to produce electricity at four power plants in the 
province. About 3.5 per cent of the power that we use in our 
province comes from those plants that use natural gas in its 
production. 
 
And in 1992, as part of its efforts to reduce cost, management at 
SaskPower concluded that it needed to find a more economical 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

and efficient way to obtain its natural gas. And in November 
’92, after studying the matter, SaskPower decided that the best 
way to ensure security of supply and a stable price was to 
acquire its own natural gas reserve. That’s in April 1993 after 
investigating a number of alternatives; SaskPower began 
negotiations to purchase the assets of an Alberta natural gas 
firm, Dynex Petroleum, for $25 million. SaskPower set up a 
subsidiary called Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd. to manage these 
assets. 
 
A board of directors was established, comprised of the president 
of SaskPower, two VP’s, and SaskPower’s legal counsel 
serving as the board’s secretary. And the audit and finance 
committee of the SaskPower board was to provide financial 
oversight of the investment. Mr. Lawrence Portigal was 
appointed by SaskPower as general manager of Channel Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the report provided to me by CIC 
officials, the management of Channel Lake began the attempt to 
expand the firm’s revenues in 1994 by engaging in gas trading 
above and beyond what was required to meet the needs of 
SaskPower and their need for natural gas. Specifically, the firm 
became involved in arbitrage in its gas trading activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, arbitrage involved simultaneously buying and 
selling natural gas in different markets to take advantage of 
slightly different price differentials. Money could be made in 
this way and, Mr. Speaker, money could also be lost. These 
activities were undertaken by Channel Lake’s general manager, 
Lawrence Portigal, and his staff without appropriate gas trading 
and risk management strategies. 
 
The Channel Lake board was aware of the gas trading activities, 
did not stop them, and did not implement appropriate policies in 
a timely manner to control them. Further, according to CIC 
officials, the management and the board of Channel Lake 
apparently undertook these gas trading activities without 
authority from the board of SaskPower, and indeed contrary to 
the mandate given to Channel Lake by the SaskPower board. 
 
The risks of these arbitrage dealings became apparent when two 
companies which sold gas to Channel Lake became insolvent in 
September and November 1996, resulting in 8 million in trading 
losses. According to CIC officials, SaskPower management 
should have provided complete disclosure of the unsanctioned 
trading activities and the losses resulting from the insolvencies 
to the SaskPower board. Instead, they did not. 
 
And in January of ’97 SaskPower officials sought and received 
approval from the SaskPower board to sell the assets of 
Channel Lake. Mr. Speaker, SaskPower board accepted this 
recommendation, reserving the right to approve the final price 
and the final terms of the sale agreement. 
 
According to CIC officials, SaskPower management then set a 
number of goals for the sale of the company’s assets. These 
included: to get the best price possible; to gain enough to cover 
trading losses in 1997; to gain enough to have overall positive 
return from Channel Lake investment; and finally, to sell before 
March 31 of 1997. 
 
The March 31 date is significant. The Deloitte Touche report 
says the following about the sale target date. And I quote: 

“it is clear that significant attention was focused by 
SaskPower officials on how the 1996 Channel Lake 
financial results would be detailed and made public, and it 
was believed in some quarters that a settlement by March 
31 would allow the corporation to tie losses and the sale 
together in one ‘package’ and thereby simplify the public 
statements surrounding the Channel Lake situation.” 

 
The goal of concluding the sale by March 31 — that is, in less 
than 90 days — led to serious shortcomings in the sale process. 
An independent evaluation of assets obtained from Gilbert 
Lausten Jung Associates . . . And this asset evaluation of the 
Channel Lake assets found the assets to be worth $20.3 million. 
Offers were sought from potential buyers by Channel Lake 
management and, in the interest of time, no formal process was 
undertaken. 
 
Five conditional offers were received. The highest offer was for 
$27.7 million, submitted by an Alberta company called Direct 
Energy Marketing Limited. 
 
According to the CIC report, which I’ll be tabling later, I quote: 
 

“DEML officials have indicated that they had no intention 
of paying an inflated value for the Channel Lake assets. 
There is no obvious rationale for such an unorthodox 
negotiating approach, excepting the possibility that such an 
initial offer would have the effect of ‘freezing out’ 
alternative bids. The DEML offer was also made in 
consideration of receiving the ten year natural gas supply 
agreement. DEML claims SaskPower knew this original 
offer would be subsequently reduced; SaskPower officials 
deny this assertion. 

 
DEML’s initial letter of offer contained three conditions. First, 
their offer was to be reduced by the cash flow adjustments of 
$1.7 million. Trading losses incurred by Channel Lake would 
be deducted from the purchase price. And third, long-term gas 
supply contract with SaskPower would be included. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if all these conditions were met, DEML was 
prepared to close the sale by March 31 of ’97. SaskPower 
officials decided to pursue this offer with approval in principle 
from the SaskPower board on March 17. On March 27, 
SaskPower officials informed the board of SaskPower that a 
sale agreement had been reached. 
 
The proposed sale price was presented by management to the 
board as a, and I quote, “total purchase price of 20.8 million,” 
omitting the significant fact that this sum was arrived at by 
deducting trading losses from the higher price. SaskPower 
board approved the sale on the assumption that the proceeds 
would be 20.8 million. It also approved a 10-year gas supply 
agreement. What follows were serious errors by some 
SaskPower officials. 
 
Channel Lake management and DEML negotiated the final 
terms of sale and submitted two draft agreements to senior 
officials at SaskPower. The first two drafts reflected the final 
net sale price of $20.8 million. However, on March 28 — or 
about March 28 — the third draft agreement was prepared by 
DEML. It was reviewed by Mr. Portigal, who was responsible 
for negotiating the deal. This third draft turned the 20.8 million 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

from a net price to a gross price and deducted the second set of 
trading losses. In other words, this draft reduced the purchase 
price from 20.8 million to 15.6. 
 
On April 1, without reading the third and final draft agreement 
containing the lower price, senior SaskPower officials approved 
and signed it. Without authority, Mr. Portigal then negotiated 
and executed additional clauses in the sale agreement. Mr. 
Portigal sent memos to senior officials at SaskPower over the 
Easter weekend advising them of these changes. These memos 
do not seem to have been understood or acted upon. 
 
SaskPower officials only became aware of the very significant 
change in the sale price on or about May 27 of ’97 when DEML 
made arrangements to pay for their purchase of the Channel 
Lake assets. 
 
A number of steps, Mr. Speaker, were taken in response. 
SaskPower management corresponded with Mr. Portigal, asking 
for an explanation. On June 4 of ’97, the employment of Mr. 
Portigal was terminated. On June 6 of ’97, SaskPower wrote to 
DEML and informed them that SaskPower considered the sale 
agreement was not binding. And DEML replied on June 11 and 
indicated that, in their view, the signed and sealed agreement 
was binding. 
 
SaskPower consulted legal counsel on its options but no legal 
action was taken to scrap the deal. And on June 13 of ’97, the 
president of SaskPower sought outside legal opinion and 
ordered an internal audit of the sale. A draft report was prepared 
which outlined the failure by senior SaskPower officials to 
properly review and approve the final versions of the sale 
agreement. And in the opinion of CIC officials, SaskPower 
management took no appropriate action on this information. 
 
On June 20, 1997, SaskPower officials provided a report in 
general and sometimes unclear terms on these events to the 
audit finance committee of the board and then to the full 
SaskPower board. Largely on the strength of a statement by 
SaskPower management that it would still recommend the sale 
even at the new and lower level of approximately 15 million, 
the SaskPower board approved the new terms of sale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower management argued that the 
corporation will receive the fair market value for Channel Lake 
assets and there was no legal recourse to overturn the 
agreement; that mistakes might have been made by officials; 
but that in final effect, SaskPower was not harmed financially. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, CIC concludes the following. The 
original mandate of Channel Lake and for Channel Lake was 
clear: to provide security of supply and predictability of price 
for SaskPower’s natural gas purchases. Channel Lake got 
involved in arbitrage activities without authority from the 
SaskPower board and without a trading of gas policy and 
appropriate risk management strategies. 
 
As a result of two insolvencies, Channel Lake incurred gas 
trading losses. The losses were not brought to the attention of 
the SaskPower board in a meaningful and direct way. The 
recommendation to sell Channel Lake appears to be linked 
directly with the question of disclosing trading losses. Under 
time pressure, the sale of Channel Lake was conducted in an 

informal and ad hoc manner. Under time pressure, the final sale 
agreement was signed without being read or understood, and 
the final sale price was substantially lower than the board of 
SaskPower had authorized. 
 
Once this was discovered, SaskPower management tried to 
remedy this mistake. The Channel Lake official directly 
involved in the sale and negotiation was terminated, legal 
counsel was sought and an internal audit was conducted, and an 
attempt was made to cancel the sale agreement. And 
management ultimately recommended that the board approve 
the sale on the argument that it was still a good deal. And 
finally, the board accepted the advice of its officials and 
approved the sale. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what happened. 
 
Here’s what we are doing about it. First, today I’m tabling a 
detailed report on this issue here in the legislature for all 
members. I’m tabling the text of my remarks; I’m tabling a 
copy of the management report prepared for me by my officials 
at Crown Investments Corporation; I’m tabling a report 
prepared for CIC officials by Deloitte Touche which CIC 
officials used to assist them in preparing their report; and I’m 
tabling the Channel Lake Petroleum’s 1996 audited financial 
statements. 
 
CIC officials received legal advice on this matter from the firm, 
Gerrand Rath and Johnson. Because of issues of legal liability, 
it is not appropriate to table legal opinions and I will not do so. 
The salient conclusions are reflected in my remarks today and 
in the report of CIC. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, our government is taking a number of 
steps to tighten up the governance and accountability of Crown 
corporation subsidiaries. These measures will include the 
following. Outside directors will be appointed to the boards of 
all Crown subsidiaries. New rules are now in place to insure 
subsidiaries regularly and properly report all of their activities. 
All subsidiaries will be accountable to the legislature’s Crown 
Corporation Committee, as Crown corporations themselves now 
are. 
 
CIC will review the Crown practices to ensure appropriate risk 
management policies are in place. CIC will ensure that frequent 
board meetings are held and that follow-up mechanisms to 
insure board directives are being carried out. And CIC will 
tighten up the approval process for the sale or disposition of 
Crown corporation subsidiaries. 
 
(1445) 
 
We have also added new skills and industry expertise to the 
Crown corporation boards. And CIC has implemented a 
comprehensive board training and evaluation program. And we 
will be implementing additional changes as recommended in 
the CIC report. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, a copy of the material I’m tabling today has 
been provided to the Provincial Auditor. The auditor will be 
reviewing the operations and sale of Channel Lake in the 
normal course of his duties. 
 
Fourth, the auditor’s report on this issue will be considered in 
detail by the Public Accounts Committee. Officials from Crown 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

Investments Corporation and SaskPower will be making 
themselves available to this committee as well as the Crown 
Corporations Committee to answer any and all questions about 
this issue and to discuss the measures we are taking to 
strengthen governance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I noted at the beginning of my statement that 
SaskPower is in considerably better financial shape now than it 
was several years ago. Pending final reconciliation, the Channel 
Lake investment did not harm SaskPower financially. The 
Deloitte Touche report I am tabling today suggests SaskPower 
earned $2 million from its operation of Channel Lake. The 
taxpayers suffered no loss as far as we can see today. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the issue today is not about losing 
money nor is it about personal gain. It is about respecting 
mandates of boards. It’s about seeking proper authority for 
engaging in trading activities. It’s about selling public assets 
properly. It’s about management activities vigorously to report 
and to correct mistakes. 
 
This government is extremely disappointed in the events that I 
have described. We deserve our share of criticism for letting it 
happen. We ordered a detailed review, we have made that 
review public, and we are acting to ensure that events like this 
don’t happen again. 
 
Having dealt at length with what happened to a subsidiary 
which comprised less than 1 per cent of SaskPower’s assets and 
business, I want to end by looking to the future of our power 
company. As I said earlier, SaskPower is in good shape today 
and has made dramatic improvements since 1992. It will 
continue to do better by building on its considerable strengths. 
These strengths of course, Mr. Speaker, include the 
corporation’s employees, its success in controlling costs, its 
shrinking debt, and its preparations for competition in the 
electricity market-place. 
 
Our power company’s number one job is always and has been, 
will be, providing safe, reliable power to the people of the 
province and to all parts of the province of Saskatchewan at the 
lowest possible price. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal very 
quickly with three other matters. Members will know that my 
report today is considerably more detailed and complete than 
my answers to questions on this matter in question period 
during last December’s special session. At that time, my 
answers were based on incomplete information as noted in CIC 
and Deloitte Touche’s report. The thorough review by CIC 
which I requested has now been provided to me with many new 
facts and I have shared them with the House here today. 
 
When we announced that our government was not approving 
the SaskPower’s proposed investment in Guyana, we released 
the corporation’s due diligence costs for legal and consulting 
work from outside the corporation. There have been since 
requests for SaskPower’s internal cost and those of CIC as well. 
I am tabling an accounting of all costs associated with the 
proposed Guyana investment today. 
 
Finally, I would like to advise the House that the government is 
undertaking a full review of the guidelines governing any 

potential equity investments by Crown corporations outside the 
province and I will report further on that in due course. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to table the following 
documents. And I also appreciate very much the attention that 
members have given while I gave this rather lengthy report. I 
appreciate that sincerely and hereby table the documents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in all 
of my experience I have never seen a confession that went on 
for 11 pages, but then I suppose I am not used to dealing with 
the way this government operates. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, what really bothers me about this all a 
whole lot is some of the stuff that isn’t said in this rather 
lengthy statement. And what isn’t said is that the government 
doesn’t take any responsibility fundamentally for this kind of a 
messed up deal. 
 
You know, I look here on one of the pages and says, the issue is 
not about losing money. As if it really doesn’t matter at all that 
we paid $25 million for this deal, had a deal potentially inked 
for 20 — there’s already five down the drain — and then we 
sell it for 15 because of a mess-up by the incompetence of the 
minister and the board of Crown corporations of SaskPower. 
And they say this isn’t about money. Of course it’s about 
money, but it’s also about competence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we see time and time again where these guys 
don’t even get it about what’s wrong with this attitude. You 
know, the last week or two we heard and we said, well aren’t 
you lucky, Saskatchewan. Aren’t you lucky that we spent 
$800,000 and more — which I hope is in detail tabled today — 
of your money so that we could decide we shouldn’t be in 
Guyana. Aren’t you lucky, Saskatchewan, that we blew almost 
a million dollars to come up with this decision. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, anybody in the streets of Saskatchewan 
would have told you for a dollar you had no business in 
Guyana. They would have done it for a buck, a loonie. And you 
guys think you’re doing a good deal because you spent 
$800,000 figuring this out. Mr. Speaker, it’s like putting 
arsonists in charge of the fire truck. You don’t get it. 
 
And now we’ve got a situation here where, finally, a year after 
all of this mess was going on, while the Legislative Assembly 
was sitting last year, and nobody breathed a word about it until 
the Provincial Auditor got it into the report, and we finally 
could get to the report and all of a sudden you said “uncle.” 
 
And here we go, and we sit here and say, oh, it’s not about 
losing money. Of course it’s not about losing money. What’s 
$10 million? You blew five from the original price, blow 
another five because you had a messed up deal with your 
officials who have no idea what you’re doing. And you say 
well, we’ve taken action, we’re going to fix it. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would like to remind the hon. 
member that rule 20 of the House requests all hon. members to 
direct their debate through the Chair and I’ll remind the hon. 
member of that and ask that he conduct himself accordingly. 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t sure you wanted to 
take responsibility and that’s why . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, now the hon. member also knows that 
he’s not to engage the Speaker in the debate and I’m sure he’ll 
want to return to the text of his remarks and enter into the 
record in appropriate fashion. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
really is strange because no one over there wants to take 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker. I mean, at the very least any 
organization that had any sense and credibility about it would 
be holding the minister of the day responsible. You’d be 
holding the board of directors responsible. And all I see in this 
whole thing is you guys have said that Mr. Portigal or 
something had to be dismissed. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s just 
not good enough. 
 
That doesn’t fix the issue. It doesn’t hold those individuals who 
are accountable answerable for the $10 million mess to the 
people of Saskatchewan. It doesn’t do it at all. Where are the 
board of directors? Where was the minister of the day who was 
supposed to be sitting on the board of directors to make sure 
these kinds of messes didn’t happen, and if they did, to stand up 
and have the courage to take responsibility for it? Where are 
they all? Where are they, Mr. Speaker? 
 
They’re all running and hiding and now the minister of CIC 
says oh well, here it is, we’re really sorry — oops Another one 
of these oopsies. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker . . . And then what we hear is that the 
president of this whole outfit, Jack Messer, resigned because he 
wants to pursue other opportunities with his future. 
 
And you know what’s really strange? — is today in the House I 
heard the minister responsible say well, we turned over to the 
vice-president the issue of Mr. Messer’s severance, for crying 
out loud. Can you believe that this outfit would even consider 
severance for Jack Messer? He should be dismissed with cause. 
The minister should be fired, the whole board of directors fired 
and get somebody other than a bunch of political appointees in 
there who maybe will manage the investments of this province 
appropriately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this goes some small part of the way, but there’s 
all kinds of questions that remain unanswered. Is there going to 
be an effort for the recovery of any of these funds? Were the 
board of directors insured so that there could be a call on that 
insurance for their responsibility of incompetence at the very 
least? Are there any pending legal issues that are going to come 
out of this that you’re not telling us? I don’t see any reports 
about that. You say you can’t table the report by the lawyer 
because there’s legal issues involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re seeing here is the final end of an 
administration who has no idea at all about what’s going around 
in the Crown corporations, and simply, this is not good enough, 
Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan are going to demand 
much more accountability from the members opposite and this 
government. And nobody is taking responsibility of this. All 
they’re doing is running and hiding and finding scapegoats. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s simply not good enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, this is not a happy day for this 
province. I think, however though, it is appropriate for all 
members to pay tribute to the Provincial Auditor for bringing 
this matter to the attention of this Assembly and the people of 
this province. 
 
After he initially did, the Liberal opposition on December 12 
requested a meeting of the Crown Corporations Committee to 
look into the operations of Channel Lake. The chairperson of 
that committee did not reply for several months, and when she 
did reply, she told us that the Saskatchewan Party was not 
interested in additional time in Crown Corporations. 
 
Then in February before the Public Accounts Committee, I 
raised nine questions. I raised nine questions concerning the 
Channel Lake transaction which needed . . . which needed to be 
looked at. Nine times — nine times — my request for 
information on Channel Lake were voted down by members of 
the New Democratic and Saskatchewan Party caucuses. 
 
Now some of the questions have been answered. Others 
certainly remain. And I will be dealing specifically with some 
of the questions I raised in Public Accounts and was 
stonewalled on by the New Democratic and Saskatchewan 
Party caucuses. 
 
Might I first say though that part of the shame of this province 
is that the auditor reported that there had been a purchase of 
another company by Channel Lake, of some company not 
disclosed by SaskPower in this province. It was assumed 
because of what we knew from Alberta corporations branch that 
that was Radisson Petroleum. That is confirmed in the 
documents that the minister has filed with us today. 
 
As to the best of my knowledge today is the first day that it has 
been publicly acknowledged that Channel Lake bought this 
other company. We could have found it out in Alberta. We 
could find out what our Crown corporations are up to in 
Alberta, but we can’t find it out in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That is a shame to this province that if we want 
to know what our Crowns are up to, we’ve got to travel to 
Guyana, we’ve got to travel to Calgary, but we’re not going to 
find it out here. 
 
One of the questions I asked was why did Channel Lake not file 
its financial statements with this House? Well we could get no 
answer. We were stonewalled by both other caucuses. Now we 
see that the financial statement on Channel Lake was dated 
January 31. It is only now being revealed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
said in Meadow Lake recently that Millar Western was 
hemorrhaging badly. How many other problem areas are out 
there? What really is going on with the public’s money? What 
did he mean by that statement that Millar Western is 
hemorrhaging badly? What did he mean by the statement that 
we will never know how much was lost on the Guyana venture? 
 
(1500) 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

When I was before Public Accounts, I brought a motion, first of 
all, why was this sale of a Crown asset untendered? Most 
outrageous is that SaskEnergy, another Crown corporation, was 
not brought into the loop that this subsidiary was for sale. So 
even the Crowns are not talking to each other. That still is not 
answered. The minister tells us today that it was the pressure of 
time is why these deals were cooked up in the back rooms 
without even the rest of the Crown corporations being aware of 
what was going on. 
 
I asked the question about Lawrence Portigal negotiating the 
sale on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan and 
SaskPower, and popping up shortly thereafter as the president 
of the new owners and the new company. I ask:, is there a 
possible conflict of interest there? I think that question has been 
answered at least indirectly. I think the question of whether Mr. 
Portigal was diligently looking out for the interests of the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan appears to be addressed at least 
indirectly in the report before us. 
 
What are the collateral agreements? Do we still have 
obligations here? Has the bleeding stopped, or is the 
hemorrhaging continuing because of the supply contract which 
will go on for the next 10 years? Is that a supply contract which 
means that we will continue to lose money? Are we still liable 
for the bad agreements made previously that apparently we still 
have? 
 
As I read the material before us, the bleeding continues because 
we still have outstanding liabilities from the Channel Lake 
fiasco. 
 
There is nothing in the minister’s statement today which 
answers the question as to why this House was told last year by 
the member for Regina South that Channel Lake was one of the 
success stories of our Crown corporations; that Channel Lake 
was an example of the responsible and sensible approach to 
managing the investments of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if Channel Lake is one of the success 
stories, if Channel Lake is an example of the responsible and 
sensible approach to managing Crown investments, then I don’t 
know what’s going to happen to us when we see the 
irresponsible examples of how our investments are being 
handled and managed. 
 
We were told last year by the member for Regina South that 
there had been a net profit of five million. We were told by the 
former minister responsible for SaskProfit there was a net profit 
of 5 million. On December 13 SaskPower told us there’d been a 
profit of 2 million. And the Hon. Deputy Premier told us 2 
million in his statement in this House on December 16. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a sad state when it is easier to get 
information in Alberta concerning the operations of our Crown 
corporations than what we can get in Saskatchewan. We still do 
not know if, we still do not know if there will be new orders 
that all subsidiaries of the Crown corporations file their 
financial statements with this House. We still do not know why, 
if the entire board of directors approved these transactions 
improperly we are told, why they are still in place and only one 
has gone. Is this an attempt to put the mess on Messer when we 
know that the Messer had a boss, and that boss is the 

Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
And we have to know to what extent they were managing 
affairs properly. We know that the New Democratic youth says 
that ministers have to step up and take responsibility for the 
operations and conduct of our Crown corporations. And for 
once, I find myself in complete agreement with the New 
Democratic youth that this government cannot escape its 
responsibility for the way our Crown corporations have been 
managed. They cannot shove this mess on Messer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — We have finally found out that years ago, we 
found out that years ago Channel Lake bought a company and 
did not reveal that to the people of Saskatchewan. The auditor 
has said that is illegal; that there was not an order in council 
revealing that. Why has it taken so long for that information to 
become public to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not just about one bungled deal. This is 
about the overall philosophy of the Crown corporations. And 
we have seen many, many problems of late and we suspect we 
are going to hear about many more. Do our Crown corporations 
exist to serve the people of Saskatchewan or do they exist to get 
involved in hare-brained, risky investments around the world 
that we then . . . whether it’s a cable company in Chicago or an 
electric company in Guyana or gas futures contracts in Alberta, 
we try and keep quiet and hope that the auditor and the Liberal 
opposition won’t find out about. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Speaker, we were indicated that the 
members who sit as independents would also be allowed to 
respond briefly to this tragedy here today. 
 
The Speaker: — It is beyond the normal procedure for 
members other than caucus representatives to respond to a 
ministerial statement and therefore leave will be required. I take 
it . . . would the hon. member . . . is the hon. member requesting 
leave? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — I would so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll make my 
comments brief because the appropriate ranting has been done 
by the official opposition parties and by the third party, and that 
was necessary. And because it’s been done, it doesn’t need to 
be repeated. But there are a couple of points that have been 
missed in the debates here today and in the comments that were 
made. And I think it’s important that Mr. Premier and his 
government take note of these things that have happened that 
haven’t been mentioned. 
 
First of all, I identify, as I listen to this report, one thing that has 
disturbed me for a long time in politics in Saskatchewan — and 
not just with this government but with every government — and 
that of course is the fact that we have supposedly watchdogs 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

appointed in our province to watch over our Crown 
corporations and the other businesses of government. We do 
that through appointed boards that are supposed to watch what’s 
going on. 
 
Here we have an appointed board of course, that obviously was 
a rubber stamp board, a rubber stamp board that was probably 
put into place to draw wages because of their political 
affiliation. And once again we find that this type of board is 
nothing more than a rubber stamp board that doesn’t bother to 
read the reports, doesn’t bother to study what’s going on. And 
as a result, they pass whatever comes up before them, and we 
have this kind of a mess on our hands. 
 
And it is obvious that if you appointed people to these boards 
that were competent to do the job, then they might have 
triggered by reading the reports and studying the materials that 
were passed through their hands. If they’d have studied it, even 
bothered to read it, they might have cut this thing off at the 
pass. 
 
And that’s something I think, that the Premier has to seriously 
look at because there is no question that governments have 
fallen on lesser issues than this. And certainly ministers have 
been fired for lesser problems than this. I wouldn’t suggest that 
the minister should be fired because I quite honestly think that 
we have inherited here a system that has caused the problem, 
and that is the appointment of boards that don’t do their jobs 
and never will, unless we get past this patronage part. 
 
The second issue here is this word called arbitrage. It is a stock 
market, gambling name, word. It is something that means we 
are gambling with other people’s money. It is, in this case, fine 
and dandy if you want to go to the stock market and play with 
your money — go right ahead. That’s what the markets are 
there for. But we should not allow Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker, to do that sort of thing. 
 
I have a strong suspicion that this may not be the only 
corporation or the only department of government that is 
playing with the money of Saskatchewan. I have a strong 
suspicion that the Premier needs to take a serious look at 
whether or not other departments are doing this very same kind 
of action. 
 
I hear some rumours in this city, and they go out all the time 
because it’s a political city. But I hear rumours in this city that 
there is a floor somewhere in a building somewhere — and I’m 
not going to name the places or the names — where people are 
trading in the stock market on a daily basis with the taxpayers’ 
money. 
 
If that sort of thing has been going on and you’re losing money 
with SaskPower, then take a look. I say this not to make the 
press but to make you aware, Mr. Premier, because you may not 
even be aware of what’s going on. You obviously didn’t know 
what was going on in SaskPower or you’d have stopped it. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I say to the government, take a look at all 
of your departments. Use this as a cue, not only to save your 
government, but perhaps to stop the things that could be 
happening that are identical to what happened here. No more 
gambling. We’re not addicted to gambling in this province and 

we don’t need to gamble with the taxpayers’ dollars. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
before orders of the day, by leave of the Assembly, to move 
five routine motions which are traditionally moved the day after 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Report to the Standing Committee on 
Communication 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I move, seconded by the member 
from Prince Albert-Carlton: 
 

That the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library be 
referred as tabled in the present session to the Standing 
Committee on Communication. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Prince Albert-Carlton: 
 

That the retention and disposal schedules approved under 
The Archives Act by the Public Documents Committee be 
referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on 
Communication. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Reports of the Provincial Auditor to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Prince Albert-Carlton: 
 

That the various reports of the Provincial Auditor as tabled 
in the present session be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Public Accounts to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Prince Albert-Carlton: 
 

That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 
as tabled in the present session be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Bylaws and Amendments to the Special 
Committee on Regulations 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That the bylaws of the professional associations and 
amendments thereto, the bylaws and amendments that are 
tabled in the present session, be referred to the Special 
Committee on Regulations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1515) 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Commonwealth Day Message 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day, I 
wish to advise the House that with Commonwealth Day being 
held yesterday around the world, I delayed presenting to the 
House Her Majesty’s message for Commonwealth Day to this 
day with the Speech from the Throne being scheduled for 
yesterday. And I’ll ask all hon. members to rise for the reading 
of Her Majesty’s message. 
 

The Commonwealth provides many special links between 
its members. Apart from more formal contacts between 
governments, there are any number of professional 
associations and voluntary organizations with close 
connections throughout the Commonwealth. Among the 
most active are those involved in sport and recreation. 
 
I believe that sport will always play a very important part 
in the social welfare of all generations. Sport — and team 
games in particular — teaches young people many 
valuable social lessons. It demonstrates the value of 
co-operation, teamwork, and team spirit; it teaches the 
need to abide by rules and regulations; it emphasizes the 
importance of self-control and how to take victory or 
defeat with good grace. 
 
Sport is a great leveller. The same rules apply to all; there 
are no age, racial, or cultural barriers to participation. 
Indeed, enthusiasm for a sport brings together people from 
every background. Some sports attract dedicated 
spectators. Some do not, but that makes no difference to 
the participants. All are absorbing and enjoyable, offering 
unique opportunities for self-discovery and to develop 
self-confidence. For many young people participation in 
sport can offer a lifeline and an essential alternative to 
delinquency, drug abuse, or crime. 

 
The Commonwealth Games are the organization’s greatest 
sporting festival and rightly known as the “Friendly 
Games.” It is always the athletes from the smallest nations 
who receive the warmest welcome. And it is the sporting 
gesture that wins universal recognition. The Games take 
place every four years and this year they will be held in 
Malaysia where every effort is being made to ensure that 
competitors, officials, and spectators will thoroughly enjoy 
the experience of this great gathering. Manchester, too, has 
already begun preparations to host the Games in 2002. 

 
The Commonwealth Games will indeed bring us together. I 

am much looking forward to joining them. 
 
That concludes Her Majesty’s message and members may be 
seated. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since we last met 
on December 19, Christmas has come and gone, and in the 
spirit of peace and goodwill which that season calls forth, the 
world has just avoided a return to armed insanity in the Mideast 
— thanks, in no small part, to the world at work through 
cooperation, the United Nations. 
 
Closer to home, there has been both good and sad news. W.O. 
Mitchell, Saskatchewan’s favourite storyteller, died. But we are 
left with a mythical prairie world that lives on through his 
books. 
 
Saskatchewan women won gold and glory at the Olympics. 
Saskatchewan teachers and doctors have signed new contracts. 
Telemiracle raised another $2.5 million, proving once again the 
energy of the Saskatchewan volunteer and the generosity of the 
Saskatchewan spirit. 
 
Change within stability — at least in this corner of the world, 
that is our home and our responsibility. 
 
And here we are again at the beginning of the third session of 
the twenty-third legislature settling in to do the people’s 
business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to be here, and before I begin I want to 
say how pleased I am to see all my colleagues back. I know I 
speak for all of us when I say that I look forward to the spirited 
and reasoned discourse which is the hallmark of this Assembly 
as we all work for the good of the people — the people we 
serve with honour, dignity, and humility, as the member from 
Swift Current said last year in moving that address. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to see you return to your rightful place 
as referee/verbal traffic officer in this legislative freeway. You 
have earned all three corners of your hat. In the past two 
sessions you’ve been fair, stern, and patient, and we’re all 
comfortable in our role, knowing you’re in command of yours. 
 
I know I echo all sides of the House when I say you need to be 
commended again, Mr. Speaker, for expanding that role by 
travelling to our schools. Our parliamentary tradition is a 
precious one, and you’ve shown that to imprint the values of 
parliaments on the minds of our youth, it is necessary to move 
beyond this Assembly. And you’ve done that for us, Mr. 
Speaker. We say, keep up the good work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — You are ensuring that we will be well served 
by the legislators of the future. 
 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

Speaking of change within stability, I should note as well that 
for the first time in five sessions, I believe, we have the same 
Leader of the Opposition for two of those sessions. I have to 
congratulate the member from Canora-Pelly for his longevity. 
Two sessions in the same chair on that side of the House is 
indeed a miracle. Changing parties in order to feel that you can 
stay where you are is just like swimming upstream; you have to 
paddle pretty fast just to stay put. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re up the creek. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — No paddle in that creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for me it is an honour to be asked to move the 
Speech from the Throne, and I thank the Premier for his vote of 
confidence in me. I am well aware of the previous movers, who 
are very capable, whom I’ve followed on this side of the 
Assembly. 
 
As well, no one I think, can rise in this Chamber without feeling 
the sense of parliamentary continuity of which we are all a part. 
In leading off this debate, I feel I am in a straight line that goes 
back to those representatives who drafted the Magna Carta and 
forced King John to share the burden of governance, whether or 
not he wanted that burden lifted. 
 
Thinking of that, we’re all in pretty heady company indeed. By 
representing our constituents to the best of our ability, we are in 
fact honouring those who set the traditions that have come 
before us. That duty, I firmly believe, transcends both party 
affiliation and parochial boundaries. 
 
The life of an MLA might be much critiqued on occasion, often 
prudish, and at times short. But it is also a privilege — a 
privilege I try not to forget. I share with a few other members 
the privilege of representing a constituency that combines urban 
and rural citizens. It begins in the south-east corner of Regina, 
where I make my home, an area that I have represented for 12 
consecutive years, first on city council and now as an MLA. My 
constituency includes the communities in and around Balgonie, 
Pilot Butte, White City and Emerald Park. 
 
I’ve discovered firsthand the strength of working in 
partnerships. Whether they be with the Regina REDA (regional 
economic development authority), the community association 
networks, Wheat Pool members and delegates, local school 
parent-teacher organizations, the Optimists, the Lions, the local 
wildlife federation or the seniors centres, I’m continually 
strengthened and sustained by the hard work and dedication to 
this province of the men and women who have chosen to put 
their faith in me. 
 
I’m pleased to represent them, and on their behalf, I’m 
delighted to speak in support of His Honour’s address because, 
as he said, it charts a course for Saskatchewan’s journey into a 
new year and beyond into a new century, a new millennium. 
Our future is bright and full of promise. In my remarks I would 
like to focus on the nature of the course we have charted 
because it is sound, sensible, workable, affordable — a plan for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Before I do that, I want to say a word about how we charted this 
course. I want to point out to all in my hearing — but 

particularly to the members opposite — that the program 
outlined in His Honour’s speech, the plan that we will follow 
during this session, is a result of those values our Premier instils 
in each of us. And we affirm in all our deliberations, 
consultations, cooperation, a sense of community, a strong 
sense of compassion and prudence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — This is a plan of an open government, a 
government in touch with Saskatchewan people. It is therefore a 
document which reflects the strength of Saskatchewan people 
as His Honour said. It is a plan which reflects the quiet pride in 
our own blessings and our own abilities. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, this is a Saskatchewan throne speech 
which mirrors the hopes, aspirations, responsibilities, and, yes, 
the quiet pride of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — In the past 55 years we have built on this 
geographical rectangle, a society that is the joy of those who 
share it, the envy of those who know it, and the best-kept secret 
to most of the rest. We plan to keep what we have built, and 
that is what I mean by a responsible plan. 
 
I stress the openness of this government because there seems to 
be some confusion among members opposite about the meaning 
of what I thought was a rather simple word. It does not mean 
changing political coats in the middle of the night, that’s for 
sure. 
 
What do I mean by open government? First, I mean a 
government that establishes the support of the people, that 
produces a budget in a timely fashion, and finally, releases the 
public accounts that truly reflect the government’s 
expenditures. According to the auditor, our Public Accounts 
have gone from being the worst-kept books in Canada a few 
years ago, prepared by the disguised Tory members opposite, to 
the best-kept books in Canada today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Information about government once kept 
secret is now available through new freedom of information 
laws we put in place. Facts on MLA expenses are now 
transparent. Committees once closed to the public and that ever 
vigilant, Conrad Black press are now open. 
 
The Premier and his cabinet are the most visible and available 
ministers in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Administratively and bureaucratically this 
government, strives to be open and answerable to the people we 
serve. Can we improve? Sure. Will we? You bet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — But openness is not just about bookkeeping, 
though that’s nothing to sneer at. Openness and accountability 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

are also about making representative government work. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that this government and this 
caucus does just that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Each MLA in this caucus makes it a priority 
to communicate with their constituents — a communication that 
works both ways. Through public accountability meetings, 
phone calls, neighbourhood canvassing, information sheets, and 
regular newsletters, we listen to what the people are saying. 
And those messages find their way into the decision-making 
centre of this government. That centre is us, Mr. Speaker — the 
elected representatives of the people — and we do just that. 
 
We are a team that listens to the opposition, Mr. Speaker. That 
might be carrying openness close to the edge but we recognize 
that no one has a monopoly on good ideas. In this Chamber and 
in our duties, we know we are stronger if we have a strong 
opposition. We’ll be able to test their mettle this session, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — For instance, members of the public and 
members opposite asked for the recognition of Betaseron and 
got it. They urged caution on certain Crown investments and 
were heeded. The electorate appreciates and understands that 
we’re all strong players in this democracy. I grant you we can’t 
accept all their suggestions, which the people of Saskatchewan 
say to that one — amen. But we do listen. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have outlined the disciplined way in which 
we have organized for decision-making. Each of us has a voice 
and a vote on matters that comes before the whole. We are all 
valued members of this team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — If we’re still not open enough, what would 
the members opposite do? Well we have only example of their 
past deeds to show us their definition of openness. So which 
party should we start with first? Which beacon of light to show 
us the way? The Liberals? 
 
I remind you that it is the Liberal leader who said that open and 
accountable government is far too dicey to leave to the people. 
Health boards, he told us, should be run by highly educated and 
highly knowledgeable people whom he would undoubtedly 
appoint himself. That is not the attitude of one who believes in 
openness. The back-room dispatching of the previous Liberal 
leader engineered by the current leader — well, let’s just say 
that’s not democracy’s finest hour. 
 
Woodrow Lloyd once said that the footprints in the sands of 
time left by Saskatchewan Liberals would be distinguished only 
by the fact that they point off in all directions. Not much has 
changed since Woodrow’s day. 
 
(1530) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Well thank goodness then for the new Tory 
Party says the good doctor. Compared to them the Liberals are 
the stepchildren of Ms. Manners. What is the new Tory Party’s 
concept of openness? 
 
Well here we don’t have to embellish a bit. We don’t have to 
exaggerate for effect. The simple facts provide their own 
rhetoric. 
 
Fact one. We now have an official opposition party which has 
not one single member elected representing that party. Not one 
member elected to represent that party. At the low point — if 
ever there was one in the history of democracy. 
 
Fact two. Half the new caucus signed an oath of loyalty to their 
previous party scant weeks before they broke the oath to join 
the new Tories — new or old Tories, I’m not sure. They broke 
their oath with such alacrity that some people suggested to me 
the name should be BOOP, or break our oath party. 
 
Fact three, fact three. The rest of the opposition is represented 
by the quote from the member from Moosomin, the member 
from Moosomin who said crossing the floor would seem to be 
rank opportunism. 
 
Fact four. By their own admission, the new party has no 
principles, no ideology. They say to the people: you tell us what 
you want us to be and that’s what we’ll be. 
 
That adds up to me to say no shame — just a desperate longing 
for power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Fact five. The new Tory Party has been 
endorsed by two Grants — Devine and Schmidt. We’re waiting 
to hear from Mulroney. Need I say more? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has had one experience with a party 
of the right, a party that took advantage of the trust of the 
people. They called themselves Tories. But as one long-time 
Progressive Conservative Tory said, they are not Conservatives 
— they were a bunch of opportunists. 
 
Fifteen billion dollars later, the Saskatchewan people had had 
enough and said, never again. We learned our lesson and we are 
reminded of it every day — every day — because the portion 
that we pay on interest on the debt every day is $2 million. 
Approximately $2 million each and every day. What a reminder 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . What a reminder, what an 
experience that was for us. One that we’d like to forget and we 
can’t. 
 
But as the film actor, Uma Thurman said, Uma Thurman tells 
us that’s it’s okay to forget the experience as long as you 
remember the lesson. 
 
Now the reel has been rewound. The same movie is playing and 
the new elected . . . Well by who? The new, unelected 
opposition is claiming that it’s something new because they 
have a new alias. Mr. Speaker, I’ve been to camp. I remember 
the old camp song: “Second verse, same as the first; could be 
better, but it’s going to be worse.” 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Something is clear though. The new party 
does have an idea. They said, if it comes from Saskatchewan, 
it’s bad. If Saskatchewan has a way of doing things, that’s the 
wrong way. If there’s grass growing somewhere else, it must be 
greener than here. 
 
This contempt for Saskatchewan at the core of this retread party 
was best expressed by a member from Melfort recently when he 
said the Saskatchewan people are, and I quote, “too tired to 
change their ways.” Is the new name of the old Tory Party their 
way of mocking the province we all hold dear, the province we 
love? 
 
I say that Saskatchewan people know exactly who and what 
they’ve been voting for, which is the reason why the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and NDP have won 
10 of the last 14 elections. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Not too tired, just too smart to trust the Tory 
Party under any name — under any name — retread or 
otherwise. Speaking of names, Mr. Speaker, most 
Saskatchewan people were fairly amused at the effrontery of the 
Tories renaming themselves. 
 
A group that could only get 150 people out to its founding 
convention, have held its constituency meetings in phone 
booths across the province, is not exactly a prairie fire. Yet it 
attempts to take the name of our province. That is not 
presumptuous, Mr. Speaker; it’s just downright silly. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Arrogant. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Arrogant. That’s right. Not silly, arrogant. 
 
The better name for this collection of floor-crossers and 
name-changers would be, I suggest, the Panamanian party. 
Because if ever there was a party that flew the flag of 
convenience, that’s the one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — So, Mr. Speaker, open, accountable 
government on one hand, the back room on the other — day 
and night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the author and journalist, David Halberstam, 
recently wrote a book about the American civil rights 
movement of the 1950s and the 1960s. He wrote the book, he 
says, because, quote: 
 

“Today there’s all too much coverage of pseudo events 
about extraordinarily inauthentic people doing inauthentic 
things. I wanted to recall the remarkable moments when 
seemingly ordinary people joined together to change the 
country.” 

 
His book is about many ordinary people with a few 
extraordinary leaders who change the nature of that society for 
ever and at the same time change the way people think about 

their society. 
 
It’s not an exaggeration to suggest that something similar has 
happened in this province. Under the leadership of Tommy 
Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd, Allan Blakeney, and our current 
Premier, Saskatchewan people have done a remarkable job of 
changing this province into the kind of society . . . a kind of 
society that’s built on economic fairness and social equality. 
 
A great thinker once said, “Philosophers try to understand the 
world, but the point is to change it.” Mr. Speaker, we changed 
the world and there’s much more that we can do. We’re getting 
there. It’s a never-ending process, but we’re working on it. 
 
Your Honour’s address demonstrates that to the people of this 
province. It announces the continuation of the plan that we 
announced in 1996, the first session of this term of office. 
 
First, of course, we have to heal the wounds left by the previous 
Tory government. We’ve had to work hard to restore the 
credibility in government and we’ve had to work equally hard 
to restore the credit. We did that. We had to save medicare from 
collapse; we did that. We had to revamp our education system; 
we did that. 
 
The themes of our first term were to restore, repair, renew, and 
revamp. With the guidance and encouragement of the people of 
Saskatchewan, we made some tough decisions — not always 
popular ones, but they were necessary — such as renegotiating 
both the upgrader deals. 
 
The theme of this term is building on the restored foundation to 
prepare for the new century. We do that by investing in people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — We do that by building on our common 
values — values established at the beginning of our journey, 
values of shared opportunity and shared responsibility that are 
the tap root of the Saskatchewan character. 
 
So far, Mr. Speaker, our investment portfolio is sound. Our 
credit rating again is a straight A from all the rating agencies. 
We’re expecting once again to have above-average economic 
growth. We’re moving along quite well. For instance, retail 
sales were up more than 9 per cent in 1997, which follows a 
similar gain from the year before. New vehicle sales are up by 
9.5 per cent. Farm income was up more than 5 per cent. Oil and 
gas drilling licences set an all-time record. Potash production 
was up by 18 per cent and gold by 40 per cent. 
 
Look at any of the strategic sectors we’ve identified for our 
economy and what do you see? Growth. Manufacturing 
shipments, housing, building permits, are up; ag bio-tech. These 
numbers might sound a bit abstract, Mr. Speaker, but here are 
some that really count. More people are working in 
Saskatchewan than ever before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — That’s Saskatchewan people working at 
Saskatchewan jobs, supporting Saskatchewan families and 
contributing to their Saskatchewan communities. In 1997 more 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

people were working than ever before, and in January, 19,200 
more people were working than January a year ago. 
 
And there’s more, Mr. Speaker. Our unemployment rate has 
been either the lowest or the second lowest every single month. 
In January it was 5.6 per cent. 
 
One more number, Mr. Speaker, because in many ways it’s the 
most encouraging. The number of employed youth in 
Saskatchewan between the ages of 15 and 24 increased by 
10,000 in January of this year over last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — The unemployment rate for youth dropped 
from 16.5 per cent to 10.6. This is the best in the country. It’s 
still too high but it’s going the right way. Now couple this with 
the fact that our population has grown steadily over the last year 
and every quarter since 1992, and you can see we’re doing 
fairly well. The economy is humming, people are working, and 
people are being trained for the new jobs which are coming in 
the new century. I want to say a bit more about that in a 
moment. 
 
A healthy economy is important. Democratic socialists have 
always known this. We recognize that the bottom line is 
important. But unlike the members opposite — we hear them 
chirping — we consider a healthy balance sheet to be not the 
end but the means. It’s a stepping stone to improving our lives 
and all the lives of our citizens. 
 
(1545) 
 
Our investment portfolio, Mr. Speaker, has six pockets. Not 
one, six, and they’re connected. Effective health care involves 
far more than hospital beds and operating rooms. Similarly, a 
healthy society only begins with a robust economy. We intend 
to keep our economy robust, and that is why the first two parts 
of our investment have to do with jobs, training, and education. 
 
Jobs I have already mentioned. To ensure that there would be 
jobs for tomorrow we’re building on our Saskatchewan training 
strategy that was announced last year. To complement JobStart 
and Future Skills, Saskatchewan has recently signed an 
agreement with the federal government which gives 
Saskatchewan the total responsibility to design and deliver 
employment programs and services in our province. 
 
The labour market agreement is a new partnership. It fits right 
into the Saskatchewan training strategy. Saskatchewan will now 
be able to design and develop a complete array of 
made-in-Saskatchewan employment programs and services. 
These will be formatted to suit the needs of our workers and 
those of the provincial labour market. 
 
As a parent of two young people ready to enter that 
market-place, I’m happy to see our government facing the 
future, facing a new economy, and not retreating from it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, it’s important to point out that 
we are not talking here about government decreeing. We’re not 

talking about decreeing from on high. The Saskatchewan 
training strategy is not a government-imposed program; rather it 
envisions an integrated regional delivery system that’s going to 
be throughout the province to work with community partners to 
plan and deliver training and labour market services. 
 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) and our regional colleges will work very closely 
with Saskatchewan career and employment centres to ensure 
career services are integrated and available. And they will 
continue to deliver high quality education and training 
programs. 
 
As well, employers’ needs will be met by linking students and 
workers with employers through the employment programs and 
through supporting sectoral and regional planning. 
 
This agreement supports the province’s commitment to invest 
in people and to build on effective partnerships with employers 
and other training and employment partners. In short, Mr. 
Speaker, it supports our commitment to invest in people and to 
build on effective partnerships designed by and for 
Saskatchewan workers and employers. 
 
We all know that the one overriding fact about the market-place 
of today and tomorrow is that it changes constantly. The jobs of 
tomorrow, some of them haven’t been invented yet. Most of 
today’s students will have to be trained and retrained. Many 
people in our labour force today will be trained and retrained 
many, many times during their careers. That’s why our training 
strategy is flexible, able to react swiftly to changing market 
needs. And that’s another advantage to having a made-at-home 
plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, we’re investing in people by 
investing in health care, something that CCF and NDP 
governments have been doing for 54 years. 
 
I thank the member from Prince Albert Carlton for giving his 
member’s statement on Dr. Hjertaas because we can never 
forget the vision and heroism of our medical pioneers like Dr. 
Hjertaas. Nor can we ever forget that the enemies of medicare 
are the same today as they were then. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Our Premier tells us and points out to the 
opposition that it’s Mr. Rock who is telling them to join with 
him and enunciate to the nation that medicare funding by the 
federal government has dropped from 50 cents on the dollar to 
13 cents on the dollar. 
 
They stand in this Assembly and ask us what we’re going to do 
to save medicare, and at the same time, just refuse to recognize 
what their federal cousins are doing. And their other federal 
cousins are asking them to help us. Will they? No, Mr. Speaker. 
They are going to play the short-term politics and they are 
going to bring it to this Assembly and say it lays on our door. 
They are not going to look to their cousins in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell a little fable called The Wolf at the 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

Door. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is this referring to Tommy Douglas’ 
stuff? 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — I’ll let you decide, sir. 
 

Mr. and Mrs. Sheep were sitting in their living room with 
their daughter, their daughter who was as pretty as she was 
edible. Then there was a knock at the door. “It’s a 
gentleman caller,” said the daughter. “It’s the Fuller Brush 
Man,” said the mother. The cautious father got up and 
looked out the window and said, “It’s the wolf, I can see 
his tail.” “Don’t be silly,” said the mother. “It’s the Fuller 
Brush man and that’s his brush.” And she went to the door 
and opened it, and the wolf came in and ran away with the 
daughter. “You were right after all,” admitted the mother, 
sheepishly. 
 
Moral: mother doesn’t always know best. 

 
Courtesy of James Thurber. 
 
I was reminded of this story, this parable, when I heard the 
Liberals announce they were going to make health care their 
issue during this session. The party of two-tiered medicine; the 
party of a vision of health care that is at least 50 years old; the 
party that would restore the 500 local boards because the 30 
present ones are too many. 
 
Now that’s their logic, Mr. Speaker, it’s not mine. The party 
that would ignore studies by highly-educated and 
knowledgeable people that their leader talks about, and they 
would save the Plains, they say. Now at the same time they’re 
talking about implementing Australians’ regional health model. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been there to see the closure of major 
hospitals and facilities — not to be converted into wellness 
centres to be closed. At the same time they’re saying save the 
Plains, they’re saying somehow to people, we’ll implement the 
regional model from Australia which says close the hospitals. 
Which is it? That’s not my logic, Mr. Speaker, that’s theirs. 
 
If there was ever a wolf at the door of medicare, it’s the Liberal 
Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, let’s not be fooled by the 
Liberal and the Tory wolves at the door. Rather than going 
backwards with health care, we’re going forward. The 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network is just one example 
of that, and I’m happy to see its announcement in this throne 
speech. This is truly laying the infrastructure for the medicare 
of the next century. 
 
I said earlier that a healthy bottom line is really a springboard to 
a vibrant society. I am therefore most pleased that this 
government is investing in people by investing even more in 
those programs that affect Saskatchewan families, especially 
Saskatchewan children. 
 
One of the main reasons I chose to run as a New Democrat was 

the position I held on the board of inquiry — chairing the Board 
of Inquiry into Hunger for Regina, Mr. Speaker. The Tories 
were in government at the time and they were saying there are 
no hungry children in Saskatchewan. A Mr. Schmidt said the 
simple solution was that their mothers should just grow bigger 
gardens. The problem would go away. Their response: have the 
community make a few muffins in the morning and things will 
be better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, none of us in this nation and province of plenty 
should rest until we’ve completely eradicated the plight of child 
poverty. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — It’s a persistent thorn in our social 
conscience — the most glaring example we have that human 
nature is imperfect and our institution is therefore more 
imperfect. 
 
We have pledged to do better. Programs associated with child 
action plan have improved the situation. The new initiatives 
announced in this speech will help even more families and more 
children. They will help by providing the kind of support that 
builds opportunities instead of dependence for individuals, that 
provides supports to help people become independent. We need 
to break the welfare trap that our social structures have so 
neatly set for these people. We need to change our system so 
that people are encouraged to work and are rewarded for that 
work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the national child benefit program which the 
federal government is finally joining is one part of that plan. 
The Saskatchewan employment supplement, the Saskatchewan 
child benefit, the family health benefits, the provincial training 
allowance, and the training programs mentioned earlier — 
they’re all part of the redesign of our social programs which 
will promote independence and move us closer to dealing with 
the root of child poverty. 
 
So I believe there’s cause for optimism here. Of course all 
children and all people have the right to live in safe 
communities. They have the right to live in communities that 
will move them from dependence to independence. And this 
speech has those initiatives contained within it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — The speech also has initiatives that will 
protect the average citizen. It talks about changing the young 
offenders’ Act being one of those initiatives. Because we know, 
in a very few cases, a young offender needs to be dealt with 
severely and the authorities will now be able to exercise this 
option. 
 
But I hope that all thoughtful members of this Assembly want 
to state openly that although the problem is severe, it does not 
characterize the 99.5 per cent of our youth who are just darn 
good kids. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Investing in people means our transportation 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

infrastructure. I know other members will want to speak on this 
so I’m only going to say a few things. One, it strikes me as very 
strange that a former federal Liberal cabinet minister, one Doug 
Young, seemingly can do more for the roads of his province 
than our own federal cabinet minister, Mr. Goodale. 
 
A Leader-Post article from January 31 said that: “Federal 
budget won’t address highway twinning, says Goodale.” And it 
didn’t. Not 1 cent for Canada’s national highway system. 
However the Toronto Globe and Mail of February 5 points out 
that Mr. Young, when he was minister, set aside $32 million for 
the New Brunswick portion of the Trans-Canada. And it’s being 
spent by the Maritime road development corporation as we 
speak. It’s now chaired by Mr. Young who was freed by a New 
Democratic in the last election so he could work in the private 
sector. 
 
Maybe we could trade Mr. Goodale and two unknown named 
players — we’ll name them later — for Mr. Young. 
 
Second, we’ve heard this, but it’s important to repeat. Our a 
hundred and eighty-five thousand kilometre network of roads 
and highways is enough to circle the globe four and a half 
times. Only 6 per cent of those roads carry 70 per cent of the 
traffic. A friend, which shall remain nameless, named Ted, 
drove from Regina to Radville the other day. From Corinne to 
Radville, a distance of roughly a hundred kilometres, he met 
less than one vehicle every five minutes and passed exactly one 
going the same direction. 
 
I mention that, Mr. Speaker, just to remind us of the difficulty 
our Highways department faces when deciding where to put its 
scarce resource. And we’re hearing that at SARM as well. At 
SARM they’re saying, we want to spend money on our 
roadways. And they have priorities. Others are saying, put your 
money into twinning the highways. 
 
It’s very difficult, when the resources are scarce, to decide 
where those resources will be put down or laid to work on our 
highways. That’s why we rely on communities, we rely on 
cooperation, and we will be relying heavily on our community 
partners working together to establish a transportation policy in 
this, the post-grain transportation subsidy era. We’ve got those 
partners working now and will be calling them together to help 
us establish where those dollar priorities should lie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our program of investing in people is a good one. 
It is workable and it’s working. It’s practical and it is local. It 
builds on the strength of Saskatchewan people and it takes 
inspiration from them. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think of my public duties and my faith stance in 
life as closely intertwined. My faith informs and strengthens my 
public resolve. I sometimes forget — and I shouldn’t — that the 
roots of my party are solidly within the social gospel and 
therefore it’s no surprise that the language of this legislature 
and its documents often echo that of the good book and vice 
versa. 
 
The second great commandment, after all, says that we should 
love our neighbour as ourselves. I take that to mean that we 

should work to provide the amenities we would like for 
ourselves to everyone, which is what I believe we are doing — 
we’re struggling to accomplish here — with the tools of 
government that we are provided to work with. 
 
The story has been often told and need not be repeated in detail 
here, but the hard lesson we’ve learned over the years in this 
invigorating but imposing environment is that together we can 
do much, alone we are at the mercy of stronger forces. Hence 
our development of society that treasures the individual but 
nurtures the community. Ours is an elemental land that teaches 
us elemental lessons. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, one of our many fine writers, Saskatoon’s 
Edward McCourt, wrote of his home, and I quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan prairies are a world that enables us to 
see ourselves clearly in relation not only to our fellow 
humans but to those values that are inherent not in the 
many but in the one. It is a world that persuades us to 
accept the fact of our own curious duality — that we are at 
once nothing and everything, at once the dust of the earth 
that God made it . . . Nowhere, I think, is it possible for us 
to know better our littleness and our greatness. For this is a 
world which objectifies the great words birth and love and 
death and God and eternity, casts them in a scale that exalts 
their grandeur and diminishes their terror. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have spent all but two years of my life here. I 
understand McCourt’s awe at our home and I share his love for 
it. Like him I use my allotted talents to try to repay some of 
what I’ve been given. It is my obvious and profound duty to 
give to my children and theirs something of what I have 
received today. 
 
Yesterday we heard His Honour read the throne from the speech 
. . . the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, with its emphasis 
on jobs, training, health, families, the environment, the social 
infrastructure. It’s a sound document. Last evening I read a 
prayer which I think reflects our secular desire to love our 
neighbours. It goes in part like this: 
 

To all nations, grant unity, peace and concord. And to all 
people, give dignity, food and shelter. Grant us abundant 
harvest, strength and skill to conserve the resources of the 
earth and the wisdom to use them well. Come to the help 
of all who are in danger, necessity and trouble, protect all 
who travel by land, air or water, and show your pity on all 
prisoners and captives. Strengthen and preserve all young 
children and comfort the aged and lonely. Defend and 
provide for refugees and the homeless, the unemployed 
and all who are desolate and oppressed. Heal those who are 
sick in body or mind and give skill and compassion to all 
who care for them. 
 

In this one area of our lives, we work in unison to change the 
minds and hearts of all people so that this prayer and others like 
it can be answered. 
 
In this part of our lives we legislate and budget what we can to 
provide the practical tools to move toward the same ends. We 
all know not all our prayers are answered, not all our secular 
plans succeed. We do what we can do. The same is true for all 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

of us. 
 
The program outlined in the Speech from the Throne is, I 
believe, responsible, progressive, prudent, and practical because 
I believe it’s a solid blueprint to take us closer to the next 
century and because I’m confident in the ability of this 
government to follow this blueprint. 
 
I am happy to move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member 
from Estevan, a humble address be presented to His Honour, 
the Lieutenant Governor, as follows: 
` 

To His Honour, the Honourable John E. Wiebe, Lieutenant 
Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased and 
honoured today to second the motion just read by the member 
from Regina Wascana Plains. I am happy to have the 
opportunity to offer my support for the Speech from the Throne 
that we heard yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech laid out this government’s 
vision for the future — a future which includes commitment to 
health, education, and social services, a balanced approach to 
fiscal management and continued economic prosperity for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I support this vision wholeheartedly. It is a vision in which this 
government takes great pride. It is a vision that I am proud to 
take home to my constituents in Estevan. Mr. Speaker, my 
constituents sent me here to represent them, to ensure that their 
priorities, their aspirations, are reflected in this government’s 
plans for the future. This is a great honour and I do not take my 
duty lightly. I thank my constituents for their continued input 
and support. 
 
I am pleased that there is so much in this throne speech that my 
constituents can feel good about. I am also pleased to report that 
my constituency, like so much of Saskatchewan, has plenty of 
reasons to feel positive about our future. Mr. Speaker, the 
economy in my constituency is based primarily on farming, 
coal mining, and oil and gas production. Our economy has been 
flourishing and I believe will continue to do so. 
 
One reason for this bright future is the recent changes to our 
province’s oil royalty structure, as was recently announced by 
the Minister of Energy and Mines. This announcement is 
meeting with favourable response in my constituency and 
around the province. For example, Carl Henneberg, 
Saskatchewan chairman of the Small Explorers and Producers 
Association of Canada, is quoted in The Estevan Mercury as 

saying the following about this government: 
 

They are doing a good job and I think the industry in 
general is pleased with the package. They know that this 
isn’t the end-all or be-all on the government side, but I 
think it is a good step and a proper step where we find 
ourselves. 
 

One result of the success in the oil patch is that, and again I 
quote from The Mercury, “the Estevan residential real estate 
business is booming.” Yes, Mr. Speaker, Estevan was the hot 
real estate market in Saskatchewan last year. 
 
The Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce recently conducted 
its annual survey and they found that the majority of 
Saskatchewan residents believe the economy is improving, and 
that it will continue to improve. The Estevan Chamber of 
Commerce year-end survey found similarly positive results. 
Business owners and managers indicated a reasonably or very 
optimistic economic outlook for the Estevan community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — But although our province is doing well, this is 
not a government that is simply content to rest on its laurels. 
No, yesterday’s throne speech clearly demonstrates that this 
government is looking toward the future. The writer C.S. Lewis 
once said the following about the future: “Everyone reaches it at 
the rate of 60 minutes an hour, whatever he does, wherever he 
be.” 
 
This is the truth. We cannot stop the future from coming. We 
must prepare for it. We must have a clear vision of the province 
that we would like our children to inherit, and put measures in 
place to ensure that future will be realized. 
 
The throne speech reflects that vision. It tells us that this 
government will continue to take a common sense approach to 
managing the finances of our province. It tells us that although 
the future looks bright, the world is ever changing and so our 
watchwords must always be, caution and balance. 
 
You know all this talk of change reminds me of a speech I gave 
in this Assembly a couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker. I was 
speaking about, that I could even see political change. And as I 
looked across this floor, I said I could see Liberals that wanted 
to be Tories. I said I could see Tories that wanted to be 
Reformers. And I said I could see Liberals that wanted to be 
Liberals but even the Liberals didn’t want them. 
 
Now, a short two years later, look at what we have. Liberals 
that are Tories; Tories that are Reformers; and we have even 
more Liberals that want to be Liberals but the Liberals don’t 
want them. Now I don’t want to have to take the blame or the 
credit for planting this seed of suggestion in such a fertile field, 
Mr. Speaker, because I’m sure nobody wants to take the credit 
for that crop of weeds over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — But I want to make it clear that when this 
government talks of change, it is a very different sort than what 
has occupied the members across the floor. We are talking 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

about looking ahead to the changing realities that face our 
province as we move into the new millennium, and having a 
plan in place to allow Saskatchewan to thrive and prosper 
whatever the future might hold. 
 
The centrepiece of this plan is our strategy for investing in 
people. Our investing in people agenda is the map which guides 
us on our own course toward our bright future. Mr. Speaker, the 
first component of our plan to invest in people is jobs. There 
was a statement in the throne speech yesterday that I think bears 
repeating: more people are working in Saskatchewan than at 
any time in our history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — And it’s a full day’s work; a full week’s work. 
Part-time work is down; full-time is up. Saskatchewan 
continues to have the lowest unemployment rate in the nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — And that job growth is happening where it ought 
to be happening — in the private sectors, in the cooperatives. In 
manufacturing we have 3,300 more jobs than a year ago. In 
financial services there are 4,500 more jobs. And it’s especially 
encouraging to see that more young people are finding good, 
full-time jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much has changed since the dark days of the late 
1980s when my colleagues across the floor, now operating 
under an assumed name, were in power. Today young people 
are finding that Saskatchewan is a place where they can begin 
their careers, where they can put down roots. They feel 
confident about Saskatchewan’s economy and about our 
province’s future. That is why 1,000 more young people moved 
into the province last year than moved out. 
 
(1615) 
 
Youth employment posted an increase of 10,000 from January 
of ’97 to January of ’98. Summer employment for young people 
is growing as well. The summer student employment program, 
Partnerships ’97, created 22,072 summer jobs for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are always comparing us to 
Alberta. They’re always saying, why don’t you do it like they 
do it in Alberta? That leaves me with the impression that if they 
get elected they’re going to do it like they do in it Alberta. 
 
This headline caught my eye the other day. “Alberta MLAs 
keep expenses secret.” I wonder if they intend to govern the 
same way in Saskatchewan. I think the Tories got in some 
trouble for doing that same thing here, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order. It 
would appear that the hon. members have many, many strong 
feelings and ideas in their hearts. And as good luck will have it, 
we have a long time to debate in the Speech from the Throne, 
and I’ll ask all hon. members to allow the hon. member for 
Estevan to be heard in his remarks. 
 

Mr. Ward: — Mr. Speaker, social assistance case-loads have 
been dropping steadily in Saskatchewan. Clearly our job 
strategy is paying off. This government will continue our work 
of ensuring that Saskatchewan people have access to good jobs 
right here in our province. And as jobs are created, we must 
ensure that Saskatchewan workers are equipped with the skills 
necessary to fill these jobs. That’s why the throne speech also 
outlines this government’s commitment to education and 
training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the labour market is constantly changing and 
Saskatchewan workers need skills which are relevant to our 
new information economy. That’s why this government has 
developed the Saskatchewan training strategy. Under the 
strategy, approximately 13,000 Saskatchewan residents will 
receive skills training or retraining in the year ’97-98 to assist in 
meeting industry skills demand. The training strategy has a 
number of components. 
 
For example, the apprenticeship programs: 2,620 will benefit 
from these programs in ’97-98. JobStart, Future Skills: it is 
estimated that in ’97-98, 4,000 people will receive training 
under this program. And SIAST annually trains approximately 
5,000 people in technical skills required by Saskatchewan 
industry. The employment success of graduates from this 
training was over 90 per cent in ’96 and ’97. 
 
And there are many other exciting initiatives as well, including 
job-training programs that are taking place off site from the 
major SIAST campuses. 
 
Working in partnership with industry allows us to provide 
students with hands-on job training that will equip them to 
make a smooth transition between school and the work force. 
Education is a vital investment that we make in the future. 
That’s why this government will continue to support public 
education at all levels — K to 12, and post- secondary, our 
universities, and SIAST. 
 
Investing in people is also about health care, Mr. Speaker. As 
the throne speech stressed, this government believes that the 
Saskatchewan value of cooperation is vital to the continued 
growth and renewal of our health care system. It’s about 
working in partnerships. Partnerships with nurses, doctors, 
communities, and health boards. Partnerships that will ensure 
that our health care system is effective, efficient, and 
accountable. There are many examples of just how effective this 
partnership approach can be. 
 
Saskatchewan still has more hospitals per capita than the 
national average. The waiting time for surgeries is consistent 
with those found across Canada. And rural residents now have 
better access to day surgery than they did in 1991. Effective 
health care is not only about caring for people when they are 
sick. There are many aspects to health, and so Saskatchewan 
Health has been focusing on prevention and providing more 
community-based services. 
 
And unlike the Tories, with a new-name party, this government 
remains committed to the sacred trust of medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

Mr. Ward: — The throne speech also outlines our 
commitments to families and children. Mr. Speaker, child 
poverty cannot and must not be tolerated in our society. It is a 
problem which needs solutions — solutions that are practical, 
workable, and which move beyond just talking about the 
problem, of tackling it head on. That’s why I’m proud that our 
province has taken a leadership role in the fight against child 
poverty. 
 
The Premier was a vocal advocate for the new national child 
benefit. He led the way for this important national initiative 
which will provide tax credit for working poor families that are 
trying to earn a living but are finding themselves walking the 
tightrope between work and welfare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Our award-winning action plan for children is 
another way in which we will continue to help young people 
living in our province’s inner cities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, children are the future of this province. They are 
also the most vulnerable members of our society. We must 
ensure that each and every child has an opportunity to develop 
to their fullest potential. 
 
This government will continue to be an advocate of children — 
not only in Saskatchewan, but throughout Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Finally, investing in people is about building 
and maintaining our transportation infrastructure. It is 
unfortunate that the Liberals’ cousins in Ottawa have turned 
such a blind eye to the transportation system here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It is unfortunate that they have stood by and watched as the 
railways aggressively abandoned branch lines across our 
province, crippling our rural communities. This massive 
rail-line abandonment is adding an enormous stress to our 
highway system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 185,000 kilometres of roads and 
highways in our province, and as has been stated, strung 
together they would circle the world four and a half times. But 
the federal government will not do its part to help maintain and 
improve this extensive road system. 
 
In fact over the last 10 years, the federal government has only 
contributed 3.4 per cent of the total spending for Saskatchewan 
roads while the province has contributed 96.6 per cent. The 
federal government refuses to provide for a national, 
cost-shared highway program, and the Liberal Party here in 
Saskatchewan is too busy circulating petitions to spend any 
time convincing their federal counterparts to help fund 
Canada’s national highway system. 
 
Our government has committed 2.5 billion to highways over the 
next 10 years. And since even this is not enough to accomplish 
all that we have to do, we will be actively consulting the people 
of Saskatchewan’s communities on how best to target that 
investment. 

Mr. Speaker, one thing that makes this investment in people 
possible — continued fiscal integrity. Just over a week from 
now, this government will introduce its fifth consecutive 
balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Clearly our balanced approach to fiscal 
management is paying off. We have been able to invest in 
program spending, delivered tax relief, and we’ve even been 
able to start chipping away at the Tory debt. We have 
established a plan whereby the total debt will be eliminated as 
soon as possible. This is good news because it will reduce the 
interest we have to spend each year servicing the debt. 
 
Nesbitt Burns has stated, and I quote: “Saskatchewan’s 
turnaround is nothing short of remarkable.” 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — That’s why all four major North American credit 
rating agencies now place Saskatchewan credit-worthiness in 
the A bracket. Our province has been able to achieve these 
successes because we have worked together as partners — a 
partnership of business, labour, community, government, and 
many other groups working together for Saskatchewan’s future. 
And we will continue to work together in the months and years 
ahead; to work together for the benefit of Saskatchewan 
communities and families; to use the successes we have 
achieved as a bridge to an even brighter future. 
 
Before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I would like to discuss a couple 
of other areas that were touched in the throne speech. The first 
is our government’s position on the Young Offenders Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people in Saskatchewan have concerns 
about Young Offenders Act as it currently stands. They feel that 
it is not serving as a sufficient deterrent to youth crime. They 
are calling on the federal government to strengthen the Act. 
This government is listening to the concerns of the people of 
Saskatchewan. We share the view that steps must be taken to 
ensure that youth offenders are dealt with effectively and 
appropriately by the courts and our communities. 
 
We believe that the Young Offenders Act needs to get tougher 
on violent and chronic youth offenders. That’s why the 
ministers of Justice and Social Services have written to the 
federal Justice minister, calling on her to make important 
changes to the Young Offenders Act. Those changes include: 
public protection must be recognized as a primary purpose of 
the Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Youth courts should be allowed to authorize 
publication of the names of convicted, violent, or chronic young 
offenders when this is in the public interest; the courts should 
be able to release information about young people who pose a 
risk to the community; and we need to strengthen the ability to 
transfer serious, violent, and chronic young offenders to adult 
court. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes — 



March 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

and I want to stress this — that the vast majority of young 
people in this province are good, law-abiding kids. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Less than one-half of one per cent of young 
people are in young offender facilities, and the majority of those 
offending youth are in facilities for non-violent offences. A 
balanced and fair approach is what is needed to deal with youth 
crime, Mr. Speaker. Our first priority must be to protect 
law-abiding Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — We hope that the federal Liberals will listen to 
our province’s call for a tougher, more effective Young 
Offenders Act. 
 
Finally, I want to talk about our province’s Crown corporations. 
Mr. Speaker, our Crowns are often portrayed unfavourably by 
members of the opposition, so I think it’s important to remind 
them of the proud history of accomplishment and service 
possessed by our Crowns. 
 
Saskatchewan people want convenient access to quality service 
when it comes to telephones, electricity, natural gas, or auto 
insurance. And they want to access that service at the best price. 
That’s why I’m pleased that our Crowns are so competitive. 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) has the lowest auto 
insurance rates in Canada. SaskPower rates have been frozen 
until at least the year 2000. 
 
To demonstrate how competitive SaskPower rates are, let me 
offer the following example. Someone in Saskatoon pays $64 
for 750 kilowatts of hour . . . of power. That same power costs 
$58 in Edmonton, 66 in Thunder Bay, and $73 in Halifax. 
 
SaskTel has the second lowest rates in the country in both rural 
and urban service. SaskTel’s rates are more than 20 per cent 
below the national average, and long-distance rates have 
dropped by over 50 per cent since 1993. 
 
SaskEnergy offers the second lowest energy rates in the 
country. It costs the average family about $61 to heat their 
home here in Saskatchewan. That same heat costs $74 in 
Winnipeg, $72 in Vancouver, $76 in Toronto, and $130 in 
Montreal. 
 
Even with rates that are among the lowest in Canada, our 
Crown corporations earn profits that are comparable to 
privately owned utilities in other provinces. And half of the 
profits earned by the Crowns are paid back to the province to 
help pay for the health care, the education, and the highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — The services offered by the Crowns cannot be 
provided for free, but here in Saskatchewan our Crowns provide 
better services at better prices than private companies would. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — And in order for our Crowns to . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I’m coming to that. 
 
And in order for our Crowns to continue providing top service 
to the people of this Saskatchewan, they need to find additional 
business outside our border. Thanks to the Free Trade 
Agreement, Saskatchewan can no longer prevent other 
corporations from knocking on our door here. If they are to 
survive, our Crowns must go knocking on other doors for 
business. 
 
And I would like to quote an editorial from the Langenburg 
Journal: 
 

Why is it a good investment to hand your hard-earned 
dollars to a mutual fund to invest in hopefully profitable 
business in and outside of Canada, and it’s a bad 
investment for Crown corporations to essentially do the 
same thing, again with your hard-earned dollars? 
 
If the Crowns did what the opposition parties wanted them 
to do, for example, take some of their current profits and 
return them to the public in the form of reduced rates or 
outright rebates, then we would only be hastening the 
financial crisis awaiting the Crowns. It’s a much wiser 
strategy to leave the money with the Crowns in order to 
give them some freedom of movement in developing future 
business strategies. 
 

(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this quote demonstrates that the media 
understands the reality currently facing our Crown corporations. 
Why is it so difficult for the members of the opposition to 
understand? Perhaps it is because the main desire of the 
opposition is to defeat this government and they will do or say 
almost anything in order to achieve that goal. 
 
Marcel Proust once said: “There is nothing like desire for 
preventing the thing one says from bearing any resemblance to 
what one has in mind.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition’s desire to form the government is 
so strong that they continue to deny the new economic realities 
that are facing our Crown corporations. The truth is our Crowns 
are governed by the fundamental principles of universality, 
reliability, quality, and reasonable cost. Our Crown 
corporations do, and will continue to, provide us with quality 
service at competitive rates and they will change and grow to 
meet the reality of today’s economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Mr. Speaker, with the throne speech we have 
presented our plan to the people of Saskatchewan. We have 
promised to continue our common sense approach to managing 
our province’s economy. We have promised to maintain our 
province’s fiscal integrity, and we have promised to continue 
investing in people. 
 
There is a Chinese proverb that tells us: “One generation plants 
the trees, another gets the shade.” Our government is laying the 
foundation to ensure that our children and our grandchildren 
will inherit the stable, secure, and prosperous future that they 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1998 

deserve. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second the motion in 
support of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
I move this debate be now adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member has moved that debate on 
the resolution before us be adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I move the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:33 p.m. 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 Bjornerud ..........................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 D’Autremont.....................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 Heppner.............................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 Osika..................................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 Hillson................................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 McPherson ........................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 Aldridge.............................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 Belanger ............................................................................................................................................................................................8 
 McLane..............................................................................................................................................................................................8 
 Julé ....................................................................................................................................................................................................8 
 Goohsen .............................................................................................................................................................................................8 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Krawetz..........................................................................................................................................................................................8 
  D’Autremont .................................................................................................................................................................................8 
  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................................8 
  Bjornerud ......................................................................................................................................................................................8 
  Heppner .........................................................................................................................................................................................8 
  Gantefoer .......................................................................................................................................................................................8 
  Boyd ...............................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  McPherson.....................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Aldridge .........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Belanger .........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  McLane ..........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Julé .................................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Haverstock.....................................................................................................................................................................................9 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Nilson .............................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Bjornerud ......................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Jess .................................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Julé ...............................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................10 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Women’s Day 
  Stanger .........................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................10 
 Outstanding Young Athlete 
  Julé ...............................................................................................................................................................................................10 
 Order of Canada Awarded 
  Kowalsky .....................................................................................................................................................................................11 
 Kinsmen Telemiracle 
  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................11 
 Honour Band Concert 
  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................11 
 Meadow Lake Tribal Council soon to own Techfor 
  Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................12 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskPower President’s Resignation 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Lingenfelter .................................................................................................................................................................................12 
 Sale of Channel Lake Petroleum 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Lingenfelter .................................................................................................................................................................................12 
 First Nations Financial Accountability 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................13 
  Cline .............................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 



 

 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Aldridge .......................................................................................................................................................................................14 
  Romanow .....................................................................................................................................................................................14 
 SaskPower President’s Resignation 
  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................15 
  Lingenfelter .................................................................................................................................................................................15 
  Romanow .....................................................................................................................................................................................16 
 First Nations Financial Accountability 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................16 
  Wiens ...........................................................................................................................................................................................16 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Channel Lake Petroleum 
  Lingenfelter .................................................................................................................................................................................16 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................19 
  Hillson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................20 
  Goohsen .......................................................................................................................................................................................21 
MOTIONS 
 Referral of Report to the Standing Committee on Communication 
  MacKinnon..................................................................................................................................................................................22 
 Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the Standing Committee on Communication 
  MacKinnon..................................................................................................................................................................................22 
 Referral of Reports of the Provincial Auditor to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  MacKinnon..................................................................................................................................................................................22 
 Referral of Public Accounts to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  MacKinnon..................................................................................................................................................................................22 
 Referral of Bylaws and Amendments to the Special Committee on Regulations 
  MacKinnon..................................................................................................................................................................................23 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Commonwealth Day Message 
  Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................23 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Hamilton ......................................................................................................................................................................................23 
  Ward ............................................................................................................................................................................................30 
 


