





























































Hansard: March 13, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 99 
 March 13, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of this 
project. 
 

These petitions come from the Meyronne, Swift Current, 
Prelate, Regina areas, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, to present a petition as well, and 
reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
Swift Current, Rocanville, Eastend area. In fact it’s got some 
from out of the province as well. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I also would like to present a petition today. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are the town of 
Tompkins and Gull Lake. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a number of petitions and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 

Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these are signed by people from Gull Lake, Tompkins, 
Abbey, and all over southern Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I too have petitions to present 
today. 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I was going to put forward petitions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well wait till you’re recognized. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well how often do we have to stand? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. The members will 
be recognized in presenting petitions by the Speaker and it will 
be done in an orderly and consistent manner. I recognize the 
hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that signed this petition are from Swift Current, 
from Prelate, from Gull Lake, and Regina. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a petition 
on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 
completely ban the practice of night hunting in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are all from Melfort, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The petition I am 
presenting, the prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to save the 
Plains Health Centre by enacting legislation to prevent the 
closure, and by providing adequate funding for the Regina 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1998 

Health District so that the essential services provided at the 
Plains hospital may be continued. 

 
These petitions are mostly signed by residents of Assiniboia. I 
also see Glentworth, Limerick, and Wood Mountain and Fir 
Mountain. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring forward 
petitions from people in the province of Saskatchewan 
regarding night hunting. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 
completely ban the practice of night hunting in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people who have signed the petition are all from the North 
Battleford area of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition. The petition . . . the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that signed this petition are 
primarily from Assiniboia, Congress, and Viceroy, 
Saskatchewan. And I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 
completely ban the practice of night hunting in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks out in 
Liberty, Davidson, Simpson, and Imperial. I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of numerous people throughout 
the province, particularly those in and around the Humboldt 
constituency, concerned about the well-being of our youth and 
the serious problem of escalating youth crime. These petitions 
numbered over 1,300 that I have presented, and I would like to 
complete them today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 
Parliament of Canada and the legislature of Saskatchewan 
enact legislation and policies to deal with the problem of 
youth crime. 
 

The petitioners on these particular petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Killdeer, from Weldon, from Humboldt, Lanigan, from 

Annaheim, from Spalding, Kinistino, numerous places 
throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, and I do thank them for 
their concern. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present petitions as well that are self-explanatory. I’ll read the 
prayer. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project, with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 

From the communities of Maple Creek, Piapot, and surrounding 
towns in the south-west. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to call 
upon the provincial and federal governments to meet to 
conclude a cost-sharing agreement on the twinning of the 
remaining portions of the Trans-Canada Highway in 
Saskatchewan; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
cause the government to reach agreements with other 
levels of government to fund the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
enact legislation and policies to deal with the problem of 
youth crime; and 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to cause the 
government to work with aboriginal and Metis leaders in 
an effort to end the practice of night hunting. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 10 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation: which law firms, accounting firms, and 
consulting firms were involved in the negotiations 
surrounding the proposed purchase of the Guyana Electric 
Company; submit a list of names and addresses for all 
firms and lawyers, accountants and consultants involved; 
and a schedule of payments made to each firm. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 



March 13, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

you and through you to other members of the House, a visitor in 
the west gallery this morning. Michele Wilde was a member of 
the staff in the legislature for about six years, serving different, 
various ministers. And her husband started, about a year and a 
half ago, a very successful business in the town of Meadow 
Lake, related to the transportation industry. And it’s a pretty 
long commute from Regina to Meadow Lake so Michele left us 
last year to move up there. 
 
We’re very glad to see her back visiting us today and glad that 
their business is successful in Meadow Lake, creating jobs and 
serving the business community there. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and to members of the Assembly today, some very 
special guests seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. We have 
here today several members of the Saskatchewan Neuroscience 
Network. They are here today as part of the proclamation of 
Brain Awareness Week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As you know, Saskatchewan is the home of a thriving 
community of neuroscientists and health professionals who 
work every day to overcome the efforts of the diseases of the 
nervous system. Their efforts in research and in the 
development of innovative health care strategies rank, Mr. 
Speaker, as world leaders. 
 
And today we have with us — and I would ask them to stand 
when I introduce them — Dr. Alan Boulton, who is the director 
of the Neuropsychiatry Research Unit of the College of 
Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan; professors Rick 
Devon, Madan Gupta, Bernie Juurlink, Steve Richardson, Tom 
Wishart, and a graduate student, Paula Ashe. I would ask all 
members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming them 
to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 
Assembly, I would like to introduce, in your gallery, Mr. 
Andrew Taphorn, from McKague, Saskatchewan and with him 
is Sharon Taphorn. Sharon is from Regina and Andy is here for 
the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention. Please help me join . . . or join with me in 
welcoming them to Regina and to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
also like to welcome Dr. Alan Boulton to the House. I think in 
my current condition perhaps it’s his medical services that I 
require today. But I’d like to acknowledge his distinguished 
career as a researcher and also the fact that he’s been active in 
commercializing that medical research to help to create the 
many new jobs we have in the province. 
 
Besides being famous as an academic, he is one heck of a 
bridge player, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Labour Statistics and Economic Good News 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d be 
remiss if not reminding the Assembly that today is in fact 
Friday the 13th. There is in fact a full moon out, and I’m sure 
that we’ll hear no end of weirdness from the opposition today in 
terms of conspiracy theory and the rest. 
 
Before we get to that though, I would like to point out that there 
is in fact some very good news to report to the Assembly today, 
particularly in terms of the job numbers that have been released 
by Statistics Canada for February. I am very, very pleased to 
advise the House that Statistics Canada tells us that there are 
14,900 more people working in Saskatchewan than there were a 
year ago. I am very pleased to tell you there are 3,000 fewer 
unemployed people. Regina has the lowest unemployment rate 
in the country, and for young people, there are 5,800 more 
young people working today than there were a year ago. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News Stories in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to read five headlines into the public record: 
 
(1) “Four Winds Ford opening in Carlyle,” the Carlyle 
Observer, January 19, 1998. 
 
(2) “Big Sky Pork building at Sturgis and Preeceville,” the 
Kelvington Radio, January 21, 1998. 
 
(3) “Elrose mayor reviews past year — a banner year,” The 
Eston Press Review, January 13. 
 
(4) “Jobs popping up all over,” the Esterhazy Miner-Journal, 
January 13. 
 
(5) “Wheat Pool expands again,” The Melfort Journal, January 
27, 1998. 
 
What do these stories have in common, Mr. Speaker? They are 
all good news stories and they’re all taking place in opposition 
constituencies. 
 
These, and many others like them, make Saskatchewan people 
very happy. They make the opposition not so happy — even 
grumpy, Mr. Speaker — because they don’t like good news, 
especially in their own homes. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Channel Lake Investigation 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
was pleased to hear the Minister of Crown Investments say 
earlier this week that the Public Accounts Committee will now 
be allowed to investigate fully the work of Channel Lake, and 
also to call witnesses. 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1998 

However, I continue to be concerned as to when this will be 
allowed to happen. During the meeting of Public Accounts last 
month, the NDP (New Democratic Party) members voted nine 
times against having Channel Lake put on the Public Accounts 
agenda. In their view, taking another year or two or more before 
we looked at Channel Lake was quite soon enough. Of course 
the Saskatchewan Party also agreed that there was no rush to 
jump into Channel Lake and also voted against adding Channel 
Lake to the agenda. 
 
Mistakes were made and hopefully lessons were learned. 
Hopefully one of the lessons learned is that by denying our right 
to ask questions the people’s right to answers is also denied. 
 
I have written to the Chair and Deputy Chair of Public 
Accounts requesting an early and special meeting of the Public 
Accounts Committee. If the government and the official 
opposition are truly committed to a full examination of what 
went wrong, they will be committed to doing it in the next few 
days and not the next several years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Brain Awareness Week 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the Minister of 
Health said in his introduction of our special guests, next week 
is Brain Awareness Week. Brain Awareness Week was begun 
in 1997 by neuroscientists affiliated with the University of 
Saskatchewan. Several public education events took place in 
Saskatoon, including public lectures, presentations to service 
clubs, and visits by graduate students in neuroscience to local 
high schools. 
 
This year, the second year, the scope has expanded, the events 
enlarged, and Brain Awareness Week will be recognized 
throughout Canada and the U.S.A. (United States of America). 
 
To launch the week, Mr. Speaker, there is a banquet tonight in 
Saskatoon at which the minister will speak. One major focus 
this year will be on acquired brain injury. Obviously the major 
purpose of this week is to bring together the researchers, 
clinicians, students, and representatives from various voluntary 
groups with an interest in neuroscience research. 
 
But the work of all these dedicated people is obviously of great 
interest and concern to all of us. We all have been affected in 
one form or another by Alzheimer’s, schizophrenia, Parkinson’s 
disease, stroke or other afflictions of the brain. 
 
Ninety seconds is only enough time to say how much we value 
the work you are doing during this week, and we express our 
gratitude. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Athlete of the Year Celebration 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
evening Sask Sport held its 1997 Athlete of the Year Award 
celebration at Queensbury Centre. I would like to congratulate 
all athletes for their talents and their contributions to the Sask 
Sport scene. 

But in particular, Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize a 
constituent and friend of mine, Dennis Dauvin, of the 
Bruno-Peterson area of the province. Dennis was a most 
deserving Sask Sport nominee for the 1997 Masters Athlete of 
the Year Award. 
 
Dennis was a member of the Saskatoon Masters softball team 
which won the provincial masters men’s championships. The 
team went on to win the gold medal at the Western Canadian 
Masters Championships, and Dennis was named the top pitcher. 
He also competed with the Bruno team that finished second in 
the intermediate A men’s division provincial championships. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, over the past 38 years, Dennis has 
contributed his outstanding pitching talents to numerous teams 
throughout the province, including the Peterson Wildcats, the 
Bruno Merchants, Rosthern Valley, and in the past 10 years has 
played with the Saskatoon Masters, who were successful in 
winning the Provincial Softball Championships for 10 
consecutive years. 
 
Now, at 52 years of age, Dennis continues to delight softball 
fans and spectators, pitching for the Bruno Merchants and the 
Saskatoon Sutherland Bar Masters. 
 
I would like to take the opportunity once again to commend him 
on his very fine efforts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Home Town Hero 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise here today to 
talk briefly about a friend of mine, a friend of my home town, 
and a friend of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Joe Stakiw is a home town hero. Way back in 1939 he began 
serving rural Saskatchewan in the RM (rural municipality) of 
Spruce Lake where he became secretary-treasurer. He moved to 
the RM of Medstead, and in 1943 he found his permanent home 
in Maidstone. He served the RM of Eldon for 39 years in the 
capacity of secretary-treasurer and an administrator until he 
retired in 1982. 
 
Mr. Stakiw is quoted as saying, “I enjoyed every day of work”. 
Well, Joe, let me say as a person from Maidstone and the MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for that constituency, we 
appreciate the work that you have done and we know that, still 
at the age of 82, you are still giving your time and effort to 
uplift the community — as well as learning to downhill ski at 
72 years of age. 
 
Joe, we will always be grateful for everything you’ve done for 
us over the years. And as reported in the Regina Leader-Post, 
we all congratulate you on receiving the Lieutenant Governor’s 
Award for Outstanding Service in Rural Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kentucky Fried Chicken Outlet Wins Award 
 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year at 



March 13, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

this time I was happy to congratulate the owners and staff at the 
Weyburn KFC (Kentucky Fried Chicken) franchise. Their 
restaurant was named the best in Canada. 
 
I refer members to Hansard, March 27, 1997, because, in the 
interest of time, I’m happy to say now that my statement there 
can be repeated now. 
 
Manager Glenn Lucas, owner Brian Johnson, and their fine staff 
won again. Only four KFC outlets in North America have won 
this award two years running. The staff was given $1,200 in 
loonies as part of their award, and Brian and Glenn are going to 
Disneyland. 
 
I also want to add that I attended this event and it was exciting 
but especially gratifying to see the excellent team work that 
brings this honour to Weyburn as Glenn Lucas recognized the 
wonderful contribution of the staff, the majority being high 
school students. 
 
I again congratulate Weyburn KFC, and once again invite all 
members, especially the Premier with his known fondness for 
good KFC, to my constituency to experience first hand the 
quote, “Best of the Best,” as the award says. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Affordable Housing for Low Income Families 
 

Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, our government recently announced the establishment 
of three very important partnerships. These partnerships of 
community groups, private businesses, the cities of Regina, 
Saskatoon, and Prince Albert, and the provincial government 
have provided secure, affordable housing for low income 
families in the core neighbourhoods. These three projects are 
well on their way and have received national recognition for 
their innovation and vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been difficult to provide new housing units 
for low income families in the traditional manner, given the 
withdrawal of federal funding. However, our government is 
exploring new, local approaches to meet the need for housing, 
approaches such as these projects, and I commend all the 
partners involved. 
 
Through these three partnerships, Mr. Speaker, 32 families have 
received loans and grants to be applied to the down payment on 
their own home. These projects were the start of renewed 
efforts to assist in the revitalization of core areas of our major 
cities. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower Presidents’ Severance Package 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). Three hundred 
thousand dollars for Jack Messer — $300,000. Mr. Minister, 
that’s more money than a lot of people in Saskatchewan earn in 

10 years, and those are the people who are going to be paying 
for this obscene severance package. 
 
Mr. Minister, the NDP has abused the taxpayers of this 
province a lot over the last 10 years, and you have kind of 
gotten away with it. But they’re never going to forgive you for 
this one. 
 
They will never forgive you unless you immediately apologize 
to every single taxpayer in Saskatchewan and you immediately 
cancel this obscene political pay-off to the Premier’s buddy, 
Jack Messer. Mr. Minister, will you do that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that in my statement earlier this week I said 
already that the government is disappointed in the way Channel 
Lake developed, and I said that very clearly and indicated that 
we did deserve our share of criticism. 
 
Having said that, I want to say clearly that we have set in place 
processes to deal with the lack of communication that occurred 
between management and the board of directors. But I want to 
say to you, sir, that when it relates to Mr. Messer and the 
severance package arranged by Mr. Milt Fair, the former CEO 
(chief executive officer) of the Wheat Pool, and legal counsel, 
that this is a legal matter, not a political one. 
 
And I say that the front page of the Leader-Post that speaks to 
that issue clearly indicates that this is a legal matter, as the 
Leader-Post story of November 21, ’93 dealing with Mr. 
George Hill. Politically, paying George Hill was not a good 
idea. Politically, paying Jack Messer is not a good idea. But 
legally, this is what is deserved under the law. And on that 
point, I will have to take the heat for the bad politics that may 
exist because, legally, paying Mr. Hill and paying Mr. Messer 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, further supplementary. Mr. 
Minister, to say this isn’t political is very wrong. Of course it’s 
political. Everything Jack Messer does is political. Everything 
you do is political. Mr. Messer was a political appointee. The 
boards of directors are all appointed people. 
 
Do other people quit their job and get a $300,000 severance 
package? No. This is a political pay-out because Jack Messer is 
the Premier’s buddy. And everyone in Saskatchewan knows it’s 
political. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you think it’s fair that after the mistakes Jack 
Messer made in the Channel Lake and Guyana deals, do you 
think it’s fair to give him more money than some make . . . 
people make in 10 years? Is that fair, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to the 
member opposite, who was part of the caucus, who was part of 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1998 

the caucus at the time that Mr. Hill transferred over a million 
dollars from SaskPower to a trust account in Saskatoon before 
the election when the Devine government was defeated, you 
remember that. You remember that clearly. 
 
We dismissed Mr. George Hill with cause. I remember it 
because I signed the letter. And after two years of negotiating, 
spending tens of thousands of legal dollars, we ended up, not 
because we thought it was good politics but because the law 
required, after much negotiation, 325,000 severance — after we 
got back the million dollars that you, sir, allowed Mr. Hill to 
transfer to his account in Saskatoon. 
 
And I would ask you to apologize. I’ve taken the heat on behalf 
of this government for mistakes we’ve made. You have never 
apologized, and I challenge you to do that today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister knows full 
well exactly what happened to the former minister as a result of 
that. And, Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan will judge 
you accordingly. I believe they will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be demanding the minister’s resignation 
but I’m scared he might resign and give himself a big fat 
severance package as well. The minister might keep quoting 
legal opinion — the same legal opinion that says Jack Messer 
was terminated without just cause. This means you are at fault; 
you fired Mr. Messer. You don’t deserve to pay his severance. 
 
Why do Saskatchewan’s taxpayers always have to pay for your 
government’s mismanagement? If this legal opinion is correct, 
as you say it is, you just made a mistake that cost Saskatchewan 
taxpayers $300,000. Why don’t you take responsibility and 
resign, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again to the . . . I believe that 
in every way I have taken responsibility for the mistakes made 
over the period by Channel Lake. I’ve admitted mistakes were 
made, I’ve said we set processes in place, and I’ve done that. 
 
On the legal issue of severance, I’ve explained as best of my 
ability why the severance on legal grounds was necessary. But 
what hasn’t happened in this House, Mr. Speaker, is that 
member — Conservative member — today, yesterday, and with 
Mr. Devine, has never responded to the wrongdoing of his 
government, which included a million dollar payment to Mr. 
Hill against all of the reports that were . . . might recommend 
differently. And you’ve never apologized for the $15 billion — 
$15 billion — in debt that you, sir, and your cronies were 
responsible for during the 1980s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Channel Lake 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of CIC. Mr. Minister, I have an idea how you 
can save a lot of money. Why don’t you change Jack Messer’s 
severance contract but don’t tell him? He won’t know because 
he won’t read it. Why won’t you change the gross amount to the 
net amount and deduct $5 million? 

Mr. Minister, the Channel Lake deal is smelling worse than 
Wascana Lake in the spring. And Jack Messer isn’t the only one 
who’s getting ahead on this deal. Your friend Owen Mitchell 
said he had no direct involvement in this deal; then why was he 
questioned in the investigation of the deal and why did he 
resign from SaskEnergy’s board just 10 days ago, just before 
the whole story came out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that as you know, Mr. Owen Mitchell, who 
worked for the provincial government during the 1970s in the 
budget bureau as an analyst, son of a former deputy minister of 
the Tommy Douglas, and I believe Liberal, government of the 
day, his mom lives in Regina — June Mitchell, a well known 
social activist. Owen, who is presently a vice-president at First 
Marathon, explained the situation, and I quote: 
 

Mitchell said he wasn’t in a decision-making capacity, a 
position to benefit, any way in the Channel Lake 
acquisition. 
 

Read the story in the Leader-Post. Read the Deloitte & Touche 
report. If you haven’t had time take an hour or two and read it. 
And I want to say to you, I want to say to you that your 
association with the Conservative Party and the payment to 
George Hill, your association and payment to George Hill and 
the severance package that legally we were required to put to 
Mr. Hill, tells you a lot about your honesty and integrity here in 
the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister 
talks about reading. It’s his government and their people they 
appoint that haven’t learned how to read yet. Mr. Minister, it’s 
time to start fishing for the bottom feeders out of Channel Lake, 
and we have just the net for you to do it with. 
 
Immediately after question period the Saskatchewan Party will 
be moving a motion calling for an independent public inquiry 
into the whole Channel Lake fiasco. That inquiry would be 
empowered to make any recommendations they deem 
appropriate, including legal action against any person or entity. 
The Saskatchewan Party motion also calls on your government 
to cancel Jack Messer’s obscene severance payment until the 
public inquiry completes its work. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you support this motion? Will you support a 
full public inquiry into the Channel Lake fiasco? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a little hard to 
speak because after asking the question, as you can see, they 
holler and yell from their seats so I can’t explain well, but I 
know why they don’t want to hear the answer. 
 
I know why they don’t want to hear the answer. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the reason is, is that at the last Public Accounts 
meeting that their representative from Melfort was at, he voted 
against — against — the auditor looking into Channel Lake. 
That’s what he did. And today, and today because it’s good 
politics, he says, let’s have a public inquiry. 



March 13, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

What a phoney lot over there. Just as phoney as those who 
signed the promise to the Liberal Party, and then a week later 
moved over to what is now called the Saskatchewan Party, 
which is really the same old bunch of Tories. A Tory is a Tory 
is a Tory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Health Information Network Appointment 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr. 
Speaker, is for the minister responsible for STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company). 
 
Mr. Minister, we found out recently about another 
million-dollar mistake by one of your family of Crown 
corporations, STC. It seems that former STC president, Peter 
Glendinning, lost the company $750,000 because his new 
computer wasn’t billing customers. So naturally, the NDP 
management gurus made Glendinning vice-president of 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. 
 
Then you replaced him with another NDP hack, Gordon 
Nystuen, who decided the best way to fix the computer problem 
was to turn it off. And now you’re going to reward his Stone 
Age computer skills by putting him in charge of one of the most 
important computer networks in the province, the Saskatchewan 
Health Information Network. Mr. Minister, haven’t you learned 
that appointing your NDP buddies to senior government 
positions is costing taxpayers millions? 
 
Mr. Minister, will you reverse your decision to put Gordon 
Nystuen in charge of SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information 
Network) and hire someone who is qualified for the job? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
announce, as we already have, that Mr. Gordon Nystuen will 
take on the responsibility of managing the SHIN board. The 
SHIN board, Mr. Speaker, is going to be managing a portfolio 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of around $40 million. And 
that $40 million project will bring to Saskatchewan, will bring 
to Saskatchewan a state-of-the-art technology similar to what 
we’re having in Manitoba and similar to what we’ll have in 
Alberta. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to ensure the members opposite that 
the process for Mr. Nystuen to get to the SHIN board, or to be 
the CEO of SHIN, required that he would compete against 37 
applications that were received from across the nation. And of 
those 37 applications, 4 people, Mr. Speaker, were short-listed, 
and on the review of the SHIN board panel, decided that Mr. 
Nystuen was the best candidate to handle the job on behalf of 
delivering a very comprehensive information health service to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I, Mr. Speaker, am responsible for that; support that Mr. 
Nystuen take that job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier told us this week in 

the House that Channel Lake taught him a lesson, that he had 
learned a serious lesson. What happened, Mr. Premier? Mr. 
Premier, if the Channel Lake fiasco demonstrated anything, it 
showed what can happen when you appoint your political 
friends to senior manage positions when they’re not qualified. 
 
Now we’re hearing you’re preparing to do that again. Mr. 
Premier, why are you preparing to name former NDP bagman, 
Gordon Nystuen, as the CEO of the all-important Saskatchewan 
Health Information Network board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just highlighted for 
the member opposite of the new Saskatchewan Party, old Tory 
Party, exactly why it is that we hired Mr. Nystuen; that Mr. 
Nystuen was involved in a process. And I’ll highlight for the 
member, again, from Arm River what had happened here. 
 
There were 37 applications that people from across the country 
. . . that applied for this job. At the end of the day, Mr. 
Nystuen’s name was short-listed with four other members, and 
of those four members that were short-listed, Mr. Nystuen won 
the award to be the CEO of the new SHIN corporation. 
 
And I am very pleased that Mr. Nystuen’s name has come to the 
top through due diligence in an excellent process. And he will 
now be the individual who will be delivering this service in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan do 
not want the government to simply shuffle the NDP deck and 
appoint another one of their party friends as the CEO of the 
SHIN board. And what you are demonstrating today is that you 
are more concerned about lining the pockets of your party 
friends than you are about the proper management of SHIN. 
 
Obviously the CEO for SHIN should have a great deal of 
experience in developing and managing information 
technology, especially when as many as 80 per cent of these 
types of projects fall flat on their face. Mr. Nystuen’s 
experience would hardly suggest he is the man. Yes, this hack 
has worked at Liquor and Gaming so he’s right out of the ice. 
And I guess that’s better than your last hack who put you right 
into the fire. But please tell this House, Mr. Premier, how 
counting beer bottles qualifies somebody to manage the 
Saskatchewan Health Information System. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you 
that clearly the member opposite doesn’t have much knowledge 
about the large portfolio of the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming and/or of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. 
Because if you think that the level of work that a CEO does 
with the Liquor and Gaming Authority is counting beer bottles, 
you have very little — you have very little — knowledge about 
the expertise that’s required in running a large corporation or 
company. And of course, I’m not surprised then, by the 
question that you ask because you have very little 
understanding and appreciation about the value of what SHIN 
will provide in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1998 

Because in Saskatchewan today, the SHIN board is made up of 
health professionals, of stakeholders that represent the broad 
piece of what’s required in delivering the health component in 
this province. Doctors, physicians, nurses, many, many 
stakeholders are involved in sitting on the board. Mr. Nystuen’s 
job will be to work with those people and to ensure that we 
have a comprehensive health system in the province, delivered 
through SHIN. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, for some reason the NDP 
government has come to the conclusion that $40 million, or is it 
80 million that we talked about last session, is better spent on a 
health information network and padding the wallets of party 
friends than it is to look after the sick and the elderly. The fact 
that the NDP is spending valuable health care dollars to set up a 
new bureaucracy to oversee this project also underlines just 
how screwed up this government’s priorities really are. 
 
Mr. Premier, it appears that SHIN may be home to more party 
friends than Mr. Nystuen. We have learned that not only are 
you going to be paying him $112,000 a year for this party 
friend, you’re also setting aside another $2 million for 
administration of this project. 
 
Mr. Premier, how many more NDP friends, how many more 
personal friends of yours, will line their pockets assigned to this 
project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m not understanding fully what it is that 
the member is challenging here. If the member in fact is 
challenging the fact that Mr. Nystuen is now the new CEO, I’ve 
outlined for Mr. Nystuen the process in which Mr. Nystuen got 
to be the new CEO for the health information system. 
 
But I hear the member opposite talking about something 
different; the member opposite talking about the value of a 
health information technology system to this province today. 
And that to me, Mr. Speaker, disturbs all of us a great deal. 
Because sitting on the SHIN board today, Mr. Speaker, are 
stakeholders of the health profession from across the province 
who tell us that in order to provide comprehensive health 
services, in particular to rural Saskatchewan, will require a 
technology piece similar to SHIN. 
 
And I hear the member opposite suggesting that that’s not 
important, that we should be taking the $40 million and putting 
it somewhere else. But that’s because the member opposite does 
not believe in the medical system, doesn’t believe in medicare. 
He believes in the two-tiered system, the privatization of the 
health care system. That’s what the member from Arm River 
believes in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Examination of Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the government has taken it upon 
itself to add a new verse to the Beatitudes. The new beatitude 
reads, blessed are they who throw in with the NDP, for they 

shall never want. 
 
My question for the Premier is: in view of the statement made 
on Tuesday in this House, is he now prepared to call off his 
back-benchers’ stonewalling the Public Accounts Committee, is 
he now prepared to ask his friends in the Saskatchewan Party to 
lay off and let the Public Accounts Committee meet promptly to 
examine witnesses, to get to the bottom of this, or is he still 
taking the position that two or three years down the road is soon 
enough to deal with this issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, how quickly he forgets 
and how mutually insulting it is. He says that these are my 
former friends over there. At least four are your very close, 
bosom friends. I think the best hope that we would have in this 
case is for you to talk to them and try to convince them to do 
this. 
 
The Public Accounts Committee will do what will be necessary 
and proper in pursuit of this. We have tabled the documents, in 
effect showing the factual circumstances surrounding this whole 
operation. Public Accounts, the Provincial Auditor, will be 
involved in this. There’s lots of room for further re-examination 
of the evidence and Public Accounts in due course will make 
their decisions as they see fit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier told us in this 
House on December 17 that there was absolutely nothing 
devious about Mr. Portigal just being out of job after he’d sold 
the company and then popping up working for the new 
company. He told us on Tuesday that there definitely was 
something more underneath all of this than what he told us on 
December 17. And in point of fact, way last June, Portigal had 
been fired. 
 
Will the Deputy Premier tell us when he knew that indeed there 
was something behind Portigal’s leaving the old company and 
going to the new company; when he knew there was something 
behind and it was a great deal more than he was telling us on 
December 17? And will he tell us if Portigal also got a pay-out 
the same as Messer? Did he get a package; does he get a 
severance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I know the member 
knows this, but in order to respond to his question, he will have 
my statement from earlier this week. I just want to quote two 
parts. On page 1 I said, “On December 9, I instructed my 
officials of Crown Investments Corporation to conduct a 
thorough review of the operations of Channel Lake.” That’s 
when I became aware, as a result of the report of the auditor late 
in 1997. 
 
And I concluded my response on page 11 of that speech I gave 
on Tuesday. I said, “At the time, my answers were based on 
incomplete information as noted in the CIC and Deloitte 
Touche’s report.” They refer to my incomplete briefing notes I 
had at the time. 



March 13, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

I have said that we have apologized for the problems that were 
caused by Channel Lake. We did full revelation. We tabled 
those documents. 
 
I say again, I know the member opposite, being a lawyer, has 
read these documents. I’m sure you’re raising this for political 
purposes. I don’t mind that. I know what the reason is. But the 
fact of the matter is, Mr. Portigal got no severance package. As 
soon as I was aware of it, I asked my officials to review the file, 
we reported it here, and to the best of my knowledge, no 
payment was made in severance to Mr. Portigal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Multilateral Agreement on Investment 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, the multilateral 
agreement on investment is scheduled for ratification in May 
1998. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, many, many Saskatchewan citizens are 
raising legitimate concerns about the impact this investment 
treaty will have on Saskatchewan’s economic, social, and 
environmental well-being. Fears have been expressed about 
corporate powers superseding that of democratically elected 
governments. 
 
Now because the people of Saskatchewan want to know exactly 
what their government has done about this issue to date, and I 
am certain that you have written documentation that your 
administration, your minister has presented to Trade minister 
Sergio Marchi and the federal negotiator, Mr. Bill Diamond, I 
would ask that you explain your position; and if you have any 
documentation of exchange between Mr. Marchi and your 
minister, I would ask that you table that today please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think this question by 
the hon. member is a very important question which has 
long-term, significant implications for not only the province of 
Saskatchewan but for Canada. And I don’t have access to the 
documentation which has transpired and the correspondence 
which has transpired. I’d have to check my files to make sure 
that it can be released. I don’t know whether they’re personal 
and confidential terms. 
 
But in general, in general I can say to you, Mr. Speaker, and the 
hon. member, this government shares the grave concerns that 
the member from Humboldt has raised about the multilateral 
agreement on investment. The MAI (multilateral agreement on 
investment) is intended to put in, on an international basis, 
some ground rules for the investors of the world, which 
investors in the world now have no such ground rules. 
 
We do not like what we see as the proposed ground rules 
because — some of my answer — what will be, we think, is a 
strait-jacketing of provincial jurisdiction and national 
jurisdiction and a lowering of standards in the areas of 
environment and health, to name two, and this government is 
simply not going to allow that to happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Premier, there is no question in anybody’s 
mind in Saskatchewan that your Minister for Intergovernmental 
Affairs has discussed the concerns of the Saskatchewan people. 
What they are concerned about even more is that there has been 
no tabled written document presented by your government to 
the committee, to the standing committee in Ottawa. 
 
And in addition, their concern surrounds provincial obligations 
in this matter. Given the statement by Mr. Gerald Schmitz, 
research coordinator for the House of Commons Standing 
Committee on Foreign Affairs and International Trade, and I 
quote, he says: 
 

If there are obligations that affect provincial areas of 
jurisdiction, then provincial legislation is necessary to give 
this effect. 
 

Will this Assembly, Mr. Premier, be formally addressing the 
issue of the multilateral agreement on investment through 
provincial legislation in this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot answer that 
question because the state of the negotiations is such that it can 
be fairly said they are very much incomplete. 
 
When I was in Washington a few weeks ago, the American 
government itself had indicated — at least some of the senators 
and officials that I visited with — that they too had these very 
much on their minds, and the concerns, therefore, necessitated 
an incomplete set of negotiations. So nothing is required until 
the negotiations are finalized. 
 
But I would say to the hon. member that I have raised this issue 
publicly on record and I’d be prepared to show it and send to 
her and to any member of the House who’s interested, a speech 
which I gave to the Canadian Institute on International Affairs 
before the end of the year 1997 outlining our concerns on MAI 
and the principles of international investments. 
 
Subsequently, I said the same to the Saskatchewan Federation 
of Labour in speaking to their annual convention. And I do 
know there’s correspondence around involving the minister and 
myself because, as I’ve said before, this government does not 
want to — and will not — accept any kind of international rule 
which lowers the standards of environment, social services, and 
above all, anything which would further damage the medicare 
where we invented it right here in this province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 5  The Animal Products 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5, The 
Animal Products Amendment Act, 1998 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1998 

Bill No. 6 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6, The 
Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Pastures Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 7, The 
Pastures Act be now introduced and read for the very first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Stray Animals Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 8, The 
Stray Animals Amendment Act, 1998 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Parks Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 9, The 
Parks Amendment Act, 1998 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 234 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 
1998 (Indexed Minimum Wage Initial Rate) 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to move 
a Bill, Bill No. 234 of 1998, An Act to amend The Labour 
Standards Act respecting the indexing minimum wage initial 
rates. I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Orders of the day. I recognize the hon. 
member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 46 to ask leave to move an 
emergency motion of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Cannington has 
requested leave to introduce a motion of urgent and pressing 
necessity. 
 
And I’ll ask the hon. member to advise the Assembly very, very 
briefly why he believes it is a matter that is of urging and 
pressing necessity and to give a brief advice to the House as to 
what he wishes to propose by way of motion. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Sale of Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
recent events surrounding the sale of Channel Lake Petroleum 
by SaskPower have left numerous unanswered questions and 
there is a clear need for an independent public inquiry into this 
matter pursuant to The Public Inquiries Act. Therefore, I wish 
to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly demand that the Lieutenant Governor 
in Council initiate a public inquiry into the purchase, 
management, and sale of Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd. by 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation pursuant to The 
Public Inquiries Act; that the scope of the inquiry should 
include but not be limited to an examination of reporting 
procedures between the Channel Lake Petroleum board of 
directors and SaskPower board of directors. 
 
Two, the activities undertaken by SaskPower, SaskPower 
subsidiaries and/or the Crown Investments Corporation in 
the process of performing due diligence in the sale of 
Channel Lake Petroleum to Direct Energy Marketing Ltd. 
 
Three, all reports completed by or contracted by 
SaskPower, SaskPower subsidiaries and/or the Crown 
Investments Corporation reviewing the sale of Channel 
Lake Petroleum Ltd. 
 
Four, all events and transactions associated with the loss of 
$8 million by Channel Lake Petroleum in 1996 and 1997 
through unauthorized arbitrage activities and all events and 
transactions associated with the sale of Channel Lake 
Petroleum Ltd. to Direct Marketing Ltd.; that the inquiring 
commissioners be empowered to make recommendations 
regarding the legal action against any person or entity they 
deem appropriate; that the inquiry commissioner shall 
immediately turn over any evidence of criminal 
wrongdoing they uncover to the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police). And that SaskPower immediately cancel 
Jack Messer’s severance package until this inquiry is 
completed. 
 

Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Hamilton, seconded by Mr. 
Ward, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
happy today to have the opportunity to speak in reply to the 
Speech from the Throne. I know that many members would like 
to have talked about Channel Lake for the rest of the day and 



March 13, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

probably that is very important. But the Speech from the 
Throne, of course, also has importance in our province and I’m 
quite sure that we will have lots of time to talk about these other 
emergency things as we go along. 
 
I want, Mr. Speaker, to first of all welcome yourself and all of 
the officials and everybody back to the session. We’re glad that 
everybody has come back in good spirits and in good health, 
and I’m sure that we are going to have a lively session. And we 
know that it will be fairly adjudicated and that we will 
accomplish something positive for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I know also that sometimes it may be very boring for people to 
listen to speeches that seem to be repetitious, but the democratic 
process is such that we do that sort of thing in order to continue 
to reinforce that we listen to what the people say rather than just 
to be dictated to. And so sometimes boredom and repetition is 
the way that that is accomplished. So we will do that as well 
some days. 
 
And as we go through this process for the next few months, 
there will be days when people in the town of Gull Lake will 
want to shut their television sets back off, because they of 
course are receiving the transmissions for the first time this 
year, from the proceedings of the House. And I welcome them 
to the proceedings, and I hope that they do find some days when 
they will actually enjoy it. It’s not quite as good perhaps as the 
soap operas, but we’ll try to make it entertaining and I’m sure 
that they will find that there is some usefulness out of what we 
do here. 
 
(1100) 
 
The town of Maple Creek, of course is enjoying the second 
year, and by now they even know probably when is the best 
time to tune in so that they can get the meat of the thing and 
find out when question period is and that sort of thing. So we 
welcome them as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was particularly interested in the Speech from 
the Throne because I wanted to hear some positive things for 
our province at this particular time in history, when we seem to 
be enjoying an economic boom. 
 
An economic boom in Saskatchewan doesn’t happen very often 
because there is an old saying — and people will know that I’ve 
said this before — Saskatchewan is always first into a recession 
and the last out. And that means that by the time we get out of a 
recession the next one has probably already started, and we 
missed the boom. 
 
What we have enjoyed though somewhat, a period of time of 
the boom this time. The other parts of the world of course, that 
have come out of the recession are now going back in. In the 
Asian countries of course, things are not looking all that rosy. 
 
I hope that we can somehow, in our nation and in our world, 
keep that downturn over there. But naturally it will spread here 
to some extent, in time, and we’ll try to offset that here in 
Saskatchewan if we are careful with how we handle the 
prosperity that we have now. It’s the old story of the seven good 
years and the seven lean years, and we’re having the seven good 
years. And if we’re careful and lay a little aside now, perhaps 

we will weather the storm in the future a lot better than we have 
in the past. I think it’s learning from experience is what it’s 
called. 
 
And I was hoping that the Speech from the Throne would 
address that kind of an approach. Unfortunately I have to say 
that I missed some things. I can’t say that I’m against the 
Speech from the Throne and that I would vote against the 
Speech from the Throne on the basis of what’s in it. But what 
I’d have to do is vote against it on the basis of what it hasn’t got 
in it. 
 
And what it hasn’t got in it is nearly enough attention to the 
problems that we are going to face in the future in our province. 
We haven’t . . . For example, I looked, being a farmer, through 
and through the speech, and I read it several times, and I still 
couldn’t find very much that concerns agriculture or the 
petroleum and natural gas industry. Not very much in a positive 
way. The two backbone products of this province, even though 
other things seem to be taking the attention. 
 
The reality is that agriculture will be here for ever because 
people will always have to eat as long as they’re alive, and as 
long as the meteorite that’s supposed to come in 30 years 
doesn’t destroy the world, people will still want to eat. You can 
never escape that. 
 
Petroleum and natural gas, of course, can still be replaced with 
some alternatives but at the present time they haven’t been 
replaced, and they won’t be for a few years. Now I think we 
need to work on that, of course, but the reality is that they are 
key to the province and they are key to the economy of our 
province and they are certainly important to the south-west 
where I come from and the area that I represent. 
 
And this government, of course, while they reduced the mineral 
royalties rates prior to the reading of the Speech from the 
Throne, and we welcome that, they haven’t actually in the 
Speech from the Throne alluded to a continuing program to 
sustain those industries. That, Mr. Speaker, is why I can’t 
support the Speech from the Throne, because they don’t include 
the very important things. 
 
They do include some important things though, that I want to 
congratulate the government on. I want to congratulate the 
government for taking back on the apprenticeship program 
approach to education. It has worked very well in Europe, and 
having had some contact with some of the Europeans from 
countries where people have enjoyed the benefits of an 
apprenticeship program over the years, I have always wondered 
why we didn’t pursue this a little more. It works so well over 
there. 
 
For example, in the country of Switzerland, they train people 
for the job that they’re going to do in their life as a part of their 
educational process through an apprenticeship program. And 
now that we have the government recognizing that that program 
is again important and are expanding on it, I want to say, 
congratulations, I’m glad you’re doing this. 
 
There are going to be some problems, and that’s natural. The 
only thing I would caution the government on is that they do 
look at these problems and that they do work hard to offset 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1998 

them before they become serious problems. One minor glitch 
that we have already noticed on the west side of the province, 
which some of the people at Public Accounts have already 
heard about of course, is the Workers’ Compensation Board and 
the way that it affects the apprenticeship program. 
 
For example — and I say this for the government members so 
that they will know the kind of thing they have to watch for — 
the people in Alberta have coverage from the Workers’ 
Compensation Board when they are being educated if they take 
a job for their apprenticeship in Saskatchewan. If a 
Saskatchewan student though, from, say Burstall, 
Saskatchewan, gets a job in the gas plant which is only a couple 
of miles away from town but across the border in Alberta, they 
are not covered by Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation 
because they are working out of province — is the argument the 
Workers’ Compensation use. Unfortunately though, the Alberta 
Workers’ Compensation won’t cover them either because they 
are Saskatchewan residents. They are students working in 
Alberta; they are Saskatchewan residents. So it’s a catch-22 — 
they can’t be covered. 
 
And the employer is caught in the middle saying, I can’t pay 
minimum wage even, because if I do, I have to be covered for 
Workers’ Compensation; that’s the law in both provinces. So it 
doesn’t matter which way we go. We just can’t employ these 
people from Saskatchewan; they’re not covered by Workers’ 
Compensation. And so our children are left out of that 
opportunity for training on the west side of this province. 
 
Now maybe the students from Regina haven’t noticed that 
problem and maybe that’s why the government hasn’t noticed 
the problem, but now we’re here to tell them that it is a 
problem. It needs to be corrected. I’m hoping that they’re 
working on it. 
 
And there will be other problems like that with apprenticeship 
programs, especially as we try to expand them, because you do 
have to coordinate a lot of people. You have to coordinate 
employers as well as, of course, as the educational system and 
the students and that’s going to take some work. 
 
But I say, hang in there. It’s a good project, it’s a good plan. 
Keep at it. We’ll make it work. And we’ll have a lot of people 
that will be trained for the jobs that are available. 
 
For many years I’ve said it makes no sense to have a degree in 
the arts and sciences if there is no job at the end of the 
education. We went through that in our family, and of course 
one of my daughters had to eventually take training in another 
field in order to get employment. And she’s very nicely 
employed right now; in fact just got a big fat raise and a new 
job. So she’s very happy with the education she got — in 
Saskatchewan, mind you. And even though she had to go 
somewhere else to get the job, it’s Saskatchewan education that 
made her what she is today, having the ability to go out there 
and compete in the world market for jobs. And she’s done very 
well. 
 
And that tells me that we have a good education system. We 
can improve on it. We do have some other problems in 
education; we have problems with how we negotiate wages and 
those kind of things. But that’s all solvable kinds of problems. 

So I encourage the government to carry on with that type of 
program. 
 
I want to talk for a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, about my own 
constituency because in the Speech from the Throne replies we 
have that opportunity to associate our constituencies with the 
rest of the province and get an opportunity to let people in the 
Assembly know what it is that we need to have in, say a rural 
community that’s a little further away from the centre of the 
province. 
 
As I’ve alluded to earlier, we have a natural gas and petroleum 
industry that works very well in our community. We have 
integrated. I believe the first wells were drilled in 1951 or ’52 in 
the south-west, so it’s got quite a long history. 
 
And in that history, we have developed the understanding of 
working as a partnership. Unfortunately though, partnerships 
where different people’s needs come to loggerheads once in a 
while find the industry basically ramming straight up against 
the needs of environment, the needs of farmers and ranchers to 
protect their soil. And those kind of things are natural. 
 
When an industry like the oil industry has to come onto other 
people’s property, even though they have bought the mineral 
lease from the government, they have still got to deal with 
getting onto the ground and dealing with the surface owners. 
Because after all, you can’t drill to 3 or 4,000 feet down into the 
ground unless you can first get your rig onto the field that is 
owned by the farmer. 
 
So it’s very simply a question of continuing to work to make 
this partnership work and to grow and to make the availability 
of these industries to continue to be able to have jobs for those 
people who can’t stay on the farm; for those people who want 
to come from other places to work in the area. These are 
important industries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is why I have introduced this session a private members’ Bill. 
And not because we’re trying to discourage new oil and gas 
industry; we do not want to do that. But we do want to help as 
much as we can for those two factions to be able to continue to 
coexist. They don’t necessarily share, even though lots of 
farmers’ sons will work for the petroleum industry and even 
though lots of people who work in the petroleum industry will 
quit and go back to a farm, or buy a farm and go back to 
agriculture. 
 
The reality is though that when you have an oil rig working on a 
piece of farm land, there are some problems that happen. Some 
of the chemicals that are used of course will kill livestock. 
Some of the processes, the simple mechanisms that are used in 
the mechanical equipment, will kill animals and livestock and 
even endanger people. So you have to constantly to be working 
on this balance. 
 
That’s the reason why I brought in a very simple amendment 
that we’re going to be talking about in the days to come. And 
that is The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act. 
It is a very good Act. It hasn’t been properly administrated in 
the past years and that needs some attention. And that’s why we 
are trying to tune it up a bit and get people to take on the 
responsibility, of working on the Arbitration Board, clearly 



March 13, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

using the mandates that they have rather than to fall asleep at 
the switch. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what we are attempting to do is to be very 
simple and very straightforward about it. What we are saying is 
that in today’s society, an Act that was written in 1969 that said 
we will now have 30 days from the time a pollution problem 
occurs until the farmer has to report it in order to be 
compensated and in order for that mess to be cleaned up, if he’s 
not within that 30-day structure, he automatically loses the right 
to clean up the environment, to clean up his farm, and to force 
the petroleum company to be responsible for the damage 
they’ve done — that is irresponsible, and it is not proper to 
allow that type of deadline to exist in today’s society when we 
have . . . Of course since 1969 . . . and think back, how many of 
us are that old that we can think back to 1969? We didn’t even 
know what pollution really was back then. We . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was a blur. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Exactly right. The member from Wood 
River, formerly Shaunavon, knows exactly what it is. It’s a blur 
looking back that far because of course we’ve got some of that 
pollution in us maybe. But age does that to us. 
 
But if you’ll think back to 1969, people were just starting to 
understand the effects of even a basic chemical like DDT 
(dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane). A chemical that we clearly 
know now has long-lasting effects in our environment. It 
poisoned our birds to the effect that a hawk would lay eggs that 
didn’t have shells. When they sat on the eggs in the nest they 
simply broke and no more new hawks were being hatched. 
 
When the hawks were flying over my tractor, I have occasion to 
remember seeing them fold up in mid-air and drop dead to the 
ground. I don’t know if they had that heart attack because of 
DDT but I know that I haven’t seen one since they banned 
DDT. And I know that there is an association there. 
 
So having a 30-day limit on the time that people can report a 
pollution spill on their farm and have it cleaned up and have it 
dealt with by a board that is already in place is unrealistic. And 
I’m asking this Assembly in the days to come, Mr. Speaker, to 
look at this amendment to that Act and take that 30-day limit 
out because it’s unrealistic. 
 
The only other point that I’m going to make on that subject, Mr. 
Speaker, is that along with that, I’m asking the Assembly to 
consider removing also another outdated section of that Act 
which is the $1000 limit for compensation for those pollution 
problems and clean-up problems that the board is tied to under 
the legislation from 1969. That’s unrealistic. 
 
A thousand dollars in 1969 would buy me at least a third of a 
quarter section of land. And of course today, I couldn’t pay the 
taxes on a half section with that kind of money because 
inflation, of course, has devalued the buying power of the 
dollar. And things that were set back, that far back are simply 
outdated. 
 
And so we need to have the board put into a modern context of 
dollar values. And so we’re saying to the Assembly, take a look 
at removing those two things from the Act in order to give the 

board the power to use its mandate so that we can have the oil 
industry and the gas industry, the natural gas industry, and the 
farmers and the ranchers continue to work as a joint group 
working in our communities for the betterment of all. 
 
We have also, Mr. Speaker, in the south-west, come to realize 
that the shortcomings in the Speech from the Throne might 
include . . . including things that look nice and fluffy and warm, 
I guess is the way I felt the day I heard the Speech from the 
Throne. It was a warm, fuzzy feeling. That’s what I want to say 
— a warm, fuzzy feeling, You felt kind of good. But once again 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I know it’s a good feeling. 
 
But once again when you re-examine it and you find that, hear 
the government saying we’re going to help the little children 
and the poor kids around our community, who could be against 
that? Well motherhood and apple pie; I’ve said it many times, 
you’d have to be a fool to be against it. 
 
(1115) 
 
But sometimes, if you take a look at it, maybe we’re trying to 
cure a problem by not really curing the problem. We’re simply 
trying to pick people up the wrong way. And this is where I 
think I would differ in the philosophy that the government is 
using. 
 
They say they’re going to bring in a new social program. And I 
always say: don’t give me anything more for free, I can’t afford 
it. And it’s just a simple fact of life that every time somebody 
gets something for free, somebody else is going to pay for it. 
And usually it seems to be me and I don’t like that. 
 
So I’m going to say to the people of Saskatchewan, I want to 
help the kids — I’ve had kids of my own — but I want to help 
them in a real way. 
 
And when the Minister of Social Services says that he’s going 
to bring in a plan as a family income supplement plan, 
everybody that’s going to get those dollars is going to say, 
thank you, we’ll take them. I’ve never seen anybody turn down 
a cheque in a long time. There are some odd exceptions, but 
most of the time people grab the money quickly. And they’re 
going to say, it’s good; we need the money, we’ll use it. And 
the odd one will buy beer and everybody’s going to complain of 
course. But most of them will use it to help the kids, and that’s 
good. 
 
But realistically over the long period of time . . . And I want to 
use a metaphor, Mr. Speaker, to explain my feelings on this. 
When you feed money to a family through a family income plan 
where they haven’t worked for it, it’s like the government 
having two big hands. And they reach underneath that family 
and they pick that family up and they lift the family up. And 
they do — they lift them up. They lift them up economically, 
they lift them up mentally and socially, because now they have 
a few more dollars to spend and they can buy some new shoes 
and they’re doing good. 
 
Unfortunately as soon as we get out of this boom period in the 
province, if we go into another recession and the government 
suddenly finds that it’s short of money and has to cut back 
programs, they’re going to say, whoops, we can’t afford this 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1998 

social program any more; we’re going to cut it out. Or you have 
an election and you elect a different government and they take 
their hands and they pull them out. That’s the government: 
pulling its hands out. 
 
Where does that family go, Mr. Speaker? They fall, because 
there’s nothing under them to hold them back up. It is 
metaphorically a drop back to where they were and you’re right 
back to where you were to start with. 
 
You will say, Mr. Speaker, how do you cure that problem? And 
I say to you that it’s not simple but it is possible. What you have 
to do is pull people up with government money, in a 
metaphorical sense, from the top up. And you do that by giving 
them increased wages, increased jobs, and something that they 
can work at themselves and take pride in. And that way, as 
you’re pulling the society up, all of the people that are poor, as 
you’re pulling them up, it’s like you automatically put a slab of 
cement under them. 
 
And when government programs do stop, if you work on things 
like minimum wage being increased, then those things are 
sustainable and they go on. And that slab of cement, when the 
government lets go, is there to catch them and they don’t go 
down; they stay. They have stability, and then they can continue 
to go on their own. 
 
Now what have I been talking about? I’m talking about 
increasing the minimum wage in this province. Our minimum 
wage is too low in Saskatchewan. And I know every 
businessman is looking for an opportunity to choke me just 
now. But if they think about it, they won’t do that because I 
understand how the system works. For a few minutes they’ll be 
angry because there’s always a lag time when people want to 
line their own pockets, they want to have profits. And there’s a 
lag time where they lose some money when minimum wage is 
increased. Business has to take that out of their pockets and pay 
the people. 
 
But you aren’t having the government pay them. And if you 
think about it and you automatically, at the same time, do what 
Alberta has done — which is decrease taxes to the business 
sector — comparably at the same time, 1 per cent of corporate 
tax reduction at the same time that you implement an increase 
in minimum wage, automatically gives them the money to pay 
their employed people that extra money. And those people then 
don’t have to depend on the government. They don’t have to go 
to the food bank. They don’t have to worry about the 
government going broke because they are now on jobs that are 
paying. And they don’t have to worry about the government 
cutting back or social services pulling their hands out from 
under them; they’ve got that cement slab of stability under 
them. 
 
Now you would find this strange to come from a person that 
claims to be a right-wing person but there is nothing wrong with 
having a social conscience. And every right-wing person that 
hasn’t got a social conscience is not my friend. You have to 
have . . . and neither is the person on the left side. But you have 
to have this stability, and we are behind. 
 
Why does Alberta continue to go along ahead of us? Why do 
they get away with having a higher minimum wage than we do? 

They have a higher minimum wage than we do, and the 
business people don’t complain . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Oh they say it’s lower. Well then let’s drag them up with us. 
 
The reality is, the reality is that the people of this province do 
not need social programs, they need to have stability. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I know that the members opposite really agree with 
this; they just don’t have the nerve to put the program into 
place. What you have to do is cut corporate taxes by 1 per cent 
in order to offset it and then increase your minimum wage. Pull 
people up from the bottom, cut out your social program, give 
them jobs, and they’ll all take care of themselves. 
 
Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Less than 50 per cent. Well 
look at that. Now I’m into a grand debate and it’s too bad that 
we can’t have all the lights on at once, Mr. Speaker. But 
anyway, I think I’ve made my point on why we have to do these 
things. 
 
I wanted to say, Mr. Speaker, a few things more about my 
constituency before we get into the lunch hour here and 
everybody gets sugar depleted and too crabby. In the south-west 
we’ve run into some very real problems. It was like I was 
saying to some folks the other day, when I was involved with 
the municipal programs as councillor and reeve, people had rat 
problems in their garbage dumps and they had some rats under 
their granaries, and we had a program to cure that. And the last 
thing anybody in the world wanted to hear about was rats. But 
they were a problem. It’s a very simple kind of an ugly little 
thing and nobody wants to kind of get involved with it but it’s 
necessary to talk about because it’s necessary to cure it. 
 
Well the same thing happens with white-tailed deer. I mean 
how many people in the province, or especially in Regina, 
really care about a white-tailed buck? Not very many people. 
But the people that are involved with the Sceptre Wildlife 
Association, they care about the white-tailed deer and the 
white-tailed buck and so do the people in the wildlife 
associations across the province. 
 
That whole group of people, of course has recognized a very 
serious problem with our wildlife, and they trigger it, and they 
point to the white-tailed buck as an example of what has gone 
wrong and what needs to be approached. And so we’re calling 
on the ministers to take a listen today about a problem that is 
growing and needs to be resolved. 
 
And that problem of course, is the loss of the gene pool in our 
wildlife, and the loss of the gene pool of course is the 
concentration of hunting on the larger horned animals. 
Naturally when people hunt, they want to find a trophy. And the 
pressure comes on the trophy animals as a result of the fact that 
that’s the way the sport has evolved. We don’t give trophies, for 
example, for the white-tailed deer with the prettiest face; we 
give a trophy for the one with the biggest horns. 
 
And so the reality is that by having outside hunters allowed to 
come in on a double tag — which of course is one of either sex 
— it automatically becomes, as the wildlife people have pointed 
out, a trophy licence. And we need, along with the night 
hunting that has occurred and those things that have depleted 
our top end of our populations, we need to address the situation 
of how we are going to propagate the species of our wildlife 



March 13, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

with strong gene pools. 
 
And that has to be done by taking a look — again I’m going to 
point to Alberta and this time I know what I’m talking about for 
sure — because in Alberta they do have some two-tiered 
hunting licence programs and I’m sure that the minister will be 
studying those as soon as he hears about it and will be taking a 
look at it. 
 
But some of those ideas are working and we also have to ask 
the government to take a look at these smaller problems, not 
just be looking at Channel Lake problems, not just be looking at 
the big problems of the multilateral agreement on investment 
which is all very important. But we have to take care of the rats, 
and the deer, and the sheep, and those other little things in our 
province that need to be taken care of. We have to take care of 
municipal roads; we have to take care of our schools; and we 
do, of course, have to take care of the big problems as well. 
 
I want to say just a couple of more things before I sit down, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ve heard, and I guess it’s natural for the last six or 
seven years as we’ve been here, people condemning the past 
administration. People, of course, will condemn this 
administration. 
 
And I guess I’m reminded of a little story that one of the 
members from the opposite side told me the other day, and I 
think it’s worth repeating, and he’ll probably say it himself. But 
he said life in politics is like carrying a gunny sack on your 
back and as you walk down the road, hitchhiking along the 
road, you stop and you put a pebble in your bag. And he said 
after awhile you pick up another pebble and pretty soon the bag 
is so full of pebbles that you fall down and collapse because of 
the pressure. 
 
Well politics is like that and the government, of course, is 
experiencing some of that this week. In fact I think they had a 
major rock dumped in the bag this week — oh it’s a boulder, 
yes — and I think it was called Channel Lake of course, but 
that’s just the reality of the way the democratic system works. 
 
The past administration got dragged down by that bag full of 
rocks too and of course they’re no longer here. But the reality is 
that every government does do something that’s good. 
 
I heard the other day from Ron Wormsbecker — who of course 
used to be a member of this Assembly but now he’s not, so I 
can give him credit by . . . with his recognized name — and he 
was telling me that there’s enough snowfall that the Rafferty 
dam will probably get another big shot of water this year in 
spite of the fact that the south-west is bone dry. The south-east 
is going to, of course, enjoy that run-off and the dam is going to 
be filling up again. 
 
And so even though it cost a lot of money a few years ago and 
was roundly condemned by a lot of people, the reality is that 
that dam is in place along with the structure of the other two or 
three dams that were put in in that area. And the floods that 
used to hit Minot, North Dakota no longer happen because that 
water’s controlled. And that was a good thing. 
 
Now you can criticize how it was done and how the tenders 
were done or not done and all those kinds of things, but the 

reality is that in the long term that project is helping 
Saskatchewan people and it’s helping the people from North 
Dakota. It’s probably also helping the people in the Red River 
Valley who of course know more than enough about flooding 
from last year. 
 
And of course you’ve got the pulp mill up North that’s working 
quite nicely. And it had some problems, but that administration 
did some good. They brought it in. They kept it there. They 
expanded it. They did what they did. And it’s still there 
providing jobs. 
 
The upgraders of course. People are bragging these days about 
how a big sale was made and profits were made. Well if it 
hadn’t been there, you couldn’t have made the profits. It was 
there because of the work of the administration of the 1980s. 
You’ve also of course got the fertilizer plant doing a fantastic 
job of making money and providing jobs. And those are the 
good things. 
 
And I think that we have come to a point in time, Mr. Speaker, 
when it’s time to give some credit to the past administrations 
that did some good. I can think of some things that I didn’t like 
about Tommy Douglas, but the man did a lot of good as well. 
 
So let’s remember the past as good things, otherwise we won’t 
enjoy the good times we’re having now because we’re all filled 
with this anger and this hate of the past. It’s a good province 
and we have rounded the corner and we’re now fairly 
prosperous. Why chew ourselves up about mistakes that were 
made before. Let’s get on with the future and enjoy this 
prosperity. 
 
This province is in pretty good shape. If we sit around and 
mope and be gloomy about the past things that have happened, 
we’re never going to enjoy life and we’re not going to enjoy the 
prosperity until we lose it again. And then we’re going to say, 
boy we sure must have had a good time, though I wish we had it 
to do over again. 
 
It’s sort of like the guy that sells his canola and he asks for the 
three wishes. You remember that story, Mr. Speaker. And of 
course the second wish, I hope that canola goes up. And of 
course the third wish was, I hope it goes up again and this time I 
have sense enough to sell it. 
 
Well you see that’s the way life is. And I want to remind people 
that we are in pretty good times. Let’s enjoy the good times. 
Let’s enjoy what we have. And I think, Mr. Speaker, even 
though I have to vote against what’s not in the Speech from the 
Throne, things are not too bad in our province. And for those 
people that think that they have to go out and eat road kill in 
this province, there is a good social services program that holds 
people up. And I wish them all well this year. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I start, I want 
to take this opportunity to wish a happy birthday to the member 
from Swift Current. I understand it’s his birthday today. He 
won’t tell us how many he’s had. And I’m sure likely turning 
40 at this time in history is probably good. And so I hope that 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1998 

all members will join with me and maybe giving the member 
from Swift Current a bit of a round of applause, because this is 
quite a big birthday for him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Many other members have acknowledged, Mr. 
Speaker, your outreach to the school children and to the adults 
of the province explaining and educating people on the roles of 
the MLA, explaining our position and our duties and the 
advantages of democracy. Our province is, and will be, an even 
better place because of your actions, Mr. Speaker. You must be 
commended on this initiative, and I want to thank you 
personally for your visits to Carrot River Valley. 
 
I want to acknowledge all MLAs and Assembly employees, 
pages included. It is good to be back and to see everyone again. 
 
And to my friends across the floor, I know we will have some 
disagreements, but I’m sure in the end we’ll be able to walk 
outside and talk to each other and enjoy each other’s company. 
 
I want to state very clearly that the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains, who moved the Speech from the Throne to 
open this third sitting of the twenty-third legislature, did total 
justice to a Made in Saskatchewan plan for our province; a plan 
with the signature and acceptance of the Saskatchewan people, 
the signature of the New Democratic Party. Congratulations. 
 
And to the seconder, and to other speakers on this side of the 
House, your words have been inspiring. To hear your words and 
your speeches makes my job as a member of the Assembly so 
rewarding. 
 
The words from across the floor also makes me proud to be a 
part of this government, Mr. Speaker. I would not want to be so 
negative and so critical of a truly Made in Saskatchewan plan 
that includes the values of our citizens and our community — 
compassion, equality, cooperation, and common sense. 
 
(1130) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Before I talk about the plan, I want to share 
with you and with the people of Saskatchewan and the people 
of Canada, and in fact especially to the people that are watching 
for the first time — that includes I believe, about 30 new 
communities, Mr. Speaker — that now can enjoy this 
advancement in technology to watch democracy in action, I 
want to share some good news about Saskatchewan in recent 
years, in recent weeks. And the reason I can tell you about some 
of the wonderful things that are happening in Saskatchewan is 
because we have all joined together the Saskatchewan way. A 
few years ago we made some tough decisions and now we can 
begin to recoup the rewards of those sacrifices. 
 
When I talk about some of the achievements Saskatchewan 
people have made, I talk about fighting the war on deficits. A 
war, Mr. Speaker, that we have won. And in a few days we will 
be introducing the fifth consecutive balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Renaud: — Raising our credit rating, Mr. Speaker, from 
B’s. And I know when I went to school B’s were pretty good. 
But I think for a government who needs to borrow money on 
occasion, B’s aren’t very good. Now that credit rating, Mr. 
Speaker, is A’s across the board. A’s, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
pretty good even for . . . It was very good for me in school but 
it’s very good for a government to have A’s. It costs us less 
when we have to borrow money. It costs the taxpayers less 
when we pay that interest on the huge debt that we still have. 
 
Some of the other good news, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that retail 
sales continue to grow in the province of Saskatchewan. It 
grows faster than any other province in Canada. Activity in the 
oil and gas continues to set new records. 
 
Our population? — steadily increasing. I remember coming to 
power in 1991 and I think our population was somewhere 
around a million, maybe a little less. Now it’s well over a 
million people and it continues to grow. 
 
Our young people are coming home to work. They’re not going 
out to Alberta or to Manitoba. In fact, Mr. Speaker, and the 
member from Regina South announced it earlier, that we have 
14,900 more people working in the province of Saskatchewan 
this February than we had just a year ago. We have 3,000 fewer 
people on unemployment insurance. Regina has the lowest 
unemployment rate in all of Canada. We have 5,800 more 
young people working in Saskatchewan today than we had a 
year ago. I think that is an excellent record, Mr. Speaker, and it 
speaks well for this government and the plans of this 
government. 
 
I get a touch of that quiet pride that the throne speech makes 
reference to when I think about some of these positive changes, 
Mr. Speaker, that have taken place in just a very short time. It’s 
been only . . . I believe it’s about six and a half years since the 
NDP government has come to power in the province of 
Saskatchewan and all of these good things have happened in 
that short period of time. I think there are certain people that 
need credit for this. I think the leadership of this government 
. . . I mean everybody tightened their belt, yes. Every citizen in 
the province of Saskatchewan participated in what we needed to 
do to get this province turned around, but certainly the 
leadership of this government was instrumental in that. And the 
leadership in particular, Mr. Speaker, of our Premier. Premier 
Romanow has . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize already that the hon. member has 
realized that he’s violated one of the rules of the House that 
prohibits members from using the proper names of members of 
the Assembly because we are required, of course, to use the 
reference to one another in terms of the roles that we serve in 
the House. And I’m sure that he’ll want to avoid doing so in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that correction. 
And certainly our Premier is well known; his name does not 
have to be mentioned. Everyone in Canada is certainly aware of 
the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and the job that he 
has done to balance our books and to get us on the right track. 
 
But as the throne speech states, Mr. Speaker, even though 
we’ve got all this good news, we can take pride in those 



March 13, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

accomplishments, but we dare not rest upon them. There is 
much left to do together, and a long way for us to go. So we 
must move on. 
 
Now here are a few words about the plan, investing in families, 
and especially in children. It is unacceptable to have child 
poverty in a country, in a province, as rich as ours — the best 
country, the best province, in which to live. And we, with the 
leadership of that government that I was just telling you about, 
Mr. Speaker, will succeed the Saskatchewan way in defeating 
this terrible blight. We will allow people to avoid dependency, 
and allow those who genuinely need help to get that help. 
 
And we will continue, Mr. Speaker, to work to full 
implementation of the 911 service province-wide. 
 
We will continue to move ahead and we will press for reforms 
for the young offenders system, recognizing, of course, that of 
the 95,000 youths in that age category, 94,000-plus are kids that 
go to school every day, that play hockey, that work in the local 
grocery store. We must recognize, while we need new rules for 
the violent, repeat offenders, that the majority of our kids are an 
asset — are in fact our greatest resource. We must not 
preoccupy ourselves so much with the offenders that we forget 
those kids. 
 
And how about jobs? We have done a good job, I think, as a 
government, to facilitate the creation of jobs, help the private 
sector fill that role, but we must certainly do more. 
 
In the area of diversification and agriculture and value added 
industries, in ecotourism, in the oil and gas and mining sectors, 
20,000 new jobs since 1991. That’s our record, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’re well on our way to 30,000 new jobs by the year 
2000, which is our pledge. This is a good record, but we must 
not rest on our laurels. 
 
And education, Mr. Speaker, investing in post-secondary 
education, training, and apprenticeships, as the member from 
Maple Creek mentioned earlier. A commitment to high quality 
public education and lifelong learning in partnership with 
community, industry, and educators. 
 
And investing in health care, Mr. Speaker, as part of our plan. 
And I want to tell you about additional service in the north-east 
part of our province, in the North-East Health District and in the 
Pasquia Health District, part of my constituency. We can now 
access more palliative and respite care. We have home care, 
more home care, better home care than we ever had before. 
 
Visiting specialists — we have that now in the north-east part of 
the province — where specialists come to the communities of 
Nipawin and Tisdale, Melfort. We don’t have to drive to 
Saskatoon; they come to see us. 
 
We have a renal dialysis centre in Tisdale, brand-new 
announcement. Telehealth project in Nipawin and Cumberland 
House, with these and the new partnerships with our provincial 
doctors. A new MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) in Regina 
and other technological advances and more help with needed 
and newly discovered drugs and the development of the 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network, along with 
additional money for ambulance service, a new and additional 

air ambulance airplane. Health care renewal is beginning to 
become tangible, Mr. Speaker — something that our people can 
see, they can feel, and they can touch. 
 
Investing in transportation, a continuation of the strategy of 
more money, better planning, including community 
involvement, and a challenge to the federal government to get 
more involved. It was the federal government’s decision to 
allow the railways to abandon rail lines. It was their decision to 
take away the Crow rate and deregulate, leaving all kinds of 
pressure on our large infrastructure. 
 
We need them to join with us, not to make decisions 
unilaterally. They have to join with us and become partners in 
protecting and fixing the roads that are deteriorating because of 
their decisions. We need their support to help our rural 
communities as railways are controlled and legislated by the 
federal Liberals, not by this provincial government. 
 
They want to make the railways rich, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Acting Speaker. How? By taking away more from the 
producers. Take away money from the producers, give it to the 
railways. Sounds good, I guess. Members opposite seem to 
think it’s okay. I don’t particularly think it’s okay. We will not 
stand for that. 
 
We are also asking that they stop immediately the railways 
from abandoning one piece of track at a time until Justice Estey 
completes his report on our transportation system. A potential 
short-line may be the answer in some cases if it has the support 
of the producers and proper agreements with the CN and CP 
(Canadian National and Canadian Pacific). But if the track has 
already gone, what chance does it have? It will take no traffic 
off the roadways of Saskatchewan. 
 
And last, and certainly not least, part of our plan, Mr. Speaker, 
is fiscal integrity or fiscal common sense. This may be the most 
important part of the plan or the thing that . . . the part of the 
plan that links the rest of the plan together. Because without 
financial freedom, we cannot accomplish what we desire; we 
cannot follow that map, that plan that the throne speech 
delivered. 
 
I want to take a moment to talk about our official opposition 
and the Liberals. And I think this is an appropriate place to cut 
in. When we talk about financial common sense, I think it is a 
very good time to chime in about the opposition because it’s 
something they have a little problem with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The newer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well success yes, 
yes. The newer, the newer Conservatives over there, I hear them 
chirping once in awhile, they want to spend, spend, spend. 
 
You know if . . . I follow some of them to meetings. They like a 
government member sometimes to come into their 
constituencies to know what’s really going on. So I have that 
opportunity once in a while. And I talk to these different 
organizations that they meet with and they tell me, what are you 
going to promise me because the members from the 
newer-than-new Conservative Party have promised us millions 
and millions of dollars for — you name it. Maybe it’s for new 
schools, maybe it’s for new roads; it depends who they talk to. 
That’s how they base their next new promise for money. So I 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1998 

want everyone to be aware of that. 
 
One minute it’s millions of dollars more for new schools, like I 
mentioned earlier, or maybe the next minute it’s millions of 
more dollars for more hospitals yet; more roads. And the next 
minute they’re going to cut every tax — every tax. They’re 
going to slash every tax in the province of Saskatchewan and 
the next minute they’re going to get rid of the debt, too. 
 
Well I’ve heard it mentioned by our Premier on occasions: 
Houdini, maybe he could do that. The people across? No, I 
don’t think so. 
 
They never mention, they never mention in any of their 
promises for more money, Mr. Speaker — or when they’re 
going to cut the tax — where they’re going to get this extra 
money for roads or hospitals or schools. Or how they’re going 
to cut the tax or how they’re going to pay the debt. 
 
They seem to forget that part of it, Mr. Speaker. They seem to 
leave that on the side. They don’t want to mention that because 
. . . I think they would have said to the people: well, yes, we 
would have to borrow and we would have to increase the debt. 
And yes, we would create a huge debt and large interest 
payments. But that’s okay because, well, Mr. Devine did it and 
he got away with it okay, and then they brought you in to clean 
up the mess. But we could maybe go back there now and we 
could do that. 
 
And so they never seem to be able to tell the people, after they 
make a promise, exactly where they’re going to get the money. 
And I think they owe that to the people of Saskatchewan. If 
you’re going to make a promise, you’ve got to tell the people 
where you’re going to get the money for that promise. 
 
I remember hearing those same promises in 1992 — or pardon 
me, 1982, 1982 I heard . . . Have you heard some of these 
sayings: oh, I know everything is good but there’s so much 
more we could be? Oh, I remember that. 1980, 1980-82. 
 
And there was another thing I heard at that point in time: we 
can mismanage this province and still break even. I heard that 
too in 1982. 
 
(1145) 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was a miracle. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — I think it, it was a miracle, exactly. I think it 
was the same people that sit over there now that maybe even 
said those words. Did you ever . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — They used to be Liberals. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Were they? Oh, okay. Did you hear the words, 
“Give her snoose, Bruce?” I’ve heard that somewhere. And I 
hear those same words over there today. 
 
Or did you ever hear this? “Never say whoa in a mud hole.” I 
heard that somewhere too . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
well my friends, we’re still paying $760 million each and every 
year. We indeed got stuck in that mud hole. We got stuck in that 
mud hole and now we’re paying. And we will never again drive 

through that mud hole with that party over there, the newer and 
newer Conservative Party. 
 
The other day the . . . A few days ago the rural municipalities of 
the province of Saskatchewan were asking the province for $56 
million. And they need money. There is no question about that. 
If we had the $760 million that we spent each and every year on 
the interest on our debt, think of what we could do with the 
rural municipalities of the province of Saskatchewan. Do you, 
when you go to the SARM meetings, apologize? I think they 
should apologize because that’s the reason that they’re not 
getting $56 million. The reason is sitting right across there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This new Conservative Party is saying the same things as Grant 
Devine said six and a half years ago. They think that the people 
have forgotten. The only thing that the Saskatchewan people 
have not forgotten is that they will never vote for that 
Saskatchewan Party, that newer-than-new Conservative Party, 
ever, ever again. 
 
And I know that the member from Kelvington chirps back 
there. She moved over from the Liberal Party to the 
Conservative Party and still feels comfortable. I can’t 
understand that. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — I know that the member across hides behind 
that desk, and even though she moved over from the Liberal 
Party over to the newer-than-new Conservative Party, she 
thinks that people will forget. But people will not forget. 
 
Actually it reminds me of a little story. There was Tom and 
Bill. Yes, it’s a little story, yes. There was Tom and Bill . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. The hon. 
member for Carrot River Valley has the floor and the speech 
. . . the debate to the Speech from the Throne. I would 
appreciate if all hon. members would give that member the 
opportunity to make his address to the legislature. And I assure 
you that there is ample time for all members to get involved in 
their turn. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you. Well hopefully, the chirping will 
be down a little bit as I tell this wonderful little story. It’s a 
wonderful little story about Tom and Bill. And they had been 
the closest of friends since childhood. They played on the same 
ball teams, they married sisters in fact and built homes . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Now I find myself 
in an uncomfortable position of having risen three times. There 
are two opposition members who are leading me to my feet. I’m 
not anxious to name them — they know who they are. They’re 
not alone in heckling in this legislature today. I ask all members 
to cooperate and allow the member for Carrot River Valley to 
continue with his debate. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Well I think, Mr. Speaker, that the story will 
hit . . . it will touch a nerve maybe and this is why they don’t 
want to hear it. But I’m going to tell it anyway. 
 
Tom and Bill had been the closest of friends since childhood. 



March 13, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

They played on the same ball teams. They married sisters in 
fact. They built homes in the same neighbourhood. Then all of a 
sudden Tom died suddenly. Bill was devastated. 
 
One evening watching a beautiful sunset Bill was sure he felt 
the presence of Tom near by. Is that you, Tom? he asked. Yes, 
Bill, came the reply. What’s it like where you are? Well it’s 
kind of nice. I get up in the morning and I have some breakfast 
and I maybe go down for a swim in the lake. And when I 
encounter one of those lovely ladies I enjoy a romantic 
interlude. Soon it’s time for lunch and a nap. Wow, said Bill, I 
had no idea heaven was like that. Who says I’m in heaven? 
replied Tom. I’m a moose in Wyoming. 
 
The reincarnation of the Liberals and the Conservatives to the 
Saskatchewan Party remind me somewhat of that moose in 
Wyoming. Maybe it’s a fox in a hen-house. Could be a fox in a 
hen-house or a wolf in sheep’s clothing or something like that. 
Maybe it’s like the caterpillar who loses his skin and then 
becomes a beautiful butterfly only to return to that crawly little 
caterpillar again. 
 
And the Saskatchewan people know that they cannot trust those 
who would do anything to have power. 
 
I want to read you a few quotes, Mr. Speaker. And this is a 
quote, Rod Gantefoer said, no, absolutely no . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. The member for 
Carrot River Valley just named a sitting member in the 
legislature and that is not acceptable. I ask — order, order — 
and I ask the hon. member not to do so. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the member 
from Melfort-Tisdale said, this is what he said, no, absolutely 
no, not with the Tory Party or any other party. I am a Liberal 
member from the legislature for Melfort-Tisdale and that is 
what I will stay, he said. 
 
And the member from Canora-Pelly, asked about crossing the 
floor, said this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh no. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — He did, he did. It’s totally false and nothing 
but an attempt by the Tories to grab media attention. We have 
signed a document from all members and I can say 
unequivocally there is no truth to it. Well my goodness. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What he meant to say is that we’re 
staying on the same side. We’re not really crossing the floor . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Moving over. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — I agree. 
 
The member from Melfort-Tisdale, again when asked about 
crossing the floor, said: 
 

“I absolutely can say I have never ever considered, never 
mind participated in, any discussions to cross the floor. It’s 
almost too ridiculous to imagine,” he said. 
 

“I was elected in Melfort-Tisdale as a Liberal and I will 
continue to represent Melfort-Tisdale as a Liberal. None of 
our members have initiated or participated in discussions 
with any party.” 

 
Well isn’t that interesting? These are the same people that are 
making all these promises now about more money for schools 
and more hospitals and more wonderful roads, never telling the 
people where they’re going to get the money. 
 
And the member from Saltcoats said this: 
 

“As ludicrous as these reports are, I want to assure you, the 
people of Saltcoats constituency, that I remain committed 
to you, the Liberal Party, and my caucus colleagues.” 
 

And look where he is sitting now. 
 
I know the other night we went to a reception and following 
him to that reception we got to the wrong reception. It was kind 
of fun though, actually. But maybe he got lost when he was 
looking for his party. All of a sudden . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I guess you should never follow them. 
 
And the member from Kelvington I have . . . oh, the member 
from Kelvington said this: 
 

I would like to inform the people of Saskatchewan, and 
particularly those in the Liberal constituencies, that we are 
continuing our loyalty and support to the cause of the 
Liberal Saskatchewan Party, the official opposition caucus, 
and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have not approached the Conservative Party or any 
other party with the intention of crossing this floor. 
 

That was actually in Hansard on April 2, 1996. So it’s quite 
interesting. That’s an example of the party next that want power 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And to the member from Melfort . . . I see he’s not here this 
afternoon. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I know the hon. member 
is also well aware that rules of debate prohibit hon. members 
from making direct reference to the presence or the absence of 
other hon. members as the debate point in their remarks in the 
House. And I will ask the hon. member to withdraw his last 
remark. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — I would like to withdraw that remark, Mr. 
Speaker. It gets so heated in the discussions here that sometimes 
we forget the rules. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Now I’m not asking the 
hon. member to comment on the ruling but simply to do what’s 
requested and get on with his debate. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the member 
for Melfort, when I go to the local bar in Tisdale, I can get a 
beer, I could play VLTs (video lottery terminal) . . . I do go. I 
do go occasionally, yes. But I can also buy a Saskatchewan 
Party membership — a Saskatchewan Party membership. Yes 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1998 

— yes, I can. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In the bar? 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Right there. Yes. I wonder if this is the new 
policy that we can maybe purchase these in all bars across the 
province? I don’t know that. And I understand that the Melfort 
from . . . the member from Melfort is looking for the next phone 
booth so that the next leadership meeting could be held. I don’t 
know if that’s right or not. 
 
And the Liberals. And the Liberals. The member from 
Battleford . . . North Battleford and I quote, “if only people had 
optimism.” This was a quote from the other day in this House. 
Well it is he, Mr. Speaker, it is he that has no optimism. It’s the 
people of that party that have no optimism. Negative — they’re 
so negative. 
 
I’m glad that the member from North Battleford is not the 
groundhog, Mr. Speaker, because I don’t think that winter 
would ever go away. I think we would have winter forever. 
 
The Liberals, if they could get off that 
defend-the-federal-Liberal kick for a minute, might be able to 
see the excitement, the enthusiasm, the upbeat attitude of the 
Saskatchewan people. Mind you, I can understand their 
dullness, their lack of enthusiasm as they watch Mr. Goodale 
and Mr. Chrétien deliver blow after blow to western Canada, to 
the prairies. 
 
Why don’t you join us? You could perhaps spend more time 
and effort maybe talking to your federal Liberal counterparts to 
help fund for an example with Canada’s national highway 
system and not just in New Brunswick, but right here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a great place to live. 
Just the other day in Nipawin we had the winter games, the 
Saskatchewan Winter Games. We had 2,100 volunteers, Mr. 
Speaker. We had 1,600 participants, athletes. We had many, 
many corporate sponsors that helped fund the winter games. 
 
This is a little quote I have from one of the coaches that were in 
Nipawin, coach Gene Kondra, and it’s from the Star-Phoenix: 
 

I’ve run out of saying that I’m impressed. Now I’m in 
awe. The people here are just terrific. They have treated us 
like celebrities and I can’t say enough about this town. 

 
The town of Nipawin, the people of Nipawin, showed the rest 
of Saskatchewan the true Saskatchewan spirit, the optimism 
that’s out there. I just wish that members of the Liberal Party, 
members of the new and newer, newer-than-new Conservative 
Party would join in this feeling of optimism and catch the 
Saskatchewan spirit and join with the rest of Saskatchewan as 
we move forward to the next century, to the new millennium. 
 
I encourage you to support the plan. I encourage you to support 
the throne speech that was so eloquently delivered by our 
Lieutenant Governor, the Hon. Jack Wiebe on Monday, March 
9, 1998. I know I will. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to bring to 
the attention of the Assembly that there are two new 
communities that are able to view the actions of this Assembly 
— the community of Spiritwood and the community of 
Shellbrook. 
 
I also understand that as we are at a time in the day when we 
plan to move into other items, that I ask, beg leave, to adjourn 
debate on the throne speech debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that it’s by agreement of all the members in 
the House that this would be a time to introduce two condolence 
motions. And could I ask leave of the House to do so. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1200) 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to rise and say a 
few words in tribute to the passing of a former Clerk of this 
Assembly, Mr. Charles Beverley Koester, better known as Bev 
Koester. 
 
Bev Koester died peacefully on Sunday, February 1, 1998, 
leaving to mourn his wife Carolyn; his children Elizabeth, 
Charles, Christopher, James, and Kate; 10 grandchildren, and 
his sister, Vera-May. 
 
Bev Koester was Clerk of the House of Commons from 1980 to 
1987 and he was honoured by appointment to the Order of 
Canada as an officer in 1989 for his public service. 
 
Prior to his service in the House of Commons, Bev Koester 
taught history at the University of Regina right here in 
Saskatchewan after receiving his doctorate in western Canadian 
history from the University of Alberta in 1971. 
 
And Bev, as he was widely known and respected, served as 
Clerk of this Assembly from 1959 to 1969. And it was during 
that period, at least the latter two years of his tenure here, that I 
got to know him first. I entered the Legislative Assembly as the 
member for Riversdale in 1967, and from ’67, ’68, and ’69, Bev 
Koester proved himself to be the man that he was in all of his 
dealings with me and with every one of us. 
 
A person of high intelligence and an understanding of the rules 
of the House. A deep appreciation of the tradition which is the 
parliamentary tradition. The belief that civilized debate and 
discourse is the hallmark of a civilization, and generally 
speaking, a very civilized human being. More than a good 
adviser and an impartial adviser, he was widely read, could be 
counted on in terms of providing advice to individual MLAs 
over and above the rules. 
 
I say the latter because in my years in this Legislative Assembly 
I’ve often argued the proposition that it’s not the formal rules 
that make this House work, but it is the informal understandings 
and relationships that work and make this House work — the 
informal relationships amongst members, the honouring of 



March 13, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

arrangements, the ordering of business. The odd time when we 
overstep our bounds, applying common sense and rectifying it 
and making amends for doing the transgression — these are the 
things which really all contribute to the formal set of rules. It’s 
true we rely on them and we need them, but if you are richly 
nuanced and well-read and experienced in the ways of life, the 
combination of the black and white of the rules, together with 
this background, this storehouse of information and knowledge 
and gentility and civility, is really what makes this House 
operate. 
 
Bev Koester was absolutely critical to the operation of this 
House. We all went to him. I served in opposition from ’67 to 
’69 — and I could do so with absolute impunity, knowing that 
the advice I sought would be tendered to me in confidence and 
that it would be the best advice — not from partisan, political 
points of view, but from the point of view of making sure that 
this institution, this body, retains the respect that is so necessary 
for it to have in order for us to do the day-to-day dealings in our 
lives. 
 
So I fondly remember, as I address you, Mr. Speaker, and look 
at our current very distinguished and able crew of Clerks at the 
Table, I can visualize in my mind’s eye the very erect figure of 
this distinguished personage, Bev Koester. 
 
It’s a number of years since he’s been here, but I guess it’s said 
it’s always the first experiences which are sometimes the most 
lasting, and my experience with him, as Clerk of the Assembly, 
was the most lasting or one of the most lasting ones that I’ve 
had. 
 
He graduated from the Royal Canadian Naval College in 
Victoria, B.C. in 1944 and served in the Royal Canadian Navy 
and Royal Navy from 1944 to 1961 and retired as Lieutenant 
Commander. So you can see, a very distinguished military 
record as well. 
 
One of Bev’s personal accomplishments was to serve on two 
separate occasions — two separate occasions — as temporary 
senior Clerk of the House of Commons in London, England, 
which I surely must think would be one of the highest accolades 
paid to any Clerk. 
 
Many things can be said about this distinguished Canadian. In 
closing, I think it’s been said best by a quotation which I will 
recite from the former federal leader of the New Democratic 
Party, Ed Broadbent. On September 16, 1987, on the occasion 
of Bev Koester’s retirement from his duties in the House of 
Commons, Ottawa, Ed Broadbent said the following, quote: 
 

Dr. Koester has a long record of distinguished public 
service in Canada. He is a native of Saskatchewan and was 
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly in his home province for 
some nine years. His interests and contributions to 
Canadian life have been wide-ranging, as a teacher, 
decorated member of the Canadian navy, historian, 
university professor, author, and of course as one of the 
country’s leading parliamentary experts. 
 

I think that sums it all up. Bev Koester cared very passionately 
about the well-being and effective operations of our 
parliamentary institutions and will be remembered by myself 

and by many others for his many great contributions to this 
House, to the House of Commons, and in the broader scheme of 
things, his many contributions to the enhancement in the 
increase of civility of our great society. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the Assembly, 
seconded by the hon. member from Moosomin: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former table officer of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to this institution and to the province. 
 
Charles Beverley Koester, who died in Kingston on 
February 1, 1998, was an officer of this legislature for 10 
years, first as Clerk Assistant and later as Clerk from 1960 
until 1969. Dr. Koester was born in Regina on January 13, 
1926. He received his early education in Regina before 
pursuing his studies at the Royal Canadian Naval College 
and the universities of Saskatchewan and Alberta. 
 
Dr. Koester had a long and distinguished record of public 
service. This began as a naval officer during World War II 
and continued for many years at the naval reserve. He was 
a noted historian, passing on his knowledge to students in 
the Regina school system and subsequently as a professor 
and head of the history department at the University of 
Regina and as an author who wrote in the area of political 
history. 
 
Dr. Koester’s public service was most distinguished by his 
lengthy tenure as a parliamentary expert, beginning with 
his service to the Saskatchewan House. Dr. Koester was 
later invited to become Clerk Assistant at the Canadian 
House of Commons in 1976. In 1980, he was appointed 
Clerk and served until his retirement in 1987. His abilities 
were also recognized at the mother parliament at 
Westminster, England. On two occasions, he was awarded 
the then unique honour of serving as a temporary senior 
Clerk at the House of Common. 

 
This Assembly avails itself of this opportunity to record its 
tribute of respect to a former table officer of this Assembly 
and expresses its most sincere sympathy with members of 
the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise and, 
certainly on behalf of the official opposition, extend our deepest 
sympathy to the Koester family on the passing of a loved one, a 
father, a friend, a husband, and an individual who has served his 
country well. 
 
As I read over the brief resume that we had received regarding 
Mr. Koester, and while I didn’t have the privilege of knowing 
Mr. Koester personally, I can certainly understand the respect 
that he has gained throughout the parliaments of this country 
and the legislative assemblies, and indeed the mother 
parliament in London, England. 
 
Working with the Clerks of this Assembly, one begins to 
understand the role a Clerk plays in how this Assembly 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1998 

operates. And certainly assemblies operate a lot more efficiently 
with them than I’m sure they would without them. 
 
And so Mr. Koester’s involvement as Clerk of this Assembly 
and as an Assistant Clerk and then moving on to the House of 
Commons in Canada is certainly an indication that he has 
received a lot of recognition. He devoted himself to his service 
for his country. We see that through his number of years in 
service as a naval officer during World War II and continuing 
on in the naval reserve. 
 
I also note his historical background and the fact that history 
seemed to be a very integral part of Mr. Koester — the fact that 
he was a professor and head of history at the department at the 
University of Regina. He passed on a lot of knowledge of 
history, I’m sure, through the years, not only to the 
parliamentarians and the legislators who have served under his 
term as Clerk, but also I understand to many students. And so 
it’s certainly with deep regret that we stand here today. But we 
certainly want to extend to the family of Mr. Koester our 
deepest sympathies, and we trust that you will find strength in 
knowing that there is a God who does care in times of 
bereavement such as we have today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I too 
would like to add to these condolences. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is not required. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the people 
of the Humboldt constituency and the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone, I offer condolences also to the family and friends of 
the former Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Charles 
Beverley Koester, and the family and friends of the past MLA 
for the Pelly constituency, Mr. Arnold Joseph Feusi. 
 
Serving the province as they have, in the honourable manner 
that they have, these men have indeed instilled in all the people 
of Saskatchewan a great sense of pride. Our sincere sympathy 
and deep appreciation for your support is extended to both the 
Koester and the Feusi family. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I have another condolence motion and 
this is to pay tribute on the occasion of the passing of a former 
member of this Assembly, Mr. Arnold Joseph Feusi of Prince 
Albert. 
 
Arnold Feusi was born on March 31, 1912 in Superior, 
Wisconsin but was raised and educated in Langenburg, 
Saskatchewan. He leaves to mourn his wife Sally; two 
daughters, Twyla and Tanny; a son Tim; six grandchildren; one 
great-granddaughter; his sister Elsie; his brother Jim; as well as 
numerous nieces and nephews. Mr. Feusi was predeceased by 
his parents, Edward and Elizabeth; two sisters, Leona and 
Ardena; and three brothers, Joe, Hubert, and Albin. 
 
As I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, Arnold Feusi was raised and 
educated in Langenburg. He then attended Normal School in 
Saskatoon, and from there returned back to the Langenburg 
district to teach, as a teacher. That lasted until he joined the 
Royal Canadian Air Force in 1941. 

(1215) 
 
He married Sally, his wife, just before being sent overseas for a 
four-year tour of duty as a radar technician. Again a very 
distinguished record of service in that great Second World War. 
 
Upon his return, Arnold and Sally moved to Kenosee and 
Madge Lake where he was park warden. And then his desire for 
the betterment of Saskatchewan and its people led him into 
provincial political life. 
 
Arnold was first elected to this House in 1952 as the then CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) member of the 
Legislative Assembly for the Pelly constituency. He served only 
one term under the former premier, the late Hon. Tommy 
Douglas in the Douglas government, and then returned back to 
the employ of the public service in the Department of Tourism. 
 
Later, Mr. Feusi was transferred to Prince Albert where he 
worked as building supervisor for northern housing for the 
Department of Natural Resources, after which he resumed his 
teaching career and moved to Weyburn as an instructor in 
carpentry and vocational math until his retirement in 1973. 
 
After retirement, Arnold and Sally Feusi moved to Moose Jaw, 
your home city, Mr. Speaker, where he wrote several 
manuscripts including “The History of the English Language”. 
However, Arnold was always drawn to the North and 
considered Prince Albert home; so in 1989 he and Sally 
returned to Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Arnold will long be remembered for his strong 
belief in the ideals of social democracy. Quite obviously he was 
an advocate and supporter of the party of the day that believed 
in that, the predecessor to the New Democrats here today. He’ll 
be remembered for his strong belief in those ideals, but I think 
he’ll be remembered for at least one or two other contributions. 
 
His services to the ordinary people of the province while as an 
MLA, something which I think we tend to overlook a bit as 
MLAs, something that I know the journalists do overlook. The 
belief that all of the activities of a member of the House can be 
related to what goes on in this House. It’s important. But we 
know, all of us, that a large, large part of the work is being able 
to help the needs and the concerns of ordinary people back 
home. And he, by all accounts — I did not know Mr. Feusi — 
but by all accounts carried out that job very, very well. And it 
was done at a time, ’52-‘56, when there were many important 
social changes being made in the post Second World War era. 
Many important social and economic changes have helped 
make Saskatchewan — what I would like to think, in any event 
— as a more caring and compassionate place and a more lasting 
legacy of his love for his province. 
 
I think that he also has to be remembered for the fertility of his 
mind. To undertake to write manuscripts on the topic of the 
history of the English language is indicative of an inquisitive 
person and also a highly ambitious person. And I think it was 
characteristic of so many of the MLAs of that period. 
Regardless of what stripe of political party they represented, 
they were men and women who may not have had the highest 
formalized education, but they brought to this House an 
imagination and a brain and sense of values and an inquisitive 



March 13, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

nature about them which compelled them to get into a variety of 
areas over and above the consuming task of being an MLA. 
They were truly oriented toward world issues. 
 
Yes, pocketbook issues, home issues, were number one, but it 
didn’t stop there. It was always coupled with the fact that there 
was an obligation to understand factors in other communities, in 
other provinces, in other countries. Without overstating it, 
understanding that we are all but citizens of one small world. 
 
That’s what Arnold Feusi represented: that kind of a gentleman 
and that kind of a character and that kind of a personality and 
that kind of a contribution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with these few brief and inadequate words, I 
would like to move, seconded by the member from Moosomin, 
by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Arnold Joseph Feusi, who died in Prince Albert on 
January 14, 1998, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly for the constituency of Pelly from 1952 until 
1956. He was born on March 31, 1912 in Superior, 
Wisconsin. Shortly thereafter he moved with his parents to 
the Langenburg district. Mr. Feusi received his early 
education at local schools in Langenburg before graduating 
from the Saskatoon Normal School. He married Sally 
Dilschneider in 1941 and together they had two daughters 
and a son. 

 
Mr. Feusi’s strong desire for the betterment of his country, 
his province, and his fellow citizens was evident in many 
facets of his life. He served with the Royal Canadian Air 
Force during the Second World War, first as a radar 
technician and later received his commission as a flying 
officer. Mr. Feusi was also a civil servant of the 
departments of Natural Resources and Tourism. His first 
forays into public life were at the local level, where he held 
positions in several organizations, including the Kamsack 
branch of the Fish and Game League, the Farmers Union 
Lodge, and local school boards. He was an active CCF 
participant in the Saltcoats constituency and in 1952 he 
was elected to this Assembly as a member of the Tommy 
Douglas administration. 
 
Mr. Feusi was a teacher by training and taught for many 
years in his home district of Langenburg, and later in 
Weyburn. His love of knowledge was well known within 
his family and they recognized this by nicknaming him 
“our walking encyclopedia.” His efforts are also recorded 
in the many English language manuscripts that he wrote. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

I so move, seconded by the hon. member from Moosomin. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
didn’t have the pleasure of knowing Mr. Feusi but I would like 
to join the Premier in offering my greatest sympathy to the 
Feusi family. Mr. Feusi gave much of himself to our country 
and to our province and to our constituency, for that matter. 
 
For a person to be married and then go off four years to war is a 
hardship that I don’t think any of us can even fathom how hard 
that had to be on Mr. Feusi and Mrs. Feusi at that time. Young 
people gave up much of their life for our country and I 
commend them for that. 
 
Mr. Feusi, as the Premier has mentioned, was a member of 
many organizations in the Kamsack-Pelly area. He was an 
MLA from ’52 to ’56 so we can see how much concern he had 
for what happened to our, you know, to our province. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to add, on behalf of 
myself and constituents, our condolences to the Feusi family. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with our Premier and the member from Saltcoats to offer 
my condolences to the family of Arnold Feusi, and who are 
living now in Prince Albert, and some in Moose Jaw, and 
perhaps some grandchildren living elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was my privilege to get to know Arnold Feusi 
over the last nine years when he and Sally moved back to 
Prince Albert after a remarkable career as a teacher in the 
RCAF (Royal Canadian Air Force), in Saskatchewan civil 
service, as well as having served as MLA for Pelly. 
 
Arnold and I met several times, mostly by chance at the Prince 
Albert Co-op. And there, standing over a shopping cart, Arnold 
would ask me about how things were going in the legislature. 
And every time we would exchange ideas, Arnold would offer 
me a thoughtful expression about issues with which our 
legislature was dealing at the time. 
 
I enjoyed these conversations, Mr. Speaker, and I found it 
inspiring just to know that a man like Arnold Feusi, in his 80’s, 
with his vast experience, still wanted to contribute to the 
well-being of others through the democratic process. 
 
His clarity of expression was always evident. His precision of 
language is reinforced by Arnold’s physical appearance. He was 
very particular about his posture and his dress, and I believe 
that this was partly because of his military training, but more 
his determination to look and keep himself fit so that he could 
continue to contribute to the well-being of those around him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just four years ago our New Democratic 
constituency association of Prince Albert Carleton chose to pay 
a special tribute to Arnold Feusi and we organized a social 
event to do this; invited his family and his friends. And after 
Arnold Feusi graciously received the accolades that were 
bestowed upon him, he took a few moments to talk about public 
issues which concerned him. And amongst his remarks was his 
advice on the issue of smoking in public places. 
 
First he said it was something that government should look at 
because it affected so many people and because it had a direct 
effect on the health budget, which is paid for by public money. 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1998 

And Arnold suggested that this legislature would be wise to 
take direct action to reduce access to the tobacco product and to 
reduce contact that people had with second-hand smoke. 
 
I know that today Arnold would be pleased with the progress 
that has taken place in clearing the air in public places, but I 
believe he would feel we still have a ways to go to help 
individuals kick the habit. 
 
In discussion with family members, I was advised both the 
manuscripts that Arnold left for his family about his life, about 
the history of the English language, and he actually compiled a 
dictionary, a practical dictionary of the English language, where 
he would . . . indicated in this dictionary that all English words 
should be spelled phonetically. He did this from his belief that 
people should have equal access to things like health and 
education and also access to the language, but they shouldn’t be 
deterred by the sometimes difficult and irregular spellings. For 
example, the word enough would be spelled “e-n-u-f.” I believe 
that the students of Saskatchewan, perhaps in all the English 
speaking world, would shout a loud hurrah to Arnold for that 
and they would spell it “h-e-r-a.” 
 
Arnold Feusi will be remembered by his family and those who 
knew him as a person who has dedicated his talents to the 
betterment of others. He worked as a teacher, as a park warden, 
as a building superintendent, as was mentioned by the Premier. 
He worked with the DNS (Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan ) in Saskatchewan. And his service to people 
through this legislature, and all those things that he did, were 
consistent with that theme: working for the betterment of 
others. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, his family remembers him as their very 
own walking encyclopedia, a person who was always willing to 
help others and help them understand issues and processes. 
 
And they remember him also for his compassion to people. 
Arnold was very conscious at all times not to discriminate on 
the basis of appearance or colour or handicap. To him, every 
person was to be treated equally. He believed in equality and he 
lived it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we always have something to learn from others in 
our own lives, and when I think of Arnold Feusi, I think of 
someone who was able to steer steadily and calmly and 
thoughtfully through his retirement years, thus reminding me of 
the changes that we feel passionate about can be achieved if we 
just take our time and clearly identify how things could be 
better. 
 
He was a good person. I feel privileged to have known him and 
I join with others to express my sympathy to the family of the 
bereaved. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member for Moosomin, by the leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with the 
transcript of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, 
be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity 
to wish you a good weekend and to move that the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Over the course of this week, hon. members, 
many of you in your participation in debate, have welcomed 
one another back to the House, and let me now wish for you 
that you will leave and go home and have an enjoyable 
weekend with your families and your constituents. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:31 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................99 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................99 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................99 
  Heppner .......................................................................................................................................................................................99 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................99 
  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................99 
  Hillson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................99 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................100 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................100 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................100 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................100 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................100 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................100 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................100 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Teichrob.....................................................................................................................................................................................100 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................101 
  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................101 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................101 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Labour Statistics and Economic Good News 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................101 
 Good News Stories in Saskatchewan 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................101 
 Channel Lake Investigation 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................101 
 Brain Awareness Week 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................102 
 Athlete of the Year Celebration 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................102 
 Home Town Hero 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................102 
 Kentucky Fried Chicken Outlet Wins Award 
  Bradley.......................................................................................................................................................................................102 
 Affordable Housing for Low Income Families 
  Pringle........................................................................................................................................................................................103 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskPower Presidents’ Severance Package 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................103 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................103 
 Sale of Channel Lake 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................104 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................104 
 Saskatchewan Health Information Network Appointment 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................105 
 Examination of Channel Lake 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................106 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................106 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................106 
 Multilateral Agreement on Investment 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................107 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................107 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 5  The Animal Products Amendment Act, 1998 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................107 
 Bill No. 6 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................108 



 

 Bill No. 7 — The Pastures Act 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................108 
 Bill No. 8 — The Stray Animals Amendment Act, 1998 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................108 
 Bill No. 9 — The Parks Amendment Act, 1998 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................108 
 Bill No. 234 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 1998 (Indexed Minimum Wage Initial Rate) 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................108 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Sale of Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd. 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................108 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................108 
  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................113 
  Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................118 
CONDOLENCES 
 Charles Beverley Koester 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................118 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................119 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................120 
 Arnold Joseph Feusi 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................120 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................121 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................121 
 


