





























































Hansard: April 07, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 491 
 April 7, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Debden, Big River area of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To present petitions as 
well. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the Redvers, Antler, 
Alida, Fertile, Carievale, Storthoaks area. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities, Mr. Speaker, involved are Weyburn and 
Midale. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I too rise to present petitions on the same 
issue, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, we will ever pray. 

 
And these come from the good people at Weyburn and 
McTaggart. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present a petition 
on behalf of concerned citizens. The issues in the petition are 
about the severance payments to Mr. Jack Messer and the call 
for an independent public inquiry into all the facts surrounding 
the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities around Archerwill, Kelvington, Porcupine Plain, 
Greenwater Lake, Chelan, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today from people in the Englefeld area: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have a petition 
to present on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. It surrounds the 
whole issue of Jack Messer and the Channel Lake situation. The 
petitioners come from the Naicam area of Saskatchewan and 
I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
on behalf of people concerned about the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are all from the constituency 
of Regina South. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
today. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to save the Plains hospital by enacting 
legislation to prevent its closure, and by providing 
adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that 
essential services provided at the Plains may be continued. 
 

Your petitioners come from Edenwold and Pilot Butte. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring petitions 
as well from people throughout the province concerned with the 
Plains hospital closure. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 
Climax, Bracken, Shaunavon area of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
present the petitions today with the following prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These, Mr. Speaker, mostly come from the community of 
Piapot, but there are a few from Flaxcombe, Maple Creek, and 
Swift Current as well. And I’m happy to present them on behalf 
of all of those people today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly 
regarding the twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; 
saving the Plains Health Centre; and cancelling severance 
payments to Jack Messer. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 27 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

As of March 31, 1997 the reported accumulated deficit in 
the summary financial statements was $9.3 billion; what is 
the forecasted accumulated deficit as of March 31, 1998; 
and what is the forecasted accumulated deficit for March 
31, 1999? 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 27 ask the government the following question: 

 
(1) How many cases of tuberculosis were reported in 
Saskatchewan in 1990; (2) how many people died from 
tuberculosis that year; (3) how many of the reported cases 
were children and youth under the age of 21; and (4) how 
many of those children and youth died from tuberculosis 
that year? 
 

I will also be submitting similar questions for the years 1991 

through 1997. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 27 ask the government the following question, 
mainly of the minister of Liquor and Gaming: 
 

What plans does your government have to comply with the 
request for exemptions from requirements such as 4(a) and 
4(f) of the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, all 
licensed raffles and lotteries having a total prize value of 
$1,000 or less in the province? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all my 
colleagues in the Assembly, family that is very near to my 
heart, if not in miles. 
 
My family comes from Canmore to be with us for the Easter 
vacation. We’ve had an opportunity to dine together and I 
would like to introduce them. They’re sitting in the top row of 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s my youngest brother, Steve; his wife, Wanda; son, Jonah; 
and daughter Lacie. The Söder-Munholland family, Mr. 
Speaker, also are joined by a nephew today, little Mitchell. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me in a warm welcome to them 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to the Assembly, four people from the constituency 
of Shellbrook-Spiritwood, actually from the community of 
Spiritwood. They are here on business in Regina. They’re the 
manager and board members of the Spiritwood Credit Union — 
Karl Kajner, Brad Brataschuk, Mitchel Valette, and Warner 
Kabatoff. 
 
I’d like you and members of the Assembly to welcome them 
here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you 
and the members of the Assembly, seated in your gallery today, 
Mr. Darren Berg from The Battlefords Health District who 
works in the field of dental health education. 
 
I had the privilege of meeting Darren at a convention last fall in 
Prince Albert. And from my experience he is someone who 
knows a great deal about dental hygiene. 
 
With Darren today is Leslie Topola, who also works in the field 
of dental health education in the Saskatoon Health District. 
They’ll be viewing the proceedings of the House today and I’m 
going to be meeting with them later this afternoon. 
 
So I’d ask them to stand and ask the House to welcome them to 
the Assembly this afternoon. 
 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Economic Development in the North-east 
 

Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I heard the 
member from Melfort-Tisdale on Saturday stumping his way 
after the leadership of the Tory Party — and I know it is the 
Tory Party because all three candidates sounded exactly like 
Grant Devine — the member said that if pigs could fly and he 
were the Premier, he would cut the Department of Economic 
Development, the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, 
and Tourism Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s what he would do to his own constituency. First, the 
small business loans association program of the Economic 
Development department encourages community development 
through non-traditional entrepreneurs. In Melfort, six small 
business loans have created 200 jobs — that’s 200 jobs gone 
under the new premier. 
 
Also gone is the Eden REDA (regional economic development 
authority) and its $60,000 to promote local development. 
Tourism is the fifth largest employer in the Melfort-Tisdale 
constituency. Visitors spend over $9 million a year — visitors 
attracted with the help of Tourism Saskatchewan, which would 
be gone. 
 
SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) provided a 
repayable loan which supports seven jobs in Tisdale. That’s at 
least 207 jobs and $9 million that would be lost in a sink-hole of 
discredited Tory ideology, spouted by the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Old dogs, old tricks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wadena Conservation Officer Wins Award 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, conservation officers play a vital 
role in preserving our natural resources. Today it gives me great 
pleasure to recognize Conservation Officer Marty Halpape, a 
constituent from Wadena, who was recently awarded the Al 
Stark Award. 
 
This award is given by SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) on a yearly basis to the conservation 
officer who best displays knowledge and dedication in 
protecting the natural resources of Saskatchewan as well as 
providing community awareness and conservation enforcement. 
Mr. Halpape is active on several government boards throughout 
his job. Mr. Halpape is also active within his community, 
serving as a school trustee and a volunteer for many of 
Wadena’s annual events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you to join with me in thanking Mr. Halpape 
for his dedication to his job and to Saskatchewan natural 
resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
Building Opens in Biggar 

 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police force is one of the longest and 
proudest traditions in this province and in our country. It has 
given us pride in its integrity and confidence in having fair and 
good order in our communities. 
 
Biggar is particularly proud and confident in its future today 
because of a new RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
facility for their town. The grand opening, which I was 
privileged to attend on January 23, 1998, marked the 
culmination of months of hard work in planning the building. 
But more importantly, it marked a significant new effort of the 
RCMP and many members of the community to bring to life the 
idea of community-based policing. 
 
The Biggar detachment will be more accessible to individuals in 
the community and will work with the residents to achieve safer 
homes and ultimately safer communities. The Biggar 
detachment has made great strides in emphasizing that it works 
in common cause with the people of Biggar. 
 
I would like to extend my congratulations to the members of the 
Biggar detachment and to all of those individuals who 
contributed in the planning and promotion of the new 
headquarters. Biggar, one more time, is leading in the 
development of innovative services to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government 
continues to support the closure of one of our newest and 
largest hospitals in the province and move in a large number of 
administrative offices and a few classrooms. Fewer beds, fewer 
nurses; more desks, more bureaucrats. 
 
The Premier’s hand-picked friend who chairs the Regina Health 
Board wrote publicly that one reason they are closing this 
hospital is because it is nearly a quarter of a century old. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, our Premier has been in politics over a quarter of a 
century as well. Perhaps he’s outdated also. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are not going to take this. They are 
not going to accept this; they will stand up and be heard. Myself 
and my colleagues are starting a large public campaign to stop 
the closure of the Plains. Mr. Speaker, the fight to save the 
Plains will start tonight in Assiniboia. I say to everyone: if you 
really care, be there. 
 

Waterfront Press Wins Awards 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The new Waterfront 
Press of Lumsden in my constituency has recently been 
awarded . . . recognized with two awards: the 1997 General 
Excellence Award for the best all-around weekly newspaper, 
and the second place award for best front page in Saskatchewan 
were given to Waterfront Press co-publisher, Jacqueline 
Chouinard, at the Weekly Newspapers Association’s winter 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

workshop at the end of February at the Sheraton Cavalier in 
Saskatoon. 
 
One judge commented: “It is evident throughout this paper the 
great deal of community involvement this publication has.” 
Co-editors and publishers, Lucien and Jacqueline Chouniard 
said: 
 

This is indeed an honour for us. We didn’t expect to win 
such a prestigious award after only being in this industry 
for three years. Much of the credit goes to our staff, 
reporters, writers, and the people in the communities we 
serve. The judges were bang on when they said that we 
have a great deal of community involvement. In our 
opinion that’s the key to the success of any weekly 
newspaper. We’re lucky. Without the community getting 
involved, this just wouldn’t have happened. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased that people at the Waterfront 
Press are dedicated to the communities they serve so capably, 
and I am proud of the Waterfront’s accomplishment. I would 
also like to extend my best wishes and good luck to the new 
Waterfront Press as they compete at the Canadian Community 
Newspapers Association competition in July. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Privacy for Montgomery Family 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In view of comments 
made in this House yesterday, I have been asked to make some 
comments on behalf of a constituent of mine, Valerie 
Montgomery-Bull. She has asked me to say that the personal 
tragedy of her family has been compounded by the fact that it 
is, of necessity, being played out in the public eye. 
 
Last Thursday she and I had a private meeting with the Minister 
of Social Services and she wants me to tell this House that that 
meeting was appreciated. 
 
It is also her hope to attend as a witness before the joint 
parliamentary committee on justice looking into amendments to 
the Young Offenders Act. 
 
Of course there is a trial of two young people to take place in 
the near future. It is her wish that these proceedings be allowed 
to go ahead without political interference and that she and her 
family be allowed to grieve and heal in private, away from the 
spotlight of public glare. 
 
I ask that all members of this House extend to the Montgomery 
family their best wishes and prayers at this difficult time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Business Forum 
 

Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatchewan 
we all know that northern Saskatchewan is the last, best-kept 
tourism secret in North America. Its natural, unspoiled beauty, 
its cultural tradition, and its sports opportunities make it a place 

of tremendous potential. 
 
I am happy to announce that yesterday, today, and tomorrow in 
La Ronge, a business forum is taking place which will help 
Northerners explore the possibility of northern tourism and 
other business opportunities. It is the second annual Northern 
Saskatchewan Business Opportunity Forum and it is being 
hosted by Jim Brady Development Corporation, the Northern 
Shores and Northwest Calling Regional Tourism Association, 
and by Saskatchewan Northern Affairs. 
 
Last year more than 250 participants attended the presentation 
and workshop. Workshops and seminars will deal with 
environmental tourism, training and marketing skills, and there 
will be a number of exhibits at this valuable forum. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I would like to read a letter and I’m going to send copies 
across to some of the members opposite. 
 
From the RM (rural municipality) of Edenwold, dated March 
20, 1998. It’s to the board of directors of the Regina Health 
District. 
 

Dear Sir: On behalf of council and the 2,700 residents in 
the rural municipality of Edenwold No. 158, this is to 
advise that we support the efforts being undertaken to 
prevent the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The Plains 
Health Centre provides essential services to the residents of 
southern Saskatchewan and it is easily accessible for 
emergency personnel and trauma victims. The services 
provided at the Plains cannot be absorbed by the remaining 
hospitals without being detrimental to the health care and 
well-being of the residents of southern Saskatchewan. 

 
Decisions can be reversed. As taxpayers who have a vital 
interest in the provincial health care system, we hereby 
request that the Plains Health Centre be maintained as the 
facility it was designed to be. 
 
In view of the foregoing we hereby request that the 
decision for the closure of the Plains Health Centre be 
reversed. Yours truly, Donna Strudwick, the administrator 
of the RM of Edenwold. 

 
And I’d like to send copies across to the Minister of Health 
and the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, everyone in 
Saskatchewan now sees what a joke your little NDP (New 
Democratic Party) show trial really is. Your people on the 
committee are so incompetent that they can’t even run the little 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

whitewash that you want them to. The whole thing now is on 
hold because the NDP Chair doesn’t know what she’s doing. 
It’s no wonder . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now I know that the hon. 
member will recognize that it is contrary to parliamentary 
debate to draw into question, in debate, the actions of a 
presiding officer and I’ll ask him to withdraw that remark. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I withdraw that remark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Premier, the hearings are a joke and all of Saskatchewan 
realizes that. It doesn’t seem to be going all that well there for 
you; the little phoney-baloney Crown Corporation hearings we 
are seeing are a complete failure. Will you do the right thing for 
Saskatchewan people, call a public inquiry, and put the Channel 
Lake investigation into the hands of some competent people 
outside of your committee instead of the bumbling committee 
that’s there? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite and to the member opposite through you, Mr. Speaker, 
that this personal attack on the Chair of the Crown Corporations 
Committee, who is a private member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the minister will 
recognize as well that it’s out of order to be commenting on a 
ruling of the Chair. The Chair has just ruled on that matter and 
I’ll ask the minister to continue with his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite through you that I think he should be ashamed of 
himself with the approach that he has brought to the committee. 
The fact of the matter is the committee, I think according to all 
other members except the members from that caucus, who went 
there with the intent not to make it work but make it fail, as 
described by the Chair of the Public Accounts Committee that 
that committee was a kangaroo court, you’re now trying to 
attempt to make this committee non-functional. And I say to the 
member opposite that if you believe that your performance on 
the committee is so bad, you should substitute yourself and get 
someone else to come who has the capability and the 
creditability to carry on the duties as a member on that 
committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you 
referred this matter to the Crown Corporations Committee for a 
political solution but you and your NDP members are clearly 
incapable of handling the job. First they try to ram through a 
witness list approved by no one but the NDP, then they start the 
hearings before even one document has been provided to the 
committee. Then you give Jack Messer a free lawyer and then 
you yank him away from him, causing another delay. 
 
If this is how the NDP runs things it’s no wonder . . . it’s a 
wonder you didn’t lose even more money on Channel Lake. Mr. 
Premier, this investigation is a joke. It’s being ground to a halt 
by NDP incompetence. When are you going to do the right 
thing for Saskatchewan and call the public inquiry that 

everyone’s asking for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite it’s my understanding, in consulting with some of our 
members, that there was an unanimous decision. All members 
agreed to adjourn today. All of your members agreed to the 
adjournment. And to come here today, and to come here today 
and falsely — falsely — try to indicate that you wanted to stay 
there and work is the height of absurdity. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, I say to the members 
opposite who don’t believe in the process any more than the 
Grant Devine government believed in process when they 
avoided the committees of the legislature . . . Crown 
Corporations was two or three years behind in reviewing the 
Crown corporations’ annual reports when they were defeated in 
1991. You tie yourself very closely to the Devine 
administration by your approach to the workings of this 
committee and trying to achieve to disrupt the workings of this 
committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The committee meeting 
this morning was adjourned because the committee was not 
ready to do the work. There was no witness list. There were no 
documents that have been asked for time and time again. Jack 
Messer was not able to come up with a lawyer. Those were the 
reasons the committee hearings this morning were denied. 
 
Mr. Premier, this morning we heard another example of brilliant 
NDP management. Jack Messer, Mr. Speaker, Jack Messer was 
the president of a multimillion dollar company for seven years 
and in that entire time he never had a written contract. It’s no 
wonder the guy never reads the contracts to do with Channel 
Lake — he didn’t even have to read his own contract. 
 
Mr. Premier, is this any way to run a professional civil service, 
hiring a CEO (chief executive officer) without a written 
contract? Jack Messer’s position at SaskPower had nothing to 
do with good management and it had everything to do with 
patronage and cronyism and paying off your old NDP friends. 
And it continues today with people like Don Ching and Gordon 
Nystuen. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member has been extremely 
prolonged in his preamble. I’ll ask him to go directly to his 
question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Premier, can you explain why Jack Messer 
never had a written contract? And how then did you decide on 
his severance package if he never had a written contract to base 
it on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that was a heck of good speech you just gave. And it 
almost sounds like you are a frustrated potential leader of the 
Conservative Party trying to get a campaign going. And with 
the lack of, Mr. Speaker, with the lack of support for the other 
three running, I suppose there is a chance that there will be a 
write-in on the ballot. But I would urge you not to use this 
committee to try to run a political campaign, which is what 
you’re trying to do. 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

You and the member from Melfort are trying to achieve through 
this committee what you failed to do out on the hustings — that 
is to get something going for your leadership campaign. 
 
I say to the members opposite, come tomorrow to the 
committee. The committee is working as it should. There’s 
procedural issues to deal with. 
 
But I’m sure at the end of the day if you do your work and the 
members in the Liberal caucus do their work — members of our 
caucus are committed — come and do your work and all of the 
issues you want to raise will be dealt with. 
 
And I want to say before I close, in the din that’s occurring . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, simply, 
why did Jack Messer never have a written contract? And 
because he didn’t have a written contract, what did you use as a 
basis for his severance package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again to the member opposite, 
the statement that I made in the House earlier about Milt Fair 
working with legal counsel to determine the severance, still 
stands. 
 
But what is new information is the Crown Corporation minute 
that I was just handed, on page 692 that says, the member from 
Melfort, and I quote: “Because I think what Mr. Messer is 
asking for is completely reasonable and I am dismayed . . .” 
blah, blah, blah. 
 
He finds it totally reasonable, he finds it totally reasonable, and 
you, sir, say that the adjournment today wasn’t in order. Why 
don’t you two caucus and get your lines straightened out. I 
know you’re not supporting Mr. Gantefoer for the leadership 
but . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I know the hon. minister will 
recognize — order! — I know the hon. minister will recognize 
that we’re not to use proper names in debate in the Assembly 
but to only refer to members in the context of the roles that they 
serve in this House. I’ll ask the minister to conclude his answer 
very, very briefly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
individual I was referring to is the member from Melfort and he 
clearly indicates that waiting for Mr. Messer to get his 
documents together is perfectly reasonable. And why you are so 
upset, and why you are so upset, why are you are so upset and 
yell from your seat, yell like a banshee from your seat, is 
unknown. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s really difficult to speak in the House 
when you allow the yelling and hollering to carry on. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ambulance Fees 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. I ask this question on 
behalf of a constituent of mine, Lloyd Nicol from Bredenbury. 
Because of chronic health problems, Mr. Nicol has been forced 
to travel to Regina by ambulance three times in the last four 
months, and ambulance costs have ran up to about $3,120. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think you’ll agree this is an excessive sum of 
money. You rant and rave about the wonderful health care 
system, but every day it fails people like Lloyd Nicol. The NDP 
has created a two-tier system, and actually it’s a multi-tier 
system — one for urban, one for rural, one for the people who 
can afford to leave Saskatchewan for services, and one for those 
that can’t; one for people forced to pay 3 to $4,000 in 
ambulance fees, and one for everybody else. 
 
My question is this: how can you deny that we don’t have a 
multi-tier system when people must pay such astronomical 
ambulance fees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member knows that 
in this province full ambulance services have never been 
covered, and that’s the case across the country. And when the 
member opposite stands up and talks about two-tiered health 
care system, I want to remind the member opposite of what his 
. . . what one of his leaders is talking about, Mr. Hermanson. 
 
And if Mr. Hermanson ends up being the new leader of the new 
Tory Party, this is what Mr. Hermanson is saying about 
two-tiered health care system. He says, Hermanson says that he 
won’t promise health care premiums or user fees but what he 
would look at doing is he would have . . . raise additional 
revenues in the health care system by removing some of the 
procedures for life-threatening illnesses and health procedures. 
 
Now that says, Mr. Speaker, that what we’ll see is those people 
today who are sitting on elective surgeries, those people who 
are sitting on elective surgeries will see user fees, health care 
costs for things like hip surgery, knee replacements. 
 
That’s what Mr. Hermanson talks about. User fees for the sick 
and ill in Saskatchewan. That’s where Mr. Hermanson is going 
if he’s the leader of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
minister missed part of my comments because two-tiered would 
be bad enough; we’re talking multi-tiered in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Nicol wanted me to mention also that each of the times he 
was treated at the Plains Health Centre and couldn’t have been 
more pleased with the care he received. Yet you’re closing the 
Plains and adding another 20 or 30 minutes to people like Mr. 
Nicol’s next ambulance trip. 
 
Mr. Minister, since your government has come to power, 
you’ve closed 52 rural hospitals and now you are closing the 
hospital designed to serve rural people in southern 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you going to do to address the expensive 
ambulance rides that are only going to get larger after the Plains 
closes? What are you going to do to improve emergency 
services in places like Yorkton so that patients can start to 
receive emergency services in smaller centres and save the 
ambulance cost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that as he and I both know, being neighbours from the 
same part of Saskatchewan, that it’s important for us to have in 
the province, good, strong health care system that is in many 
cases where specialized services are centrally located. And the 
result of that will mean that people from his constituency and 
mine, which are neighbours, will need to come to Regina for 
some of those specialized services. That has always been the 
case. And we’ll continue to see that happen into the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what does the member opposite say and his leader say? 
Now the member opposite, who’s real comfortable now that 
he’s returned home to the Tory Party again, is really 
comfortable, real comfortable with Mr. Huyghebaert. What 
does Mr. Huyghebaert say here? Mr. Huyghebaert says, Mr. 
Speaker, that people who require medical . . . in the medical 
community that there is enough money in the health care 
system today, is what Mr. Huyghebaert says. 
 
But what he also goes on to say is that if he becomes the leader 
of the new Tory Party we will see user fees — health care 
premiums and user fees for Saskatchewan people. That’s what 
the member from Saltcoats believes in. That’s what his 
leadership believe in. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Services 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses has reported 20 cases of patient 
care being compromised in Regina in the past month because of 
understaffing. In rural communities the situation is no different. 
 
We received a call today from Joanne Johnston who’s husband, 
already a victim of two heart attacks, was brought into the 
Redvers hospital with chest pains. After more than an hour of 
watching the nurses being run off their feet, she took it upon 
herself to put a heart monitor on her husband. Joanne says this 
is not the fault of the nurses. She knows they’re overworked, 
and she knows it’s the fault of your government. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health. What level has our 
health care system sunk, when family members are forced to 
hook up a loved one to a heart monitor? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that from time 

to time in this province we ensure that we provide significant 
services to enrich the quality of care that people have. And on 
occasion, Mr. Speaker, we have individuals who have the 
ability to assist within the health care system to provide those 
kinds of services that the member opposite talks about. 
 
Now I think what’s important here is that we need to look at the 
information that’s provided by the Liberal caucus. Because over 
the last couple of weeks the Liberal caucus has provided all 
sorts of information to this House which hasn’t been anywhere 
near the mark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday the member opposite, the Liberals opposite, talked 
about the fact that there were insufficient number of beds 
available, and we highlighted that there were 11 beds that were 
available to the system yesterday. 
 
The member opposite talks today about there not being enough 
heart services . . . (inaudible) . . . cardiology services available. 
This week alone, this weekend alone in Regina there were six 
more heart surgeries performed than on the average — six more 
heart surgeries than on the average. In this province, Mr. 
Speaker, we are providing some of the best health care services 
anywhere in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, if you listen to the members 
opposite respond to these questions, one would have to ask why 
it’s each and every day we can bring personal cases that aren’t 
getting health care in this province. Should be ashamed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Redvers hospital has 18 beds and Joanne’s 
husband was fortunate they weren’t filled with patients when he 
was admitted yesterday. But today there are more patients than 
beds and he was told to go home. As I speak, he is lying down 
on his living room sofa; he has already experienced two heart 
attacks and fears a third is on the way. 
 
Mr. Minister, your version of health care may be economical 
but it’s not safe. What is it going to take to convince you that 
your government has crossed the line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, in this province today we’re 
providing services on a daily basis to about 35,000 people — 
35,000 people every day access the health care system 
somewhere. And from time to time we’re going to see an 
experience where somebody doesn’t receive its fullest kind of 
service that they might wish. That’s true. On an occasion that 
may happen. 
 
But I want to tell the member opposite that he just finished 
saying to the House and to the people of Saskatchewan that this 
individual was discharged home from a health care centre. If 
this individual was discharged home from a health care centre, 
clearly he had the opportunity to visit and see a physician. 
 
Now if the member opposite is telling me that he is a politician, 
who has no medical training at all, and is able to say to this 
House and to the people of Saskatchewan — because I have no 
medical information . . . or no medical training either — and a 
physician tells this individual to go home and convalesce there 
because he thinks it’s safe, how is it that the member opposite 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

thinks that he has the better sense of what this individual needs, 
who has no knowledge of the health care system because he has 
no professional knowledge of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, clearly what the minister 
isn’t accepting, and the Premier isn’t accepting, is that there are 
no beds for these people. They’re not asking to be kicked out 
immediately after surgery, but that’s what you’re doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, following question period yesterday, the Minister 
of Health told the media that, and I quote: “It’s my sense that 
we can’t make decisions around what our moral obligations 
are.” That’s what you said yesterday. 
 
Mr. Minister, you just heard how the health care system is not 
meeting the needs of the people in the cities and the rural areas. 
Do you not have a moral obligation to ensure that our health 
care system meets the needs of the residents of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I sense that the 
member opposite just needs to pay some attention to what’s 
happening in his own constituency. Just recently he and I were 
at the opening of the new Ponteix health care centre, of which 
the district health board members there applauded, Mr. Speaker, 
the wonderful health care service that they have in their 
community today — applauded it, Mr. Speaker. And today 
across the province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And today across the province, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re providing more money for emergency health 
care services. We’re providing more home care services than 
we ever did. We’re providing more financial assistance to 
health care than we ever did, Mr. Speaker, and more services 
today than we ever have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have not received one penny — one penny — 
from the federal government to assist us with the delivery of our 
services. And I would ask the member opposite and his leader 
to table in this House the letters that you have written to Ottawa 
— table in this House that you’ve written to Ottawa — asking 
for some additional financial assistance to deliver health 
services in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Natural Gas Contract 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is about Channel 
Lake but it has nothing to do with the work of the Crown 
Corporation Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bleeding hasn’t stopped. It’s going to go on for 
another 10 years. SaskPower has signed a 10-year exclusive 
contract with Direct Energy Marketing Limited. These guys, 
and not SaskEnergy, will supply SaskPower with its natural gas 
for the next 10 years. There’s a lot of unease about dealing with 
the same people who hoodwinked us out of $5 million in the 
middle of the night. 
 

Mr. Minister, how comfortable are you in dealing with the same 
people that you say tricked us out of over $5 million? Do you 
really want to go on for the next 10 years dealing with Portigal 
and Direct Energy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as indicated in the 
House about four weeks ago, — I guess three weeks ago now 
— the 10-year contract that was signed was brought here to the 
legislature. We reported on it in the report I gave to the 
legislature. The member opposite may have not been here while 
we debated it at the time. But we indicated at that point that the 
report from SaskPower and in the Deloitte Touche report, if you 
care to read the document that deals with the 10-year contract, 
that it appears to be at a commercial rate and one that will work, 
in fact, for the Power Corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well at first glance it appeared that the sale of 
Channel Lake was to our interest too, but something happened 
to that at the last minute. We want something more to assure us 
that this isn’t a sweetheart deal. We know that the 10-year 
supply contract was integral in the sale of Channel Lake and the 
sale would not have gone through otherwise. If this is a 
sweetheart deal then in point of fact we’re getting a lot less that 
15 million for Channel Lake. 
 
What independent assurance can you give us that the terms of 
this contract are a fair market deal, that it is preferable for us to 
deal with Direct Energy as opposed to our own sister Crown 
corporation of SaskEnergy. Will you table this contract. Why 
do you feel more bound to this contract than you did to the 
contracts of the farmers of this province over GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program)? You tore those up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding 
that when the officials from SaskPower appear before the 
committee, those individuals involved in the sale and purchase 
of Channel Lake, part of that agreement dealt with the 10-year 
contract. In the Deloitte & Touche report it speaks to the issue. 
And a question you may ask of those officials and the 
consulting company that did the review, are those exact 
questions that you put. 
 
From the report that I get from SaskPower and SaskPower 
officials and the Vice-Chair of the board of directors, Mr. Milt 
Fair, is their review is in fact concluded that this is a fair and 
equitable arrangement. But having said that, if your review 
which you will be doing in Crown Corporations Committee find 
something different, I would be very interested in that at that 
point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Welfare Rates 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning’s Leader-Post contains some really shocking statistics 
on this government’s so-called child action plan. This article 
states that in 1997 there were 34,000 children living in poverty 
in Saskatchewan, a child welfare rate higher than every 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

province except Ontario. It also states that there were 79,700 
people on welfare in the province, and that’s a 17 per cent 
increase from 1993 when the child action plan began. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 8 per cent of Saskatchewan’s total population is 
on welfare. From day one this administration has been boasting 
about how it has turned the province around. Well these 
numbers show how hollow that claim is and how shallow the 
NDP government’s social and economic qualities are. 
 
Will the Minister of Social Services admit that the economic 
and social policies of this administration have been an abject 
failure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 
question because I’m pleased to have this opportunity to 
identify for all members the case-load situation in the province 
of Saskatchewan in terms of our welfare numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member will know, because I’ve explained it 
to her before, that in 1993 the federal Liberal government, by 
unilaterally transferring aboriginal people off reserve to the 
provincial rolls, added 10,000 people to our welfare case-load, 
Mr. Speaker — 10,000 people were added on by the federal 
Liberals. 
 
Now since that time, Mr. Speaker, we’ve worked hard restoring 
the economy of this province, providing social programing 
that’s effective. And I’ll tell you what’s happening, Mr. 
Speaker, the welfare case-load is on a steady, steady decline. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if we compare this 
February, our latest reporting date, from February a year ago, 
the welfare case-load is down another 8 per cent, a full 8 per 
cent down. Mr. Speaker, we’re on the right track. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard the comment before 
in the House earlier today — blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. 
 
Mr. Minister, your response to an intolerable and a worsening 
welfare situation is belated and it is meagre. It is one thing, Mr. 
Minister, to increase funding to welfare recipients under the 
unemployment . . . or the employment supplement program in 
the hope of getting them into the workforce. However, everyone 
knows the climate for growth in Saskatchewan leaves much to 
be desired. Otherwise, why would 1,700 more people leave this 
province in the first nine months of 1997 than moved in from 
other provinces? And these 1,700 were the young and the 
educated and trained — our future. 
 
Mr. Minister, if your government does not soon see the light 
and encourage wealth creation through lower taxes, lower 
utility rates, and the lessening of regulatory burden, the 
“building independence” strategy will be no more effective than 
the child action plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to ask . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order. 

Order, order. The hon. — order! — the hon. member has been 
extremely long in her preamble and I’ll ask her to put her 
question directly now. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, would you 
rather see the growth of poverty in the province or the growth 
of work for our people? If so, I think you had better change 
your policies pretty quickly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, not only would I like to see 
opportunities and jobs for Saskatchewan people, I’m seeing 
them, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have today in the 
province of Saskatchewan more people working on a daily 
basis, getting out of bed, going to work, than we’ve ever had in 
the history of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, just by the way, a 
good percentage of them are in that member’s own 
constituency. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, are we satisfied, are 
we satisfied with perhaps almost the lowest unemployment rate 
in the country? Are we satisfied with the third lowest 
dependency rate on social welfare? Are we satisfied that our 
welfare rolls have declined 8 per cent in the last year? 
 
The answer is no, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve taken . . . where in 
the last two weeks, Mr. Speaker, we have taken dramatic steps 
to reform the welfare system in this province, to provide the 
child action plan. Just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I announced to 
. . . on behalf of the government, that the child action plan in 
this province has grown from a total of $4.4 million in ‘94-95 to 
a total of $53 million in this budget . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is progress for people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Firearms Act Regulations 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on March 26 the federal 
Justice minister released a 140-page document containing the 
final set of regulations under the federal Firearms Act, Bill 
C-68. The Government of Saskatchewan is very concerned 
about the lack of respect that the federal government is showing 
to the Alberta Court of Appeal by forging ahead, announcing 
yet another set of regulations under Bill C-68 in advance of the 
decision of the Alberta Court of Appeal. 
 
As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of six 
provincial and territorial governments that are challenging the 
federal gun registration legislation in a reference to the Alberta 
Court of Appeal. We expect a decision very soon; however it 
would appear that the federal government intends to go ahead 
with the implementation of their legislation without waiting for 
the decision of the court. 
 
And like all Canadian citizens, Mr. Speaker, the people of 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

Saskatchewan are being kept in the dark about how gun 
registration under Bill C-68 will be administered and what it 
will cost. About six weeks ago the federal Minister of Justice 
said the federal government had spent $34.3 million to date on 
developing the gun registration program and its communication 
strategy. To date not a single gun has been registered. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, other federal departments may be 
involved. How much has been spent by Canada Customs and 
Foreign Affairs, for example, to plan the implementation? What 
are the costs to date, in those provinces and territories that 
continue to be party to the Bill C-68 scheme. The federal 
government should come clean with the total amount spent by 
all departments and with the total projected costs of this 
program. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we are told that the RCMP have been 
selected to deliver the gun registration program. This 
government wants to know how much the RCMP have spent on 
the analysis of this project and on the negotiations with the 
federal government. 
 
We have other questions, Mr. Speaker. How far will a gun 
owner have to travel to a firearms office under the new 
program? What help will be available to complete the myriad of 
forms that will be required? And most importantly, how much 
more will the federal government spend before the program is 
up and running? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government has not presented the 
people of Canada with a detailed picture of what they are 
getting for their tax dollars. And, Mr. Speaker, if the court 
determines that gun registration is, as our government has 
maintained, an area of provincial authority, then all the 
expenditures made by the federal government are for nothing — 
a waste of taxpayers’ money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to assure you that our stand on this 
important issue has not changed. I reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that in 
September 1996 I said that the Government of Saskatchewan 
would not be involved in the development of the Bill C-68 
regulations and we have not. We remain opposed to the federal 
government proposal to put a new gun registration program in 
place. 
 
We have advised the federal government that the province of 
Saskatchewan will not participate in any way in the 
administration of the gun registration program under Bill C-68. 
It is and will remain a federal responsibility, and that means, 
Mr. Speaker, that it’ll be up to the federal government to 
implement this system on their own. And most importantly, the 
federal government will have to pay the bills on their own and 
the cost will be enormous. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan will continue to work with other 
provinces and territories as we await the decision of the Alberta 
Court of Appeal. Our government has informed the federal 
government of our position on Bill C-68, and I assure the 
people of Saskatchewan and the members of this Assembly that 
we have no intention of changing our position. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
thank the minister for his words of support for the firearms 
community. I certainly hope that his government and he will 
continue to provide the support that they did prior to the last 
provincial election. 
 
And I’m pleased to note that this House stood firm against C-68 
since I introduced the first motion against C-68 in this 
Assembly in 1994. 
 
This is not the first time, Mr. Speaker, that regulations have 
been presented by the Ottawa Liberals on C-68. The others 
were so fatally flawed that they were withdrawn before they 
were even close to being implemented. Firearms owners and 
associations will carefully review these new regulations to 
determine their appropriateness; although I doubt that any 
regulations can correct the fatally flawed C-68 with its massive 
flaws, as I mentioned, and its losses of freedoms for the citizens 
of Canada. 
 
In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we must continue to fight the 
Liberal gun control Bill C-68. We must not allow people to 
forget just who did this to us — the federal Liberals. And all we 
hear from the third party on this issue, Mr. Speaker, is blah, 
blah, blah. 
 
Mr. Speaker, costs are a very important issue when you’re 
talking about C-68. It’s going to cost approximately $100 per 
firearm to register, which will total over $2 billion — $2 billion 
which can be spent much more appropriately dealing with crime 
and crime prevention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s also important, Mr. Speaker, that all people be treated 
equally when it comes to firearm legislation, that no one be 
given exemptions. Mr. Speaker, you have to question . . . and 
I’m hoping that the minister will instruct his lawyers in Alberta 
that are taking this case before the courts to ask why is it that 
citizens are considered to be criminals if for any reason the 
justice system suspects they may be involved with a firearm or 
have knowledge of a firearm. 
 
They are criminal when they start under this Liberal legislation, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s very important that we carry on with this 
court case. It’s also very important, Mr. Speaker, that this 
House at some point in time during this session reiterate its 
opposition to Bill C-68. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to hear the 
Justice minister’s statement this afternoon in this House. I’m 
somewhat disappointed that there are colleagues in this 
Assembly who have already forgotten what the position has 
been of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party in opposition to 
registration of firearms. 
 
The member who spoke about the all-party committee . . . and I 
happen to have accompanied the all-party committee to Ottawa, 
Mr. Speaker, in support of unregistering firearms in this 
province. I made also, personally, a presentation at Senate 
committee hearings opposing the registration of firearms in this 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

province, so I welcome it. 
 
I am, Mr. Speaker, also disappointed that the federal 
government does not respect and does not wait for the Alberta 
Court of Appeal’s decision on this entire issue. And I’m pleased 
that the provinces and territories continue, continue to oppose, 
and I’m pleased to see that the Justice minister has taken that. 
And we will continue to maintain our position on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 2:32 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 21 - The Appropriation Act, 1998 ( No. 1) 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:34 p.m. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — To a conversion to orders for return 
(debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 22 is converted to motions for 
return (debatable). 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Rail-line Abandonment 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 
opportunity to speak today, Mr. Speaker, I will be putting 
forward a motion seconded by the member from Carrot River, 
which will deal with the question of grain transportation and 
rail-line abandonment, particularly pertaining to the federal 
government. 
 
I think that as I hear today from the members of the official 
opposition, that I think today this resolution that’s being put 
forward — or motion — is one that all parties in this House will 
certainly accept and vote for because, Mr. Speaker, we are 
seeing some changes to the system in terms of grain handling in 
this part of the world that producers are unable to deal with in 
an adequate amount of time . . . to deal with the situation and 
the change of grain handling. 
 
We are talking about the system, or a logistics system by which 
farmer-customers can move their grain to port in a very efficient 
and economical manner. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this debate has been going on for years and 
years by which we deal with this in terms of the railways and 
the grain companies. And it’s interesting when we talk about 
the issue, as I said, how things have not changed. 

And I want to highlight how things have progressed, Mr. 
Speaker, related in terms of what’s gone on in terms of the idea 
. . . as the words have changed, but the ideas have not. 
 
I first, Mr. Speaker, wish to quote from the Hall Commission 
report on grain transportation, dated 1997. And this regarded 
the performance of the railways, Mr. Speaker. And under that in 
the area of a prairie rail authority, it was stated as a 
recommendation on page 521 of such report: 
 

That a Prairie Rail Authority be established to provide the 
administration, operation, financial arrangements necessary 
to best meet the public interest, and to provide a continuing 
assessment of branch line needs and the rapidly changing 
industry, the commission recommends the establishment of 
a three-body force. 
 

It also talks about the railways need to be compensated. But at 
the same time the railways must be responsible for adequate 
maintenance and any upgrading of lines within the basic 
network. Basically saying that as the railways are compensated 
for the movement of grain, Mr. Speaker, they are responsible to 
maintain those lines. And what was done in the Hall report was 
that these lines be secured to the year 2000, as the year 2000 
approaches. As we all know, those guarantees and protections 
have been lifted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to refer to another report on grain transportation which 
talks about the questions of responsibilities to the railway 
system. And I refer to the Gilson report, Mr. Speaker, dated 
June 1982. Again a very comprehensive report dealing with 
grain transportation and the railways. 
 
In this report, in the executive summary, page 9, section 8, and I 
would like to quote for the record too: 
 

In return for being compensated, (the railways) it is 
recommended the railways’ performance and service be 
assured in the following manner: 
 

That Transport Canada administer the performance and 
service bonuses based on decisions and 
recommendations of the Central Co-ordinating Agency. 
 
That the railways’ investment plans and expenditures in 
western Canada be monitored by Transport Canada to 
ensure that fair and reasonable levels of investment are 
being made in the grain branch line network. 
 
The Central Co-ordinating Agency be responsible for the 
promotion and encouragement of these efficiency . . . (of 
the) system. 
 
And (that) any productivity gains in the system be shared 
in some manner between the railways and the producers 
. . . 

 
This is 1982, Mr. Speaker. I now refer to the document that was 
put forward by the four western premiers, dated this year, Mr. 
Speaker, to deal with the question of the Estey report, which is 
reviewing the policy of rail-line abandonment in western 
Canada. And again I quote: 
 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

The four western premiers maintain that any solution that 
comes out of the review process must be consistent with 
the following principles: establishing appropriate and 
regulatory frameworks that promotes modern logistic 
practices; promoting a customer-orientated system that 
enhances international competition for the western grain 
industry to benefit producers; promoting a more effective 
logistics system through examination of grain handling and 
transportation supply; and promoting competition and 
producer choices in grain handling and transportation 
system, and establishing accountability. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what I’ve read here, dated from 1997 . . . or 1977 
to 1998, basically says there is a role and a responsibility for the 
railways in the movement of grain and there is a role and a 
responsibility of the federal government to maintain the railway 
system by which it is . . . will serve the farmer-customers that 
exist out there in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just to note: 1977, do you want to know who 
was in power as a federal government? — the federal Liberals 
under Pierre Elliott Trudeau; 1982, the report of Clay Gilson, at 
that time the government of the day was the Trudeau Liberals; 
1998, the problems that we face in grain transportation in ’97 
and ’98 in terms of lack of performance by the railways and the 
threat of grain-line abandonment to the railway system are the 
federal Liberals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the question of rail-line 
abandonment it is not an argument of the red herrings that are 
put forth by other people about marketing. It is not about that. 
It’s not about weather conditions. It’s not about labour laws. It’s 
not about these kind of things. It is a question of responsibility 
and who is responsible. 
 
And the federal government has abdicated those responsibilities 
as all these groups have called for — from 1977 — a degree of 
protection for the farmer-customer who is the consumer of the 
goods. And this is some of the questions that we deal with in 
terms of commitment. 
 
If the system is to serve the farmer-customers, therefore the 
railway system should serve the farmers. But what I see is a 
system that is serving the grain companies in terms of what 
their plans are out there, in terms of what’s going on. In terms 
of the railways and the federal government and the federal 
government serving the farmer-customers, the federal 
government is serving the railways. 
 
Where is the question of the farmer-customer in terms of 
dealing with a competitive nature out there in the industry? It’s 
not a piece of the puzzle. Simply, what we are seeing in terms 
of rail-line abandonment is the transfer of cost to the producers 
and a transfer of cost to the taxpayers, be them municipal, be 
them provincial, in terms of the abdication of the cost in terms 
of the rail network to that of the costs of the deterioration of the 
road system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are the reasons why we need a stop to the abandonment 
of rail lines at this present time as the Estey Commission 
reviews what is going on in grain transportation. And every 
person in Saskatchewan should be concerned in terms of what 
takes place within the industry. I have before me a map. It deals 

with the question of the Saskatchewan rail network, and the 
three-year plans of CN and CP (Canadian National and 
Canadian Pacific). 
 
And when we talk about the question of farmers taking hold of 
their future, as they have done historically in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, as we have seen them historically do this in terms of 
dealing with the cooperative movement, be it the UGG (United 
Grain Growers Limited), be it the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, be 
it the creation of political parties in terms of the Progressives, 
and the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) then 
NDP Party; as we’ve seen it in the creation of financial 
institutions, in terms of the credit union system; and as we’ve 
seen it in terms of the creation of economic entities in terms of 
retail marketing, the cooperative system, farmers are now 
seizing the opportunity themselves in terms of trying to take 
over some of the rail lines to provide the service themselves 
because the railway said they’re not going to do it. 
 
But when the farmers say they want to do this, what do the 
railways do? They go running off to Ottawa and say, well we 
want to take a chunk of a little piece of railway away and then 
the track is useless. I give an example of this. It’s called the 
block 19. There’s a great deal of experience, being involved in 
that area several years ago, understanding block 19, south of 
block 21, and that’s the rail line that goes through Eston, Elrose, 
Wiseton, and areas like this, is that CN wants to take the track 
away from Eatonia, from Mantario . . . (inaudible) . . . connects 
onto block 21. 
 
(1445) 
 
We’re talking about a rail line that grows 22 million bushels of 
grain, cereal grain, high quality grain, where these producers are 
not getting the service they want, are willing to take the service 
that they want. And with taking away that portion of the track, 
these people cannot haul and make this an efficient way of 
moving their grain by moving grain into Alberta. They would 
be then forced to take the grain from Eston, backtrack it, take it 
to Saskatoon and across, which is being done now, as the 
railways say, in terms of the name of efficiency. 
 
Where producers could take control of this, you could pass 
through it into Alberta. There’s an opportunity there by which 
producers can do that, and that’s being taken away. 
 
Another example is the question of the branch line between 
Birch Hills and Prince Albert. The railways have gone running 
to the federal government saying, we’re just going to give away 
a few kilometres of track. That few kilometres of track takes 
away a direct link for those people in that area, around Prince 
Albert and Birch Hills, to a direct link to Hudson Bay. And 
these are the kind of things that are going on out there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is the three-year plan. I’d be afraid to 
see the 10-year plan. 
 
I remember talking to a friend of mine one time from the area of 
Plato and he drew a map what he thought the railway system 
was going to look like in Saskatchewan. And he simply took 
that map of Saskatchewan, drew two lines through Saskatoon, 
two lines through Regina, and said that will be the rail system. 
That’s a scary thought. 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

And when I talked about these reports and the question of 
regulatory in terms of competition, competition doesn’t exist in 
the grain handling system. I know only of one place in 
Saskatchewan where both tracks run side by side, and that’s the 
track that goes through Perdue-Biggar, where you have main 
line CP track and main line CN track that run side by side. 
That’s the only place where the railways would be competitive 
in terms of offering service to farmers, and they don’t do it. 
They don’t do it. 
 
And we’re seeing a grain handling system change at such a 
rapid rate that producers are having a great deal of difficulty 
keeping up. And as agriculture has changed over time, Mr. 
Speaker, with those changes that are taking place as we’ve 
moved into speciality crops, we’ve also put great pressure also 
on the highway system. But we know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
efficient way to move cereal grains to port in this province and 
in western Canada is by rail and the federal government is 
abdicating the responsibility when they talk about the 
abandonment of rail lines in Saskatchewan. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion. And I 
wish to move a motion, seconded by the member from Carrot 
River Valley, that says: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal Liberal government to 
immediately call a halt-order on all rail-line abandonment 
projects until the Estey grain review has completed its 
work, submitted its recommendations to the federal 
government, and those recommendations have been given 
due and thorough consideration with a view of providing 
maximum benefit to grain producers. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I want to 
say, why do we need a motion in this Assembly in regards to 
such an important issue like rail-line abandonment, the question 
of a moratorium or the halting of rail-line abandonment until at 
least the Estey review is complete. And the reason why, Mr. 
Speaker, is that I’m reading here from the Star-Phoenix and it’s 
dated March 19, ’98 in which it leads off by saying: 
 

Saskatchewan’s federal cabinet minister, Ralph Goodale, 
all but ruled out legislated moratorium on rail line 
abandonment last week. 
 

And another article here from the Star-Phoenix, March 14, 
which says: 
 

But Ralph Goodale, minister of natural resources, stopped 
short of supporting legislation to halt rail line abandonment 
. . . 
 

Then the next thing that we have to ask ourselves is why do we 
want to halt rail-line abandonment. Why do we want a 
moratorium on rail-line abandonment until Mr. Justice Estey 
reviews the grain handling system in a complete form. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, prior to the elimination of the Western 
Grain Transportation Act — I believe that was just recently — 
the freight rates were set each year. The freight rates that were 
charged to the farmers were based on a cost that the railways 

incurred on capital investment plus 20 per cent for profit. 
 
Well today the rates are adjusted for inflation and the railways 
. . . based on the railways’ input cost each year. But the 
railways’ costs, we would suspect, are going down because of 
rail-line abandonment and lay-offs. The deregulation of railway 
transportation has led to the abandonment of approximately 
3,400 kilometres of branch lines within the last 25 years, with 
another 1,400 kilometres identified that will be transferred or 
abandoned in the next little while. 
 
CN and CP say that these branch lines are no longer viable. But 
if we ask the farmer out there whose grain is in the elevator, 
who can’t move grain, he would say that if the train would 
come and pick our grain up, that maybe we would have a 
chance to make some money ourselves, plus the railway 
certainly might make a few more dollars. 
 
In 1996, Mr. Speaker, according to The Financial Post, from 
the movement of grain, Canadian Pacific Railway had revenues 
of $832 million in 1996. And the CN had revenues of $570 
million, Mr. Speaker, in 1996. 
 
Railways are doing very well on grain movements, thank you 
very much. They want complete deregulations after 1999, and 
even before if they could get it, without any consideration of the 
service offered to our farmers. That would dramatically increase 
rates again. 
 
I remember the farmers in my area saying that, you know, $13 a 
tonne was what their cost to move a tonne of grain to port. Now 
that same cost is 35 to $40 per tonne. And after deregulation in 
1999, what will the cost be? I think only the sky is the limit. 
 
Railways say, no, no, rates will not go up; they will actually in 
fact go down; we will compete with each other. That’s not so, I 
would argue. Seventy-five to 80 kilometres apart — that’s 
basically the average of distance between the CN and CP rail in 
most instances in the province of Saskatchewan. And besides, 
why would they beat each other up when they have the province 
divided in two already? — the CN in the North and the CP in 
the South. It wouldn’t be very good business to compete. 
 
Effects of deregulation without competition, I guess we can just 
look south of the border, Mr. Speaker. Burlington Northern in 
Montana have higher freight rates than even the rates in 
Saskatchewan. Why? Because there is no competition and 
because there is deregulation. 
 
Where there is competition, like the barges on the Mississippi, 
railway rates are much lower in North Dakota. CN and CP 
would have us believe that they have become lean and efficient 
and export problems are never their fault. A new short-line 
railway, Carlton trail owned by Omni Trax in Prince Albert 
area, 35 employees rather than 70 employees, handling more 
traffic, union agreement is very similar and the employees seem 
very happy. And you know what the farmers say, Mr. Speaker? 
That it is in fact better service. 
 
They have better service today from the short-line operation 
than the main line carrier. This short-line provides some lessons 
of how the transportation system might evolve. Short-lines 
should be given a fair chance to succeed before branch lines are 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

abandoned. If not, beware our road system. And everyone 
knows our road system in Saskatchewan. You’ve heard the 
lines: four and half times around the earth, the centre of the 
earth, the equator, that’s how many roads we have in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And many of those roads were not built for the heavy, heavy 
traffic that we will see today and even more so with rail-line 
abandonment. Many of these roads are thin membrane surface 
pavements that will break up under the stress of those large 
loads. 
 
And how about joint running rights, Mr. Speaker? They need to 
be examined more closely. Meaningful competition, a short-line 
moving grain to port on one of the lines or CN or CP running 
on the same lines, these are efficiencies that will happen in the 
form of true, true competition. 
 
Competition is coming in telephones, competition is coming in 
the services of natural gas, competition is coming in electrical 
power — so why not competition on the rail line? 
 
How about time lines that this wonderful legislation that the 
Liberal government gave us to decide whether we will buy or 
purchase a piece of abandoned rail. Well they give the public 60 
days. Well that’s a long time to arrange financing, I guess. I 
guess you need a good banker — and a very understanding 
banker — to be able to put together a business plan and get your 
financing in order in 60 days. But if the public doesn’t want it 
or can’t find a way to do it, then the province has 30 days and 
then the municipality 30 days. Well that just isn’t enough. So 
we need to review that as well. 
 
I want to congratulate the Department of Highways on the 
formation of the area transportation committees that will look at 
short-line railways and grain transportation. I also want to 
commend the Department of Highways for installing within the 
department a unit to help short-line rail develop. 
 
If nothing is done, farmers are going to continue to take action 
on their own as they did in the Kindersley area. They’re going 
to load their own cars and they’re going to ship them to port, 
ship their products to port. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the reasons why CN and CP 
should not be allowed to abandon railway track until Mr. Justice 
Estey . . . the review by Mr. Justice Estey is completed. So with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I second the motion from the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter the 
debate and I’m a little bit disappointed that the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest didn’t ask us to second the motion 
because we certainly would have. 
 
We are supportive of the motion. We believe that it’s 
imperative that we hear what Justice Estey has to say before any 
more of our infrastructure is ripped out of the ground. And I 
think there’s real concerns about that. We’ve seen the rail 
companies make proposals and put forward their plan for 
rail-line abandonment, and it continues in spite of the fact that 

there is a rail line transportation debate ensuing all across 
western Canada these days. 
 
So we certainly believe that until those meetings and Mr. Estey 
has put forward his final report, that it would be at least an act 
of good faith if the rail companies would set aside their 
abandonment plans until the report from Mr. Estey is in. It may 
indicate all kinds of things that would be helpful in terms of the 
movement of grain products from western Canada. 
 
However, it’s a little bit ironic that the NDP cries crocodile 
tears regarding rail-line abandonment yet will do nothing to 
facilitate short rail line operations here in Saskatchewan. And 
one thing that they could do . . . or there’s a couple of things 
that they could do to support rail-line abandonment here . . . or 
to support the call for short rail lines here in Saskatchewan. One 
of them of course, is the repealing of successor rights. 
 
(1500) 
 
Anyone that attended the short rail line conference here in 
Regina, and I did attend last year I believe it was, when we saw 
short rail companies, one after another, taking the platform and 
suggesting that they would be happy to come to Saskatchewan 
and start up short rail line opportunities here in this province, if 
indeed the short successor rights were dealt with here in the 
province. 
 
So we believe that it’s important that they do something of that 
nature as soon as possible. We’ve supported that right from the 
very outset. We can’t help but wonder why this government 
wants to cling to this notion of successor rights, particularly for 
rail companies, when it’s obvious that that is one of the major 
impairments for them starting up operations here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Northwest also says that it’s about 
none of the other things, such as labour laws, marketing, or 
taking responsibility for their actions. Well I would say to the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest, it’s about all of those 
things. Farmers just aren’t concerned about, farmers just aren’t 
concerned about their rail line closing down. They’re also 
concerned about how they’re going to market their product if 
that closes down. They also wonder whether or not labour laws 
are tied to this, and I think it’s clear that they are. And they also 
want all players within the industry to take responsibility for 
their actions. And that includes this government taking 
responsibility for their actions in slowing down the progress for 
short rail line operations to start up. 
 
Private business and farmers are willing to move in to take over 
these abandoned rail lines. All over Saskatchewan we are seeing 
that kind of opportunity come forward. Rail companies have not 
given them time to set their proposals, set up proposals, and the 
provincial government has to make these proposals feasible by 
dropping the successor rights. It’s the only way it’s going to 
happen here in Saskatchewan on a large-scale basis. 
 
You may see from time to time operations starting up that don’t 
think it’s an impairment to them, but I suggest to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that if you look towards the American experience, the 
companies that have had any success in this maintain that 
successor rights are a problem for them. 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

The NDP should make the farmers of this province their top 
priority for a change, instead of unions. If you are truly 
interested in this subject to the point where you wanted to do 
something about it, you would be addressing the issue of 
successor rights and you would also not be siding with the 
unions whenever we see strikes in the grain transportation 
system, Mr. Speaker. That’s a problem that we see constantly. 
 
In the last, in the last several years, we have seen longshoremen 
going on strike, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen other rail unions 
going on strike. And each and every time that it’s happened, 
members of the NDP don’t say a thing about it, don’t say a 
thing about it. They may say something in private to their 
farmer friends, but they certainly don’t speak in any public 
fashion in that regard. In private I suspect they tell the grain 
unions that they’re supportive of what they’re doing — grain 
handling unions. 
 
Local governments, Mr. Speaker, stand to lose tax revenue if 
railways and elevators disappear from their communities. The 
federal government and Ralph Goodale seem clueless when it 
comes to the difficulties in the transportation and grain delivery 
system. We’ve been waiting for years and years and years for a 
review, Goodale’s been promising it time and time and time 
again, and yet we see very little action on this. 
 
Another area that if the NDP was truly interested in doing 
something to support the farmers in Saskatchewan and support 
the movement of grain here in Saskatchewan, they’d be 
addressing the question of fuel taxes. The fuel taxes for the, 
pardon me for the transportation companies here in 
Saskatchewan, the rail companies, are the highest in western 
Canada by far and yet they are unprepared to address that in any 
way. 
 
The federal . . . nobody’s talking about giving any more money 
to the railways. What we’re talking about is, any time that the 
rail companies have a cost, and fuel taxes are a cost, what 
happens to that cost, Mr. Member? 
 
What happens to it, Mr. Speaker, is it is directly transferred into 
the cost of delivering products for the farmers. Any time that 
there’s a cost, it’s directly transferred, and that member knows 
full well that high taxes in terms of fuel taxes directly go 
towards the farmers’ cost at the end of the day. So any costs 
that you people impose, any cost you people impose, any cost 
this government proposes to raise is a direct impairment to the 
farmers of this province. 
 
The federal Liberals’ abandonment of the Crow benefit, 
coupled with the acceleration of rail-line abandonment, is 
putting even more stress on our road and railway infrastructure 
and the NDP is unwilling or unable, incapable of putting 
anything forward in terms of meaningful solutions to that 
problem as well. We see a government, Mr. Speaker, that on 
one hand talks about rail-line abandonment and on the other 
hand is putting less and less money rather than more and more 
money into a highway structure . . . infrastructure here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They’ve made a grandiose promise of $2.5 billion over 10 
years, which comes down to $250 million a year. And you’ve 
missed the mark on two of the last, on the last two budgets, the 

first two years of that 10-year plan, Mr. Speaker. We see very 
little evidence that that is going to change in the future. And 
you’re not helping with your taxation policies in Saskatchewan; 
it’s only making it worse. 
 
A study by the Organization for Western Canadian 
Co-operation shows that Saskatchewan levies the highest taxes 
on railways when land taxes, fuel taxes, and other charges are 
worked into the equation. All of those are directly transferable 
to the user — the farmer in this case. 
 
A single grain train moving west would face the following 
government-imposed charges: in Manitoba it’s about $20,000; 
in Saskatchewan 22,500; Alberta $9,000; British Columbia, 
14,600. 
 
So once again we see the policies of an NDP province here in 
Saskatchewan resulting in the highest costs to the rail 
companies, which is in turn turned over directly to the cost of 
grain and moving the product for the farmers. These costs apply 
to both existing lines as well as any short rail line opportunities 
here in this province. The NDP has given them a double 
whammy of high taxes and high labour rates. 
 
The member from Northwest says that it’s red herrings. Well all 
of these costs are directly transferable to the agriculture 
community here in Saskatchewan, and neither the federal 
Liberals nor the Saskatchewan NDP nor the provincial Liberals 
want to take any responsibility for this. Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s the farmer that’s caught in between all of the time. 
 
Between the failures of the Liberals and the NDP, farmers in 
rural communities have been poorly served by the governments 
of the day. In fact, Mr. Speaker, farmers in Saskatchewan 
believe that there’s a rural revenge program going on and it’s 
spearheaded by the provincial government here in 
Saskatchewan and Ralph Goodale on the federal scene. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we are supportive of this motion, we 
also believe that this government should be doing more than 
paying lip-service to the problem of rail-line abandonment here 
in Saskatchewan, and we believe that certainly the farmers of 
this province are supportive of our position. 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to enter 
into this debate, especially after the member from Kindersley 
has spoken. I’ve got a few things to talk to him about. 
 
Let’s look at the federal government framework, at the federal 
government frameworks . . . place decision-making authority 
for grain handling and shipping and grading with any grain 
companies, railways, ports, and federal authorities. Producers 
have been excluded from any decision making. 
 
For example, producers and producer market organizations 
cannot choose their shipping route to export their grain or their 
preferred port to maximize their returns. Producers must pay for 
their grain cleaning and dockage even if their product meets 
export standards at the farm gate. Producers should have direct 
input into the key issues that affects them to ensure that they 
benefit from any changes in the grain handling and 
transportation system. 
 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, on March 3 I attended a Hudson Bay Route 
Association convention in Prince Albert. At that convention, all 
speakers were encouraging producers to write letters to their 
federal minister and Liberal MPs (Member of Parliament) to 
stop CNCP from abandoning lines, at least till such time that 
the Estey report is done. 
 
This is a situation that’s facing . . . There is a situation that’s 
facing north-east part of the province. One of the major 
challenges facing the Hudson Bay Route Association and Omni 
Trax, the new operators of the Hudson Bay railways, is 
expanding the size of the Churchill catchment area to increase 
grain volumes from the current level of about 400,000 tonnes 
per year. 
 
A crucial factor in achieving this goal will be to maintain the 
rail link between Birch Hills and P.A. (Prince Albert) to move 
grain from the north-central area to Hudson Bay to the 
Churchill line. Not only the line from P.A. to Birch Hills could 
be dismantled but also between Prairie River and Hudson Bay. 
This will farther diminish the size of the Churchill catchment 
area. 
 
Meath Park too has been in desperate situation; I guess they’re 
looking at closing that line as well. The whole issue of rail-line 
abandonment has been brought to a head primarily as a result 
of action taken by the federal government. This elimination of 
the Crow benefit costing Saskatchewan farmers $400 million 
annually in the last return . . . in lost returns. 
 
In 1996, changes to the Canadian transportation Act essentially 
gave the railways a blank cheque to do whatever they want. 
The federal government, I guess thought it was time for them, 
for the railroad companies, to do it favours for them. 
 
Last fall our Highways minister talked to the federal deputy 
minister of Transportation, what they intended to do about 
rail-line abandonment. You know what the answer was? I want 
to quote: “We thought we’d just leave it go for a few years and 
see what happens.” That is irresponsible of the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the other lines that were taken out. I 
want to talk about the one in between Paddockwood and 
Henribourg and now between Henribourg and White Star, and 
that has created a lot of problems to our roads in that area. 
 
We had a highway that run from No. 2 over to Henribourg. 
Now they moved the elevator to White Star without any 
consultation with the RMs (rural municipality), with the 
provincial government, but still asking for the provincial 
government and the RMs to take responsibilities of building 
roads there. And we had a road in place to go to Henribourg 
already. 
 
I just want to say, the member from Kindersley was talking 
about successor rights. I want to say, Omni Trax . . . we met 
with Omni Trax before they took the line over from P.A. to 
Warman, and that exact question was asked about successor 
rights, unions. I mean the union member was there. They asked 
him, are you worried about the unions? And I tell you he said 
no, that it’s no problem. 
 

So they purchased, Omni Trax purchased that line. And you 
know what? They hired just about every person that worked on 
that line for CN. They weren’t scared. They think good 
workers, good Saskatchewan workers will be hired. Yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Langford: — The member also talks about more money, 
that the Saskatchewan government is not putting enough money 
into highways. I’ll tell you, when he’s asking that, he’s asking 
the farmers, he’s asking the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, to put 
more money into roads. He hasn’t even said that the federal 
government, it’s their responsibility. I mean I would be 
ashamed to go to any of these little towns, to the farmers, and 
ask them for more money. And on the other hand he says we’re 
taxed to death. Now he’s asking for more money. 
 
I want to talk about what are we doing. That’s what he’s going 
to be asking, is what are we doing? Well as you may be aware, 
the western premiers urged the federal government to establish 
a review of the grain handling and transportation system at a 
May 1997 conference to resolve grain transportation 
performance problems and develop a long-term, logical system 
improvement. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s important. 
 
Mr. Langford: — You bet that’s important. 
 
All the western premiers from all the western provinces are 
united on the need of a provincial involvement in the review 
and on the importance of this issue to the western economy. 
 
We have repeatedly called for action to improve the 
performance of the grain handling and transportation system to 
increase returns to producers and others while meeting 
customers’ demands in a reliable, effective manner. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take my seat now and let 
others continue on to the debate. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in support of 
this motion because the fear of myself and of my colleagues is 
that the review being conducted by Mr. Justice Estey has little 
real meaning or purpose if while that review is proceeding, 
branch lines and the grain delivery points which are served by 
those branch lines are lost. 
 
However, I do wish to say that I think some of the statements 
that have been made in the House this afternoon are perhaps a 
bit simplistic, which I found out in my term as being the MLA 
for North Battleford. 
 
Of course North Battleford itself is secure in terms of rail-line 
abandonment, but we do have two lines out of our district, the 
Robin Hood and the Walburg lines, which indeed are in peril. 
 
We in North Battleford have frankly been pleased to hear 
announcements by Saskatchewan Wheat Pool of an $11 million 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

grain handling facility for North Battleford, with a similar 
announcement expected by Pioneer. 
 
However, at a meeting over branch lines held in Meota, one of 
the communities on the Turtleford line, Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool representatives made it abundantly clear that they would 
not be building an $11 million facility for North Battleford with 
any intention of continuing to run a whole string of small 
elevators up and down the branch lines. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest has been too narrow on focusing in simply on the 
issue of the rail lines. Because the grain companies have also 
made it abundantly clear that by building the large new grain 
terminals, they are opting for centralized grain delivery points 
and they will not be operating those terminals in addition to the 
small delivery points. And they have said so very clearly and 
unequivocally. 
 
If we are going to maintain, if we are going to maintain service 
on our branch lines it must somehow be in a way which is 
complementary to the new grain terminals, and we must find 
ways in which that can be facilitated. 
 
Certainly all of us in Saskatchewan are concerned that the 
removal of the branch lines, the loss of the grain elevators, will 
first of all put enormous pressure on our secondary roads and 
highways. We know that that will create other enormous costs 
for the province and for our municipalities. We are also aware 
that the loss of the branch lines, the stations, the elevators, will 
make many of our villages non-viable. The tax base of many of 
those villages will be gone. 
 
So we have great concern for what will be the long-term 
implications from the realignment of grain transportation. And I 
am told by many experts that it’s anticipated that within a few 
years, most farmers will not be trucking their own grain. It will 
be trucked by companies, and of course we already see that 
becoming standard in many areas. 
 
It is the hope of all of us that the review by Mr. Justice Estey 
will be able to find some workable and satisfactory compromise 
between the new integration and centralization represented by 
the grain terminals and the need to provide service to our 
smaller points, and also the desirability of keeping as much as 
possible of our grains on the rail bed and off the highways. But 
in order for that to happen, we have to give Mr. Justice Estey a 
chance to do his work and to come in with his report. 
 
This is not simply a delaying mechanism in my view, Mr. 
Speaker. This is not an attempt to simply foist this matter off on 
a committee so we don’t have to face the hard questions. Rather 
in my view, it is a question that we have appointed an eminent 
man to look into this problem, to make suggestions for us. And 
in that sense it would be a travesty not to give him an 
opportunity to report, and us to consider his recommendations, 
prior to taking action which cannot be reversed. Certainly we all 
know that once the branch lines are closed down, the track is 
removed, the elevator is torn down, then at that point, whatever 
Mr. Justice Estey may recommend becomes moot and has no 
meaning. 
 
So I join in support, as do my colleagues, of this motion to say 

that we want Mr. Justice Estey’s report to come in. We are 
hopeful that it will provide helpful suggestions for us all. 
 
However, I would encourage all members though to consider 
that this is not merely a rail line issue; indeed, it may not even 
be primarily a rail line issue. There are so many other factors. 
 
The member for Kindersley mentioned successor rights. The 
member for Kindersley mentioned the lack of enthusiasm from 
the government side for the establishment of branch lines and 
independent railroads. There has been little discussion about the 
need in Alberta . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now I note with 
interest that it’s two members who have already spoken on the 
record who are shouting across the floor at one another, and I’ll 
ask the cooperation of the House to provide the hon. member 
for North Battleford to put his remarks on the record. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I didn’t think it was that bad a speech myself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that in the province of Alberta, 
short-lines are popping up all over the province. We know that 
in the United States we have short-lines starting all throughout 
the Midwest of the United States. Can that not happen in 
Saskatchewan as well? I believe it can. 
 
But it needs the cooperation of the grain companies. It needs the 
action of our farmers. And my fear is that when our farmers 
know for certain what the plans of the rail lines and the grain 
companies are, it will be too late for them to make alternate 
arrangements before they have lost service to their smaller 
communities. 
 
So let us support the work of Mr. Justice Estey. Let us hope that 
his review and report will provide workable and valuable 
suggestions for us as we move our transportation system into 
the 21st century. Let us accept that the world will continue to 
turn and that to simply stake our ground on a grain 
transportation system that was founded in the days of 60-bushel 
wagons pulled by horse is not necessarily the best way to serve 
the population of this province today. But none the less, let us 
also say that we are committed to leaving as much as possible 
of our produce on the rail bed and not on the highway; we are 
committed to the viability of our small towns and communities; 
and we are committed to the process of the Estey report. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Mr. Speaker, the motion moved by the hon. 
member from Saskatoon Northwest and seconded by the hon. 
member from Carrot River Valley reads: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal Liberal government to 
immediately call a halt-order on all rail-line abandonment 
projects until the Estey grain review has completed its 
work, submitted its recommendations to the federal 
government, and those recommendations have been given 
due and thorough consideration with a view to providing 
maximum benefit to grain producers. 
 

Doesn’t seem like too much to ask, to me. Or simply put, let’s 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

not just tear up the tracks until such time as we know what the 
report says. However this kind of conduct from the railways, 
with the blessings of the Liberals, both here and in Ottawa, is 
not all that surprising. They have done it before. 
 
You all remember the Hall Commission. Well the report from 
Mr. Justice Estey may not be any better received by Liberals 
than the Hall report was. Justice Hall really fell from favour 
when he told them the truth, as I expect Mr. Estey will. 
 
Mr. Hall stated emphatically that if the Crow goes, buffalo will 
once again roam the Prairies. So guess what the Libs in Ottawa 
did with that report — they shelved it and hired an American to 
give them the answers that they wanted. So now they don’t 
want anything to interfere with the railways as they redraw the 
map of Saskatchewan, and redraw it they will. 
 
Don’t kid yourself — the railways will not cooperate in any 
meaningful process with RMs, town councils, provincial 
highways, or short-line. They know the grain will wind up on 
the main line, one way or another. And we as farmers and rural 
taxpayers will pay the bill. 
 
Far-away Liberals in Ottawa may have an excuse if they don’t 
understand rural issues. But when a couple of Liberals from 
north-west Saskatchewan don’t get the message, it is hard to 
understand. 
 
For example, the member from North Battleford, working with 
other Liberals in the area, trying to cast blame for highway 
conditions on the provincial government when it is the federal 
policy, or lack thereof, that transfers goods from rail to road, 
thus destroying our highway system, then failing to fund a 
national highways program. 
 
For example, I would just like to read a response I sent to the 
News-Optimist dealing with an unfair message delivered from 
the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from the 
Battlefords by a well-known Liberal who was, to their shame, 
trying to use his position in an important organization to shore 
up the failing Liberal fortunes in north-west Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with your permission I will now, for the record, 
read my response to the ridiculous approach to a very serious 
matter. It stated: 
 

I’m writing in response to an article by Owen Einsiedler in 
the March 25 edition of the News-Optimist. In the article, 
city councillor, Julian Sadlowski is quoted several times. 
From his comments, I am not certain that Mr. Sadlowski 
has a complete understanding of the situation regarding the 
twinning of the national highway system in this province. 
 
All of the twinning done on these highways since 1991 was 
done in my constituency, starting at Borden in ’93 in what 
was then Redberry constituency and concluding last fall at 
Langham in what is presently Redberry Lake constituency. 

 
(1530) 

 
Approximately 95 kilometres in all, and all in my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Sadlowski, prior to becoming vice-president 
of the Yellowhead association, will remember attending a 

meeting at my invitation in December in the town of Borden 
where we joined forces to kick-start this portion of the 
twinning. 
 
I appreciated the support I received from Mr. Sadlowski at that 
time and also the support from the hon. member from 
Lloydminster, who has fought long and hard for the remainder 
of the Yellowhead Highway from Saskatoon to Lloydminster. 
 
Since 1995 we’ve been joined in our efforts by Battleford-Cut 
Knife MLA, who also realizes the importance of this major 
artery in the north-west. What escapes me is Mr. Sadlowski’s 
support of the Liberals in this matter. If the Liberal government 
down in Ottawa were continuing to pay the 50 per cent of the 
construction cost on the Yellowhead, I expect we would have 
seen the twinning from Lloydminster to Battleford completed 
by the turn of the century. 
 
I would like to call on Mr. Sadlowski and the Liberal member 
from North Battleford to join with the NDP MLAs from 
north-west in demanding that Ottawa replace the 50 per cent 
funding for the Yellowhead. Our government is prepared to do 
its share as a province. Where is the Liberal commitment? Why 
should the people of Saskatchewan bear the whole cost while 
other provinces received federal money? 
 
The Liberal Party is also responsible for the loss of the rail 
system that is costing us in so many ways. Mr. Sadlowski, as a 
representative of the Yellowhead Highway Association, has 
been quoted as making some very partisan remarks. I have 
traditionally counted on this group as allies in our endeavours to 
have Highway 16 twinned throughout north-west 
Saskatchewan. I hope that Mr. Sadlowski is not attempting to 
turn the Yellowhead Highway Association into a lobby group 
for the Liberal Party. 
 
Perhaps the MLA from North Battleford should be supporting 
the proposed twinning of the Yellowhead, the remainder of the 
distance from my constituency to Lloydminster, instead of 
supporting his party’s efforts to take advantage of a family 
tragedy by presenting petitions to twin not the Yellowhead, but 
the Trans-Canada. 
 
I also want the good folks along the Yellowhead to know that 
the member from North Battleford is calling for the twinning of 
No. 1, not our Yellowhead. Why the Liberal member from the 
north-west would not join with us on our call to Ottawa I will 
never know. I also would like Mr. Sadlowski to admit he was 
supporting the Liberals friends and not representing the view of 
the Yellowhead association. 
 
A year ago last August, I had the privilege of joining SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
representatives on a train trip to Churchill, including a tour of 
the port facilities. The conditions of the track was just another 
indication of how the federal government has fail . . . federal 
governments — because there was Tories involved from time 
to time — have failed to accept responsibility for a national 
transportation policy. 
 
These are the same people that cut $400 million annually out of 
the net of Saskatchewan farmers with the killing of the Crow, 
and through their neglect have virtually destroyed the potential 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

of the port of Churchill. Don’t ever forget it was the Liberals 
that did that to us, and granted it was the federal Liberals, but 
Liberals just the same. 
 
I guess it just goes to show you that my neighbour may well 
have been right after all when he claims that the Liberals in 
office were actually worse than the Tories in office. It was his 
idea that the Tories did less harm because they did nothing 
while they were in office, while the Liberals actually did 
something to you. 
 
Well it was the past Liberal government that did the $400 
million job of killing the Crow, but it is the present Liberal 
member from the Battlefords who was letting Saskatchewan 
people down right now by not joining with us to demand a 
national transportation policy. In fact he could start by 
supporting the people of north-west Saskatchewan in asking for 
federal money for the Yellowhead so we could twin the rest of 
the highway from my constituency through The Battlefords to 
Lloydminster. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
agree with my counterparts in the legislature today and I also 
agree with the motion. I believe that farmers and small 
companies have to have time to set up short-line rails, and I 
believe the Estey report has to have time to work, but what my 
fear is that Ralph’s rural revenge will once again take over. I 
believe in Saskatchewan we’re going to be punished for only 
sending one federal Liberal back. 
 
My second concern though is the Saskatchewan Minister of 
Agriculture and Mr. Goodale seem to be just like a glove when 
it comes to things to do with Saskatchewan farmers and the 
things like the Wheat Board and other issues; they have the 
same stand exactly, so I have a hard time understanding the 
government’s views today. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Northwest said that competition is a 
problem and I agree — lack of competition that is. But he also 
said that labour laws are not part of the program here and not a 
problem. 
 
Well every group that we have met with, one of the first things 
they have brought up is successor rights. They all say successor 
rights are one of the problems. 
 
I also have a thing, a graph today, Mr. Speaker, and one of the 
other problems that they say is, is the fuel tax, and this is the 
railways talking. And if you look at the graph, Mr. Speaker, you 
look at how many cents per litre in each province are charged 
. . . I’d like to go by B.C. (British Columbia). I believe there’s a 
4 cent tax by the federal government. There’s 3 cents by the 
province of B.C. There’s about 7 by Alberta, 7 by Manitoba, 
and when we get to Saskatchewan it’s 15 cents a litre. Well the 
railway is . . . the first thing they tell you is that they have 
nowhere to pass that on but to our farmers. So guess who picks 
up the tab? 
 
Mr. Speaker, another problem we have is land tax where the rail 
lines sit. And with reassessment if anybody’s been watching, 
the value of that land that the railroad is sitting on, the 

reassessment has jacked that a way up. Once again the railways 
say they have nowhere to pass that on but to us the farmers. So 
once again we’re picking it up. 
 
If the provincial government was really serious about helping 
our Saskatchewan farmers, why don’t we drop that 15 cent fuel 
tax down to 4, 3, 5 even, like the other provinces, and you 
would show me that you’re really serious about helping our 
farmers. 
 
Another problem I believe, Mr. Speaker, we have, is incentives 
by the railroads and grain companies to haul your grain to the 
larger centres. I’ll give you an example. We have a small Pool 
elevator in the town of Saltcoats — a brand-new elevator in 
fact. But because it’s a 24-car spot, the incentive in Langenburg 
is so great that they’re trucking grain, after we haul it into the 
Saltcoats elevator, down the highway to Langenburg, and it’s 
worth enough that they can make money doing that. We have a 
big problem, and that problem is with the railroads and the 
grain companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These things have to be straightened out. This cannot carry on. 
The problem also is multiplied by the lack of funding for 
municipalities out there by this government, because when 
things like this happen, rural municipalities need more money 
to fund rural roads. 
 
And in the last seven years they’ve been cutting and cutting 
rural funding. In fact municipalities, as the member from 
Regina Victoria says, you’ve cut back on rural funding, and he 
says we’re asking for more money. No, Mr. Speaker. What 
we’re asking for is return some of the money that we balanced 
the budget with. Not more money, some of the money you’ve 
cut from us in the last six or seven years. 
 
Another area, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to address is not the 
east-west rail line to Thunder Bay and Vancouver, maybe we 
should be looking more seriously at the north-south one from 
Churchill right down . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Pursuant to rule 17(2) the time 
for the main debate on the motion has expired, and we’ll now 
move to 10 minutes of questions and comments. Questions and 
comments are in order. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to pose a question to the 
member for North Battleford. If he was prepared to agree with 
me in saying that the federal government is totally inept at their 
policies related to rail transportation, when they go to Japan and 
make an agreement to reduce the amount of carbon generated in 
Canada on one hand, and then come back to Canada and 
basically are going forward with a policy to reduce rail 
transportation and shift it over to the road at probably a four to 
six times the amount of carbon released as what was on the 
railway, that they are just simply not going through . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member has been extremely 
long in his preamble. I want to ask him to put his question 
directly, immediately. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Does the member from North Battleford 
accept what I’ve said as accurate? 
 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I am aware that the hon. member 
is reflecting the views of his caucus that the international 
concern to reduce carbon emissions is crazy, bizarre, weird, and 
totally unjustified. 
 
Unfortunately I would say to him that this is the way the world 
is headed. We are aware that greenhouse emissions are a serious 
problem. Global warming is a problem for our planet, and our 
federal government is joining with national governments around 
the world to try and address it. 
 
How we can address it in a responsible manner that is 
economically feasible is indeed a serious issue. But he is right 
that we do not agree that it is crazy that the greenhouse gas 
emission and the value, quality of our environment have to be 
dealt with by our national governments. The Liberals stand by 
that. I realize you oppose that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
direct a question to the member from Spiritwood. Mr. Member, 
you stated in your comments that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It is not in order to direct a 
question to the member from Spiritwood. The member from 
Spiritwood was not involved in the debate. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Shellbrook-Torch River. The member mentioned in his 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member may want to direct it to the 
member for Saskatchewan Rivers. There is no member for 
Shellbrook-Torch River. 
 
I’ll recognize the hon. member from Cannington and I’ll ask 
him to be fairly brief in his question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We hear from 
him so seldom. 
 
Mr. the member from Spirit . . . Sask Rivers, you mentioned in 
your comments that successor rights were not a problem. Yet at 
the short rail conference last year, every representative from a 
short rail line said it was indeed a very big problem. In fact as 
even your minister at the time indicated, that they were 
prepared to look at each individual case on a case-by-case basis 
to eliminate successor rights. 
 
If that is the case, why not simply eliminate them totally, 
instead of waiting, until after somebody comes in here and 
spends all their money, to give them the indication whether 
successor rights are going to be in place. They’re not going to 
spend the money unless it’s there. 
 
Mr. Langford: — I’m glad, Mr. Speaker, somebody knows 
that I’m from Saskatchewan Rivers. This guy . . . 
 
Anyways, he’s talking about successor rights and that nobody 
will invest in . . . companies won’t invest into our railroad 
system. I’ve pointed out Omni Trax. They invested; they’ve got 
no problems and they hired, they also hired our employees from 
CN. I mean that is not a problem. 
 

I just want to ask the member, maybe you should go and talk to 
the Omni Trax and ask them if they do have problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct my 
question to the member from Saltcoats. And I know that the 
Saskatchewan Party would take all the taxes away from the 
railways and give them a free ride and that they would give 
more to municipalities on the other hand. And in fact if 
balancing the budget is not important to them, I’m wondering if 
the member would table the Saskatchewan Party’s policy on 
railway taxation for the benefit of the members of the house. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to get 
the opportunity to answer questions because we definitely need 
the practice. We’ll be on that side within a year, acting as 
ministers and we will be answering you people every day. So 
I’d like to thank the member. 
 
Actually as we have said, we agreed with the motion put forth 
by the members and seconded by that member. But I think if 
that government was really serious about what they’re bringing 
forward today and you look at this chart that I have here, all 
you’d have to do is drop the gas about 10 cents a litre and every 
farmer in this province could make a few more dollars. So until 
you do that I don’t really believe for one minute that you’re 
serious about the motion you presented today. 
 
The Speaker: — The 75-minute debate has expired. No, the 
75-minute debate has expired. I advise all hon. members that if 
you wished to put the question then the debate had to conclude 
prior to the expiration of the 65 minutes. It was at that point that 
it was in order to have the question put, unless of course the 
House would determine otherwise. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of the 
House to put the question now. I think the members were under 
the impression that they were going to provide for the time to 
have the question put during the question period. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member from Prince Albert Carlton 
requests leave of the House to put the question on the motion. 
Leave is required in order to put the question. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:47 p.m. until 3:52 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 31 
 

Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 
MacKinnon Tchorzewski Johnson 
Whitmore Upshall Kowalsky 
Calvert Bradley Koenker 
Trew Renaud Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Langford Murrell Bjornerud 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

Toth D’Autremont Boyd 
Heppner Osika Hillson 
Goohsen   
 

Nays — nil 
 

Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to present a 
motion to the House regarding the transcripts of the following 
debate. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present a motion, 
moved by myself and seconded by the member from 
Kindersley: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly requests the Speaker to send 
copies and transcripts of the 75-minute debate motion 
regarding railway abandonment to the Prime Minister of 
Canada, the federal Minister of Transportation, the federal 
Minister of Agriculture, and the federal Minister 
responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Health Care System Review 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly a privilege to stand in this Assembly today and to 
speak to a very important issue that’s reflected in the province 
of Saskatchewan by many people across this province, and 
that’s in regards to health care. And at the end of my remarks 
I’m going to be moving a motion, seconded by the member 
from Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly urges the NDP government to 
recognize that a full-scale review of the current health care 
system is warranted given that five years have passed since 
it introduced its major health reform initiatives, in order 
that the government and all Saskatchewan residents can see 
why the current system is failing so many more residents in 
Saskatchewan than it did in 1993, yet costs more than it 
ever did; and that this Assembly further urges that the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre in Regina is put on hold 
until such a review is completed given the questions 
surrounding the number of Regina hospital beds that are 
adequate to care for the population of southern 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope and I trust that we will see the 
. . . that when a vote comes on this particular motion that indeed 
the members of this Assembly will indeed unite as well, and 
certainly reflect the views of the many residents across this 
province — certainly the southern part and the eastern part of 
this province — in regards to the Plains health care centre, but 
most importantly to all residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan in regards to health care and how it affects each 
and every one of us. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reason we brought forward this motion 
is because of the many number of letters. And I just received, in 
fact, just before I walked into the Assembly for question period 
this afternoon, received a note in from my secretary of my 
office, or office assistant, with two more phone calls that had 
arrived at the office from individuals who had called and 
basically said, please work to keep the Plains Health Centre 
open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those were two phone calls. I also received three 
letters just when I entered the Assembly this morning, entered 
my office, got to my office, from individuals with the same 
message, saying please work to retain the Plains health care 
centre. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the letters they’re writing, they’re 
not just writing the letters because somebody else is saying 
keep the Plains health care centre open. What I’ve found, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, people that have come to me have contacted 
me, have contacted me for many different reasons. 
 
(1600) 
 
In some cases employees working in the current Regina Health 
District have called. Of course their jobs are on the line; they 
have a reason to call. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and other 
people have reasons as well. And while I suggest that if we’re 
just looking at saving jobs and that’s the only reason, I think 
we’ve got to look beyond that. I think we need to find some real 
reasons as to why you would look at keeping the Plains health 
care centre open. 
 
And when I look at what different ones have written, some of 
the reasons, the one letter I have in my hand here right now just 
talks about an individual . . . a couple writing in, and the person 
writing this letter says, I would like to see you and your fellow 
MLAs vote down the closing of the Plains hospital. He says: 
 

I waited six months for open-heart surgery and (he says) I 
would have waited longer except for the fact that I ended 
up in the emergency room. 

 
There was no more wait; he had to receive this care. And his 
wife goes on to explain as well how much they appreciated the 
staff and the care that was given to them through the Plains 
health care centre. 
 
And I can suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having visited 
that facility on numerous occasions over the number of years 
that I have been an MLA in the province of Saskatchewan, I 
visited all kinds of patients in the major hospitals, certainly here 
in Regina and outside of Regina, but the Plains health care 
centre, many of the patients I’ve visited have been there as a 
result of respiratory or, in most cases, heart patients, individuals 
who are needing special care and needing heart surgery. 
 
What I’ve found, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that every one of the 
patients that I talked to had just high accolades for the service 
that they had received, for the service that had been provided 
and for the care that they had received not only from the 
medical professionals, the doctors, but certainly the staff on the 
floors as they had prior to and post-operative care. 
 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about the Plains health 
care centre and we see the number of letters that keep coming 
in, where people are coming up to us and keep asking us to 
raise the concern about what’s going to happen when this 
hospital closes and the Minister of Health just indicating the 
other day that there will be no loss of beds in the city of Regina. 
That may be true, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the district and 
the government have already eliminated a number of beds to the 
point where we’re finding that there are shortages that we’re 
facing on a constant basis. 
 
And we saw this just the other day. A call into our office from a 
very concerned professional who had indicated that they had 
been informed that the General and the Pasqua were going to 
have to close the doors on their emergency services because 
they did not have beds available, and thus they will all fall on 
the Plains health care centre. 
 
And as we were chatting with a couple of the care-givers at the 
Plains health care centre the next morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it was interesting to note how they mentioned the workload that 
they had that evening and the fact that they actually had to call 
more people in — in fact ask people to stay on, rather than 
when they had completed their time of work, they were asked to 
stay on because there was such a demand and workload placed 
on the emergency services at the Plains health care centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Speaker, when we look at and when we 
discuss this issue of health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan, it’s not just about bricks and mortar and beds, 
more beds, lack of beds, or even more money, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s the livelihood of individuals. It’s the desire of 
people to receive adequate and prompt health care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe people in this province feel very 
strongly. They feel that they are already paying high enough in 
their taxes to justify and suggest that they need and they feel 
that they should have adequate health services. Whether it’s in 
here in Regina, whether it’s at the General, whether it’s at the 
Pasqua or the Plains Health Centre, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
you look at health care in the province of Saskatchewan, people 
feel very strongly about it. 
 
In fact just over the weekend, I don’t know exactly how many 
people I chatted with or people who came up to me at functions 
I was at, and the very first question that I was asked about is, 
are you standing up for us? Are you speaking out about our 
concerns regarding the closure of the Plains health care centre? 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about health care, it goes 
far beyond the closure of the Plains health care centre. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a motion or a Bill before this 
Assembly that suggests the government take a long, careful 
look at health care expenditures in the province of 
Saskatchewan and how it’s delivering health care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, even the Conference Board of Canada is 
suggesting it’s time to review health care delivery, not only 
across Canada but in each province; in Saskatchewan in 
particular. It’s time to review how we are delivering the 
services and whether or not the current delivery of care is 
meeting the need that we are facing on a daily basis. 
 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at . . . we just debated 
a motion in this Assembly where the government members 
brought forward a motion suggesting that we urge the federal 
government to put a moratorium or put a hold on any further 
branch line abandonment until the Estey report is delivered and 
presented to the federal minister responsible for the Canadian 
Wheat Board, or the Minister of Transport and the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would seem to me that if it’s appropriate 
for the government to put a hold or ask for the federal 
government to put a hold on any further closure of branch lines 
in the province of Saskatchewan, I think it would be appropriate 
as well for this government to look very carefully at their plans 
to close the current Plains health care centre and put a hold as 
well on the closure of the Plains health care centre until they 
have taken the time to review how they have spent their money 
and whether or not we are receiving value for the dollar we are 
putting into health care expenditure in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, when you 
look at health care spending, and the Minister of Finance and 
the Minister of Health and the Premier will argue that the health 
expenditures and budget in the province of Saskatchewan eat up 
one-third of the expenditures out of the General Revenue Fund. 
And no one is arguing that. One-third — $1.72 billion I believe 
this year is going into health care expenses in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at . . . when you 
talk to the public, you talk to individuals on the street, you talk 
to individuals who call my office because they’ve been put on a 
waiting-list for a specific operation, regardless of what it is, or 
they’re laying in a bed in one of our local hospitals, waiting for 
a bed for a specific procedure, to tell them that we have $1.72 
billion being expended in health care — they just don’t 
understand it. They just don’t . . . that doesn’t raise anything 
with them. 
 
They say, well if we’re spending $1.72 billion, how come I’m 
on a waiting-list such as six months from now I may get that 
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan that I’ve been 
scheduled for — six months from now, not a month from today. 
Or why am I on a waiting-list for six or eight months for knee 
surgery or hip surgery. Or even as the letter that I brought 
forward earlier, waiting for six months for a heart operation and 
the fact that it was scheduled earlier was only scheduled . . . the 
fact that it was bumped up was because of the fact that this 
gentleman ended up in the emergency room. He ended up in an 
emergency situation, and therefore his need was dealt with. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not acceptable. Most people feel 
that if you are in a situation where you are facing a crisis 
situation, our health care system should be meeting that need. If 
indeed we’re spending $1.7 billion in health care expenditures 
in the province of Saskatchewan, if indeed it’s one-third of the 
provincial budget, then why do we have waiting-lists? Why do 
we have fewer beds? Why do we have fewer people delivering 
the services? 
 
Those are some of the questions, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, 
that people are asking. In fact we’ve got to the point where 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

many people come up to me and they basically say if it’s a lack 
of money, they’re saying, why don’t we go back to the old 
premium we used to have, back in the Blakeney days and a time 
when I believe it was in fact the premier . . . Mr. Blakeney was 
the premier of the day when they removed the annual health 
premium. Why don’t we go back to a premium? 
 
I’d be more than willing to pay a premium if I knew it 
guaranteed me access to a service. That’s what people are 
saying because they feel that if it’s the funding that’s the 
problem, then maybe it’s . . . then they would be willing to 
participate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s more than just funding. I believe we 
need to take a careful look at how health care services are 
delivered in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We heard this earlier this year in the Minister of Finance as a 
report to this Assembly and as he presented his budget to the 
Assembly. The government spoke of putting $88.8 million 
more into health care expenditures in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now to the person outside of this Legislative Building, they 
would say, $88 million more? Boy, that’s great. Maybe that will 
speed up the access to this certain operation I’m waiting for. 
 
But lo and behold, when we look at the numbers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the $88.8 million, very little, if any, will see . . . will 
be put into avenues whereby the services that people are 
looking for really address, $88.8 million is not going to add one 
more bed to the current system to address the shortfalls that 
we’ve seen even last week in regards to the lack of beds really 
put pressure on the emergency services. This $88.8 million is 
not going to address the need of the access to CAT 
(computerized axial tomography) scan services or MRI 
services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the $88 million and you 
find that most of it’s wrapped up in bricks and mortar and 
meeting the needs of health districts that are running deficits, 
very quickly you realize that throwing more money into the 
health care system, as we have been doing in the past, doesn’t 
necessarily translate into more money for actual services such 
as acute care or such as doctor services or nursing services, Mr. 
Deputy Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we have the member from Regina crying from his seat 
again, crying wolf, the same member who used to stand on this 
side and cry the blues about even when the former government 
used to put a few dollars more in and say, it’s not enough, it’s 
not enough. That’s what the member is saying. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not talking of more dollars. I’m 
talking of the fact . . . Let’s take a look at where we’re spending 
the dollars today. I’d like the member from Regina — I don’t 
know if it’s Regina Centre — to take the — or Regina Victoria 
— to take the time, maybe he can tell me whether or not the 
$1.72 billion is being spent appropriately. 
 
Are we putting the dollars into the right areas? Are we putting 
them into the areas where we really meet the fundamental 
health needs of the residents of this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? I think and I firmly believe that is the area that needs 
to be delved into and looked at very carefully. And the 
unfortunate part, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, is the fact we’ve 
been trying to determine that. We’ve been trying to get some 
information that would help us to get a better idea of how our 
health dollars are being expended. 
 
And I can say as of today we’re at least starting to get some of 
the information we’re looking for. We’re looking for that line 
by line expenditures from the boards, from the district boards, 
such as we have the departments laid out before us in the 
General Revenue Fund and in the accounts of the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
We need that information, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, so that 
we can indeed look very carefully and determine whether or not 
more money needs to be put . . . earmarked towards health care, 
or whether we start looking at the fact of addressing the current 
funding that is there and determining whether it is meeting the 
need, or some of that money could be used better in one area 
versus the other. 
 
And when I talk about how money is being used, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, one of the concerns that district boards have raised in 
the past is the fact the money that is earmarked and that is sent 
to them has . . . basically it’s earmarked for certain services. 
And the district boards are limited in how they can utilize those 
funds within their own district. 
 
One of the big concerns, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, is the 
fact that boards do not have the ability if they see a need for 
acute care funding to transfer; if there’s an over abundance in 
the home care area, put some of that into your acute care fund. 
They can move from acute care into heavy care or into home 
care, but not into acute care funding. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Deputy Deputy Speaker, when we look 
at the Plains health care centre or when you look at the needs of 
health care beds and acute care beds throughout the province, as 
individuals at the Lanigan meeting that I attended most recently 
indicated, and as they’re looking at cutting the number of acute 
care beds in their little hospital — which is not that far, about 
an hour or less from the city of Saskatoon — when you find out 
that people are on waiting-lists because of the lack of bed space 
to meet the needs of post-operative care, some of the 
suggestions that came out of the meeting — and I’ve heard 
them not only at Lanigan; I’ve heard them at other communities 
where — well why don’t we utilize the beds that we have here 
right now rather than shutting them down. We’re obviously 
short some beds. Why don’t we have maybe the Saskatoon 
Health District transfer some light care or that post-operative 
. . . transfer people for post-operative care out to the local 
hospitals and free up some of those beds for the major surgeries 
that people are waiting for. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, I believe when you look at . . . and 
when we talk to people, people across this province do have 
good and sound ideas. And people across this province aren’t 
interested in just spending more money for the sake of spending 
money. People have learnt in the past how to adapt, how to 
work with what is available, how to make it last, or stretch that 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

dollar out, whether it’s in providing for the home and whether 
it’s in providing for their children or providing for services in 
the local community. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can also tell you that people across 
this province are more than willing to reach out to meet the 
needs of others — and I believe in health care — they would 
love to do that. 
 
And just for an example, the Lions Club recently held a 
breakfast to raise some funds to help a young individual who 
was born with I believe it’s muscular dystrophy to go to camp. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I was chatting with the family 
they were just shocked as to how the people poured out and met 
that need — almost $5,000 was raised and I believe the camp 
costs a little over $4,000. 
 
But to realize that the individuals in the community were 
willing to give of themselves to meet the needs of a little boy in 
the community, what does that say to you and I, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? That says that people in Saskatchewan are giving 
people. People in Saskatchewan are ready and willing to reach 
out and meet the needs of those less fortunate and those around 
them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that’s what the people of 
Saskatchewan are asking this government today. They’re asking 
this government to step back, to take a broader look, and 
determine whether or not, number one, the current wellness 
model is working and is working appropriately and is really 
meeting the needs of the patients or the taxpayers of this 
province; and number two, more specifically in regards to the 
Plains health care centre, they would love, and they are asking 
the government, sit back, take a look, and review where we’re 
at and whether or not the Plains health care centre and its 
closure, its imminent closure, are necessary or whether or not 
we’re jumping the gun on this one. 
 
I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the decision to close the Plains 
health care centre, and we’ve heard it time and time again, was 
we don’t need more than so many beds in the city of Regina. 
And that may be fine. I don’t think anyone will disagree with 
that. However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the Plains health care 
centre was built in the mid-’60s, the Plains health care centre 
was built keeping in mind the needs of all of southern and the 
eastern part of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the number of 
hospitals or facilities that have been closed across this province, 
certainly in southern Saskatchewan, the number of beds that 
have been closed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe it’s time to 
take a moment to sit back and take a look and determine, okay, 
maybe we need to take another look. Maybe we need to 
reassess. Maybe it’s time we sat back and determined, well that 
Plains health care centre, we’re not just talking Regina any 
more, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re not just talking the area 
surrounding Regina — we’re talking a very broad section of 
southern Saskatchewan. 
 
And in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people across the 
southern part and certainly the east part of this province really 
feel that the Plains health care centre provides a service that 
they feel is important to them. Whether it’s the people in 

Assiniboia, whether it’s the people even in the Weyburns or the 
Estevans of this world or Moosomin or Kipling or Saltcoats, the 
Saltcoats area, Yorkton area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people are 
concerned. We’re seeing that. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, that even members of 
the current government, members of the NDP caucus are 
receiving numerous letters and phone calls raising the same 
concerns and the same issues. 
 
Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, it would seem to me that it would 
be appropriate and it would show a commitment by this 
government to the people of Saskatchewan. It would also say to 
the people of Saskatchewan . . . this government could say to 
the people of Saskatchewan: yes, we’re listening; yes, we hear 
you; yes, we understand your concerns. 
 
And by even just suggesting that yes, we’re going to sit back for 
a minute and we’re going to follow the advice of the 
Conference Board of Canada and review our current wellness 
model to see whether it’s working, to see whether or not our 
health dollars are being spent wisely, and whether or not it 
would be appropriate to close the Plains health care centre as 
we’ve already decided. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe last week I mentioned about an 
article in MacLean’s magazine where it pointed out the fact that 
one of the Grey Nun’s hospitals in Edmonton that was shut 
down I believe about three or four years ago, they are now 
resurrecting that hospital because they’ve all of a sudden found 
out that while they were closing hospital beds a number of years 
ago, they may have closed too many. In fact not just “may 
have,” they’re bringing more hospital beds on because of the 
need that is available there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the same thing is going to apply here. 
Why wait and find out after the fact? Then you have to pour 
more money in to the two facilities if the Plains centre is totally 
closed down and turned into another use. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it would be appropriate to take that look now before we rush 
headlong into the full closure and then we can’t turn the clock 
back, then we’ve got to look at another means of reaching out to 
meet the needs of health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important 
for us to take a careful look. It’s important for this motion to 
come forward. And so I therefore move, seconded by the 
member from Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly urges the NDP government to 
recognize that a full-scale review of the current health care 
system is warranted given that five years have passed since 
it introduced its major health reform initiatives in order 
that the government and all Saskatchewan residents can see 
why the current system is failing so many more residents in 
Saskatchewan than it did in 1993 yet costs more than it 
ever did; and this Assembly further urges that the closure 
of the Plains Health Centre in Regina is put on hold until 
such a review is completed given the questions 
surrounding the number of Regina hospital beds that are 
adequate to care for the population of southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

I so move. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I also have a few comments I’d like to add to 
the member from Moosomin today, to his comments, and I 
agree very much with what we’ve put forward here today — 
that reform has really been a failure to say the least. We’ve 
closed — what? — 52, 53, now 54 hospitals. The Plains 
hospital is closing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe, if we go to the Plains for just a 
minute, that a lot of the dollars that came to build the Plains to 
serve the south side of the province and the eastern side of the 
province was donated money. And I’m sure those people when 
they donated that money felt that that hospital would be there 
for a long time. 
 
What has happened now in the 20 years that it’s been there, and 
all of a sudden it’s an . . . And by the way, it’s been a very, very 
good hospital. Anybody that’s had anything to do with it, had 
anybody in there, has nothing but good things to say about it. 
 
I’m not sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and as the government has 
done this year, they’ve put more money into health and I guess 
we should be thankful for that — but I’m not just sure that 
money is the answer to all the problems in the case of health 
care. 
 
We’ve closed all these hospitals; we’ve closed many beds; 
we’ve cut many nurses’ jobs or LPNs (licensed practical 
nurses), orderlies; we have a doctor shortage in many areas of 
the province. And I’m not just sure money is going to help. 
 
We seem to have loaded the bureaucracy and the administrative 
part of health care so heavy that it’s eating up any additional 
funds that we have and we have none left over to hire extra 
nurses or to re-open some of the beds that have been closed in 
the last five or six years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I feel, too, that when we come to regional 
hospitals such as Estevan or Yorkton or Moose Jaw, Swift 
Current, these are the places that we really have to start to look 
at to take the load off the Regina hospitals, seeing that we’re 
only going to have two when the Plains is finally gone. 
 
These places, with the way we’re heading now, are actually 
turning into nothing more than band-aid stations. And I believe, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that unless we do something quick to 
make these hospitals viable, the problem is only going to get 
worse. 
 
I take for an example the hospital in Yorkton. It covers an area 
from Kamsack, Canora, Preeceville, Esterhazy, Langenburg and 
all the smaller centres in between and should be servicing the 
need we have there. Instead of that, people are going to the 
Yorkton hospital, stitched up, put bandages on, whatever the 
case may be, and forwarded into the Plains Health Centre . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — If there’s a bed. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Yes. If there’s a bed. That’s the other 
problem. When you get here, most of the time there isn’t even a 
bed and they have to turn these people away or send you down 

to the Howard Johnson, as happened in the last week. And 
that’s the overflow for our health care system in Regina — the 
Howard Johnson Hotel. 
 
And once again we have to compliment those people for the 
fine facility they have in that hotel, but it’s not really . . . it 
wasn’t designed to be part of the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, I’d like to touch on a number of 
the things that I feel that were really . . . there’s a shortfall in 
our health care system, and kidney transplants are one of them. 
And I believe we have one case in Regina and another one in 
Saskatoon where a donor is available but there’s no bed to do 
the operation. 
 
And the information we receive, that kidney dialysis costs about 
30,000 a year to give dialysis, renal dialysis, to the patient and 
only $15,000 for the transplant. So common sense would tell 
you that the quicker we can perform this surgery and help this 
person through to have less pain and suffering and get the 
problem over with and get them back to a normal life, would 
save us all money and save these people a lot of discomfort. But 
now with the state of our health care, we can’t even perform 
these surgeries; we have a big, long waiting-list. 
 
Another subject that I talked about earlier today in question 
period was the cost of ambulance service to people in rural 
Saskatchewan. And the person that I was talking about today 
had shown me bills: one for 1,100-and-some dollars; one for 
700-and-some dollars; another one for 500-plus that he shared 
with a person from Yorkton to come into Regina — so the total 
bill was over, was over a thousand dollars once again. And this 
goes on and on in rural Saskatchewan because hospitals such as 
Yorkton and the ones I’ve mentioned, like Estevan, Swift 
Current, Moose Jaw, Melville, cannot handle the problems 
that’s going on out there. 
 
So I guess what we’re really seeing out there is not just a 
one-tiered health system or a two-tiered health system, it’s 
actually a multi-tiered health system. Because when people 
have to start spending their own money to receive health 
benefits in this province, we’re not all being treated on an equal 
field. So once again, it’s a multi-tiered system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to just touch on for a minute 
the hepatitis C, which is part of our health care in this province 
and on all over the country, and the compensation that they’re 
being . . . received for something that was no fault of their own. 
And I go back to my constituent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who 
acquired, contracted the disease in 1982 and is going to fall 
through the cracks because the Health ministers of the 
provinces and the federal government have saw fit to only cover 
from 1986 to 1990. And I have no understanding how they 
could justify such a thing. I feel that they’re showing absolutely 
no compassion and have no feelings for the people of this 
province. 
 
Dialysis, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to touch on a minute 
because this is something I’ve lobbied for for a long time for 
the Yorkton area, and finally the Minister of Health has agreed. 
But in doing so, we won’t receive any dialysis machine up and 
running there until the fall, and I wish that could be speeded up 
a little bit, but I’m thankful it’s finally going to happen. 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I give you some of my 
thoughts on this motion and I would hope the government 
members opposite would also find it in their hearts to support 
this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise and to speak about our health system. Of course I 
will not be supporting the motion put by the members opposite 
because I’m proud of our health system, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud of its evolution and I’m here to build the health system, 
not to criticize it and knock it down and to lay out false 
premisses about the health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have, since we’ve gone into the health renewal 
system, the health renewal process in Saskatchewan, the most 
modern and up-to-date hospitals anywhere in Canada, perhaps 
in the world. We have an ambulance system and home care 
system and a system that provides preventative measures 
second to none in the country, and we’ve got to keep it that 
way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re doing that, Mr. Speaker, not because the federal 
government is helping us, not in the least. The federal 
government used to support the health system with 50 cents on 
every dollar and they have now reduced it to 13 cents on every 
dollar, and it’s the Saskatchewan taxpayer that’s picking that 
up. 
 
And we’re not doing it because of any help that we’re receiving 
from the Liberals sitting across from us, led by the good doctor 
who is saying that he would repeal the districts and replace 
them by appointment — not by election — but replace them by 
appointment. And he says that he’ll go back to the old system 
where this is going to be done on a local basis, back to the idea 
of 400 health boards, and back to the idea of no rationalized 
health system eating up the valuable dollars that are needed for 
the new services that are being put into the places like the 
Pasqua, and the Plains . . . the General Hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge though, in this argument, 
that the politics of talking about the Plains hospital at this time 
is very much an emotional issue, and I acknowledge that 
because I’ve experienced it in my own home town in Prince 
Albert when we went through the process of rationalizing our 
system and deciding what is the best for the residents that are 
going to use the system. 
 
(1630) 
 
Now in both cases there were very strong emotional ties to a 
certain hospital. In our case in Prince Albert, we had the Holy 
Family Hospital, which was supported very strongly over the 
years by all the people that went there. My two daughters were 
born in that hospital and it was an emotional tie to me, Mr. 
Speaker. There are many people who served in that hospital as 
employees; people that went there and received excellent care 
in that hospital and they had an emotional tie to it. On top of 
that was the factor that the hospital was run by the Sisters of 
Charity, I believe it was, Mr. Speaker, and they had a 
tremendous support in the community for their dedication to the 
community. 

So we . . . When the health boards, starting way back in the 
’80s, looked at how to provide the best system for people in that 
area, they looked at it and they said we have to combine it. We 
have to combine it. They put together two studies prior to 1991 
and they said, we have to combine it. Why? Because we need to 
have that critical mass of specialists in one place. We need 
equipment; we cannot afford equipment in two places. We need 
to consolidate the equipment in one spot. Those are the two 
main issues and those were health related. And those issues had 
to be . . . had to override the emotion of keeping the two 
hospitals going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit, when I hear the arguments about the 
Plains, that there is a very similar ring. People say, particularly 
in rural Saskatchewan, in southern Saskatchewan, they say that 
this is our hospital. It was the Plains hospital which is touted to 
be as the rural hospital. And they say we have adequate parking 
there and we know how to get there. And they have ownership 
of that hospital. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, using those arguments alone would 
make great sense just to keep the Plains hospital going. But 
when you put the health arguments forward, which the health 
board had to do — the local health board had to do — then all 
of a sudden the picture changes, because their job is to provide 
the best health care they can for the dollars they have available. 
And what they saw was the need, for example, of a new MRI 
here, right here in Regina. 
 
What they saw was a need to be able to attract specialists so that 
all of the procedures, the technical and very sophisticated 
procedures, even the one like was mentioned by the member 
across the way of the need for kidney transplants, you can only 
do that if you are able to attract specialists and keep your 
specialists. 
 
And specialists these days will not come and stay unless you 
have a system that’s got colleagues for him to consult with and 
has got all of the equipment. So you put that idea together and 
that’s really where the consolidation of hospital care comes 
from, the need to be able to put our doctors into a situation 
where they can best serve, to the best of their capabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, taken on top of that, then there was the decision, 
okay if you’re going to go to two hospitals instead of three, 
which one do you choose — which one do you choose? That’s 
a very difficult decision. When I consulted with people who 
were knowledgeable about why the board made the decision on 
using the Pasqua and using the Plains hospital, here are the 
arguments that came forward. 
 
First of all, access. The Pasqua is a good hospital for access. 
Everybody knows the Lewvan Drive, where it is. Everybody in 
this area who has ever come to Regina knows where the 
Lewvan is and everybody knows that the Lewvan carries a lot 
of traffic but it carries it quickly and efficiently. And 
particularly if you’re coming from out of town, from the North, 
from the West, or from the South you can access the Lewvan 
very easily and the Pasqua is within a stone’s throw of the 
Lewvan — accessibility, right there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes down to the General Hospital, that 
was already the main hospital. The General Hospital serves 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

more people than all of the other hospitals put together in this 
area practically. The General is where the babies are born, my 
fellow members tell me. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you have to keep those two things in mind. 
The General was getting older so it did need renovation. 
 
Now when you consider the Plains hospital, we know what it 
had going for it because I already mentioned that. What has it 
got going against it? The fact that it needs a new sprinkler 
system, Mr. Speaker. The fact that it did not have wheelchair 
accessibility for all the rooms, and the fact that it had asbestos 
which needs to be removed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in order to upgrade the Plains and make that 
choice as one of the hospitals, you would have to put in new 
sprinklers, wheelchair accessibility, and asbestos replacement. 
It’s possible that that could be done at the expense of one of the 
other hospitals. At the same time, while you’re doing that, you 
have 160 patients that have to go somewhere. You have to have 
somewhere for them to go. 
 
The decision then was made, and rightly so I believe, by the 
health board in Regina and district that what they should do is 
build additional beds and put them in the Pasqua and put them 
in the General Hospital, an equivalent number of beds to make 
up for the beds that would be lost when the Plains was 
decommissioned and used for other purposes. 
 
So what they are doing is, they are moving all of the beds from 
there, adding services, not one bed to be lost to this area. So 
people should not be scared off by somebody who may be 
doing some scaremongering and saying, where are we going to 
be? 
 
That is something, Mr. Speaker, that has been going around. 
People have been asking the question: well where are these 
people going to go? Without waiting for the answer, members 
of the opposition have been using the emotional argument and 
forgetting that there is a health reason for all of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the emotional argument will win in 
the short run, but only in the short run, Mr. Speaker. Over the 
long haul, I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
on this side in this government will be supportive, will be very 
supportive of the health board in the process that they’re going 
through. It’s important to, it’s important, Mr. Speaker, for the 
process to continue. It’s important for the health and well-being 
of all of the citizens in this area for this to happen. 
 
I sometimes ask myself the question: well why is it that the 
Tories would be using this as an issue? And I guess it doesn’t 
take too long to get an answer to that question because, Mr. 
Speaker, the Tories in this province at this time unfortunately 
lack credibility. And they are searching desperately, and have 
been, for an issue. They lost their credibility because of the 
mess and the legacy that the Devine government left them with. 
 
So what did they do? They’re trying several things. They first 
of all tried to put on new clothing, you know, they changed 
their names. And then they changed their names, they got 
caught because people recognized who was underneath that new 
clothing. And then they tried ringing the bells with respect to 

Channel Lake. And on that issue, Mr. Speaker, once again they 
lost credibility because they overstepped what people felt was 
really important. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, now what they’re trying to do is use the 
emotional aspect of the health care issue and trying to make it 
override the issue of health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very interested to hear the member from 
Moosomin propose a premium, a premium on health in his 
debate. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people in Alberta have got a 
premium. Mr. Speaker, the people in many parts of the United 
States where they pay insurance, their own insurance premiums, 
they have a premium. And nobody should be fooled that this 
premium would be in the 40 to $80 range like it used to be back 
in the ’60s. Nobody should be fooled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the premiums, if we went to a premium system in 
Saskatchewan, look at Alberta, in the vicinity of $500 a year, 5 
to $700 a year. And that only pays for a small portion. In the 
U.S. (United States) where we’ve gone completely private, 
people are looking at $500 a month-plus. I defy anybody to 
bring me some proof that you can get coverage similar to ours 
for less than $500 a month. I defy it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you just take a look at our health budget, $1.7 
billion, and work that out for every man, woman, and child, 
that’s about $1,700 each per year, per year, that’s paid through 
the tax dollar. If you’re going to look at premiums and wanting 
to pay half of that, for every person, for every man, woman, and 
child, and only had to pay half of it, that would be about $850 
per person; for a family of two, $1,700 a year; for a family of 
four — doubled, $3,400 a year, if you only had to pay half of it, 
Mr. Speaker, if you only had to pay half of it. 
 
So I’m rather surprised that the Conservatives continue on their 
track of wanting to go into this premium system. I’m rather 
surprised about that. I’m also surprised at the member from 
Saltcoats, in his delivery when he talked about the need for 
kidney transplants, was not aware that you just don’t have 
kidney transplants done in any hospital. You have to have a 
cadre of specialists; you have to have the equipment. 
 
And when you’ve got both, as Regina will have as we move to 
consolidation, as Saskatoon has as they rationalize their system 
. . . I don’t think we’d be able to do a kidney transplant in 
Prince Albert, we’re simply not big enough, Mr. Speaker. But 
you have to proceed on in the direction of consolidating your 
services in order to get better services and more services, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to mention one other thing here, Mr. Speaker, before I 
take my place. In this motion the members ask for a monitoring 
and a review of the system. They want to review the system, the 
health system. Apparently, Mr. Speaker, they are unaware that 
our health system is under a constant monitoring and a review. 
Apparently they’re not aware of that. 
 
This government has determined that health is too important not 
to have this kind of activity going on continually. For example, 
Mr. Speaker, we have yearly audits, both private and by the 
Provincial Auditor, of this system’s financial accountability and 
performance. 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

And every year each district prepares an annual district health 
plan, and it reviews its activities of the past year and it outlines 
the future plans. 
 
And each district, Mr. Speaker, each district is required by The 
Health Districts Act to hold at least two public meetings. Mr. 
Speaker, I submit that what the members opposite would do 
would be review this with the option, with the idea, of 
privatizing health. And that should never, ever be allowed to 
happen here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to once again mention just one 
thing about what . . . couple of facts about the Plains Health 
Centre. I want it to be known that this is a fact, that the Regina 
district’s target for acute health bed hospital — hospital beds, 
pardon me — has been and will continue to be 675 beds. And 
on the average last year, 608 of these were occupied, on the 
average. That provides much more than 10 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, much more than 10 per cent leeway in the case of 
some disaster. 
 
(1645) 
 
I want to advise that the transfer, according to the hospital 
board, of services will begin this summer and will be complete 
by October 31, ’98 with absolutely no disruption in service. 
And that the plan does include new signs, advertisements, 
access maps, videos, direct mail, increased parking — expanded 
parking, up to 992 spaces more than the 901 that are available 
now. 
 
So in order to put this motion . . . and to state succinctly, Mr. 
Speaker, what position it is that I am taking with respect to this 
motion, I now propose to move an amendment to the motion, 
seconded by the member from Battleford-Cut Knife, and the 
amendment would read as such: 
 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 
. . . support the government for implementing and 
continuing its approach of an ongoing review and 
monitoring of the community-based health system in the 
six years that have passed since this major health reform 
initiative; and because the health system is too important to 
the people of Saskatchewan not to undertake these 
activities continuously, that this Assembly further urge the 
government to ensure that the system continues to undergo 
ongoing monitoring and review, including: 
 
yearly audits (private and Provincial Auditor) of the 
system’s financial accountability and performance; 
 
yearly health district preparation of annual health plans, 
including reviews of activities in the past year and 
outlining future plans; 
 
regular health district board meetings as required by The 
Health Districts Act, which must include a review of past 
performance and future plans, thereby providing an 
ongoing mechanism for the public to be involved in a 
district service evaluation and planning; 
 

ongoing evaluation of key utilization and performance 
issues in the health system by the Health Services 
Utilization and Research Commission established when 
health renewal began, which has led to real and measurable 
changes in how this system uses resources and provides 
services such as thyroid testing, ECGs (electrocardiogram), 
hospital acuity, and home care. 
 

I do so move. 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Mr. Speaker, I am a baby boomer and baby 
boomers will relate to being a child in the late ’40s and early 
’50s and the changes we’ve experienced in our lives and in our 
health care. 
 
As a child, if you had a sore throat, the doctor removed your 
tonsils; if you had a side ache, your appendix was removed; and 
if you broke your leg, you wore a plaster cast until you no 
longer could remove the itch with a knitting needle. 
 
Now in the 1990s, thanks to modern surgery techniques, we can 
have a hip or a knee replaced so that we and our parents can 
remain in our homes living productive, quality lives. We can 
have a heart, a lung, and a liver transplant. At one time doctors 
relied on X-rays to diagnose symptoms. Now thanks to modern 
technology, there are specialized services such as CAT scans, 
MRIs, renal dialysis, and nuclear medicine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on March 19 the Minister of Health announced an 
additional $2.8 million to support specialized, hospitalized 
services so that Saskatchewan residents and physicians would 
benefit. 
 
New cancer treatment is available in Saskatchewan. Cancer 
patients with Hodgkin’s disease will be able to receive 
life-saving blood stem cell transplants. There will be improved 
access to renal dialysis through satellite sites which will be 
established in Tisdale and Yorkton. 
 
We have also committed $40 million to SHIN, Saskatchewan 
Health Information Network, computerized technology that will 
also benefit Saskatchewan people regardless of where they live. 
 
In order to attract or/and keep doctors in rural Saskatchewan the 
emergency coverage and weekend relief programs have been 
developed. These programs recognize the demands on rural 
general practitioners to provide emergency coverage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are focusing on wellness with programs 
addressing seniors’ needs, children’s needs, and community 
needs. Funding is targeted for community health initiatives 
focusing on early childhood development and youth at risk. The 
family health benefits program provides supplementary health 
benefits for lower income families. 
 
The Saskatchewan home care program provides supportive, 
palliative, and acute care replacement services to help people 
remain independently at home — services that include nursing, 
assessment and care coordination, homemaking, home 
management, personal and respite care, Meals on Wheels, and 
volunteer coordination. 
 
Saskatchewan has a sparse population. The sparsity creates a 



April 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

challenge for health care. The emergency response program, 
which includes the first responder program, is receiving 
additional funding to provide services to this group of citizens. 
Funding is being provided to improve emergency response, 
including expansion of first responder programs challenged in 
travel distance and sparse populations, including the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are investing in quality health services in 
Saskatchewan. Services that include prevention of illness and 
injuries, as well as treatment. Services that are provided at 
home or in the community, where people want them and need 
them and are based on health needs. Services are there when 
needed, as close to home as possible. 
 
To ensure this, district health boards, in consultation with their 
residents, make decisions about the best services and facilities 
to meet the residents’ needs. These boards are to be commended 
for their contribution to our communities. Their initiatives are 
addressing our concerns. 
 
I would like to acknowledge the Greenhead, Midwest, and 
Prairie West health districts whose initiatives, Partners in 
Communication, received the first ever green ribbon award on 
Monday, March 23 from the Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations. 
 
This initiative is a new strategy for delivering speech and 
language services to preschool children, supports home based 
programing, and is funded by the three districts with support 
from community services organized. 
 
Although I represent the constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife, I 
understand the concerns of the area regarding the Plains. My 
area has had hospitals closed, but our immediate needs are 
being provided for by wellness centres, and the hospital 
services are getting better. By consolidating specialized services 
in one location, equipment can be upgraded and used 
efficiently. It is also a better use of specialists’ time, so that 
more people will benefit. 
 
Numerous reasons have been given for the closure or the 
non-closure of the Plains. Despite two major studies that show 
the Plains should close, that no beds will be lost due to 
consolidation with the General and Pasqua, and that services 
offered at the Pasqua and General will provide even better care 
to the patients, despite all this, people resist changes. And I 
have been one of those to resist. 
 
Change threatens the things we hold dear — our universal 
health care for one. So we resist change because we want to 
protect the progress we’ve made. However change is real; it’s 
happening, and people know it. So any political party that 
pretends things can go back to the way they were is dooming 
itself to irrelevance, if not extinction. 
 
So we hear the mayor of Estevan wanting to go back to how 
things were in the ’80s. And we hear the members opposite 
wanting to go back to the ’80s. No one in Saskatchewan, other 
than perhaps the members opposite, want to go back to the 
Devine years which were anything but divine, leaving a legacy 
of crippling debt which threatens the progress we have made. 
 
When the hospital services are consolidated at two sites, the 

Pasqua and the General, you will see that there are no loss of 
beds, there are no loss of services, but there will be enhanced 
services which will serve each and every one of us. There will 
always be challenges, there will always be changes, but there 
will also always be solutions. 
 
I am confident that this government will continue its 
commitment to health care. Therefore I do not support the 
motion but I am pleased to second the amendment. I now close 
debate . . . 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
enter this debate today for a couple of reasons. One was that, as 
the member from Moosomin stated and as their platform states, 
they want to do a wide-ranging public review of the changes 
that have occurred in Saskatchewan’s health system. 
 
The member from Prince Albert covered that very well, Mr. 
Speaker. He says we have yearly audits, private and provincial 
auditors that do that. Every year each district prepares an annual 
district health plan. Perhaps the members could go to their 
district health meetings and get these. 
 
Each district is required by The Health Districts Act to hold at 
least two public meetings, one of which must include a review 
of the past performance and future plans, and the HSURC 
(Health Services Utilization and Research Commission) or 
health services utilization committee does our services every 
year, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that they’re being utilized to 
their ability. 
 
But one of the important things is the Plains Health Centre, and 
why I get letters on it too, Mr. Speaker . . . in fact the letter in 
the paper the other day, what was the main reason? His number 
one reason was accessibility. And these people have mentioned 
the ambulance drivers a number of times. Well I have more 
faith in the ambulance drivers than obviously they do, Mr. 
Speaker, because I feel that the ambulance driver will find the 
emergency room no matter where it is in this city. Whether he’s 
coming from Moosomin or whether he’s coming from Swift 
Current or whether he’s coming from Estevan. I think that those 
ambulance drivers know their way around this town, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And they complain about the emergency rooms, Mr. Speaker, 
being full. Have they once mentioned that after the remodelling 
there will be more emergency rooms than there is now? No. Did 
they mention that? Not once. Not once did they mention that. 
 
And did they mention the beds? They say no, there’s going to 
be bed closures, but the Regina District’s health target for acute 
care hospital beds has been 675 in Regina. After the Plains 
closure there will be just as many beds, Mr. Speaker, the same 
number of beds. 
 
And what’s another fact, Mr. Speaker? On an average day last 
year 608 of those beds were occupied. That leaves us an extra 
60 beds, an extra 60 beds free that aren’t occupied, Mr. 
Speaker. All the services at the Plains will be continued to be 
provided by the Regina Health District at either the Regina 
General Hospital or the Pasqua Hospital. 
 
Do they mention that? No, they say there’s going to be cuts in 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1998 

services. But there are not, Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be 
more services. They mentioned there’s going to be an MRI in 
Regina, there’s going to be a CAT scan in Regina, but they 
want to keep the Plains open and not have those services in 
Regina. 
 
So I don’t know where they’re going, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Good point. He brings up the 
Howard Johnson incident. The lady as I hear it, discharged 
herself from the hospital, Mr. Speaker, and they’re claiming 
that she was kicked out. People don’t discharge themselves, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Those people are making fearmongering out of this. That lady 
was discharged by herself and went to the Plains hospital . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You guys didn’t check that. 
 
And the other issue I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, is the 
parking because it’s also an issue at the Plains. People say it’s 
easy to go — 992 spaces after the remodelling, Mr. Speaker, 
more than there is now. And I now move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. With the applause that 
was . . . the noise in the House I was not able to hear the final 
remarks of the hon. member for Estevan. 
 
Mr. Ward: — I now move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................492 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................492 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................492 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................492 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Economic Development in the North-east 
  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................493 
 Wadena Conservation Officer Wins Award 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................493 
 New Royal Canadian Mounted Police Building Opens in Biggar 
  Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................493 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................493 
 Waterfront Press Wins Awards 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................493 
 Privacy for Montgomery Family 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................494 
 Northern Business Forum 
  Langford ....................................................................................................................................................................................494 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................494 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................494 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................495 
 Ambulance Fees 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................496 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................496 
 Health Care Services 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................497 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................497 
 SaskPower Natural Gas Contract 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................498 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................498 
 Welfare Rates 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................498 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................499 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
Firearms Act Regulations 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................499 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................500 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................500 
ROYAL ASSENT .............................................................................................................................................................................501 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 



 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................501 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Rail-Line Abandonment 
  Whitmore...................................................................................................................................................................................501 
  Renaud ...............................................................................................................................................................................503, 510 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................504 
  Langford ............................................................................................................................................................................505, 510 
  Hillson ................................................................................................................................................................................506, 510 
  Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................507 
  Bjornerud ..........................................................................................................................................................................509, 510 
  Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................509 
  D'Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................510 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................510 
 Recorded division .........................................................................................................................................................................510 
  Whitmore...................................................................................................................................................................................511 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Health Care System Review 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................511 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................515 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................516 
  Murrell.......................................................................................................................................................................................518 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................519 
 


