





























































Hansard: April 01, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 375 
 April 1, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents of 
Tisdale and Prince Albert. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find out 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitioners come from the Prince Albert, Birch Hills, 
Meath Park area of the province, Mr. Speaker. I so submit. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well to present petitions. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake’s fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by people from the Carnduff area 
and another one from Prince Albert. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake’s fiasco. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities, Mr. Speaker, are the community of Naicam 
and Spalding. I so present. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I too ask to present a petition 
and these are people who are concerned about the severance 
payments to Jack Messer and the Channel Lake fiasco and 
they’re signed by people from Annaheim, Shellbrook, and 
Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the severance payment to 
Jack Messer and for the immediate calling of a public inquiry 
surrounding the facts regarding Channel Lake. 
 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Redvers, Wawota, Storthoaks, and Manor. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased on behalf 
of Saskatchewan residents to present a petition as well. The 
petition is surrounding the whole Jack Messer-Channel Lake 
fiasco and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. This petition, 
Mr. Speaker, comes from residents of Muenster, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned about the 
closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions are from the communities 
of Frontier, Kyle, Herbert, Swift Current, and Moose Jaw. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains hospital. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains hospital 
may be continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks 
from Assiniboia, Fir Mountain, Glentworth, Coronach, and 
Willow Bunch. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join my colleagues in 
representing people who are concerned about closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures are from Regina, Edenwold, and Pilot Butte. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
today. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to save the 
Plains Health Centre by enacting legislation to prevent its 
closure, and by providing adequate funding to the Regina 
Health District so that the essential services provided at the 
Plains may be continued. 
 

Your petitioners come from Pilot Butte, Moosomin, and 
Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in bringing petitions forward regarding the 
Plains hospital. The prayer is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued; and further, that the government not turn this 
hospital into SIAST offices for political reasons. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 
the Ponteix area. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people of the community and 
town of Maple Creek. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 

And I’m happy to present them on behalf of these folks today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to fund the twinning 
of the Trans-Canada Highway; to save the Plains Health 
Centre; and to end the severance payments to Jack Messer 
and to call an independent public inquiry into Channel 
Lake. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture and Food: what are the 
results of the circulation of his proposed provincial policy 
for game farm development in Saskatchewan, stakeholder 
consultation document, and accompanying questionnaire, 
and particularly: (a) what groups of stakeholders were 
consulted in this process; (b) which organizations 
responded to the questionnaire; (c) how many individuals 
responded from each of the following categories listed in 
point no. 12 of the questionnaire: (1) farmer; (2) game 
farmer; (3) hunter; (4) member of wildlife organization. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

Of the ministers of Energy and Mines and SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management): 
how well are provincial government, cities, and industries 
complying with the ARET — that’s the accelerated 
reduction on emissions and toxins established in 1994— 
and the VCR — the federal government voluntary 
challenge and registry — for the reduction of greenhouse 
gas emissions in the province over the past year; what level 
of hydrogen sulphide and other toxins, dioxins, chlorines, 
salts, styrenes, heavy metals, and other chemicals, acids, 
etc. are presently entering the environment as a result of 
crude oil and natural gas production in Saskatchewan; what 
clean-up of crude oil, salt waters, chemicals, and heavy 
metals is presently occurring in the province under the 
authority of the Department of Energy and Mines, The 
Pipe Lines Act, and The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act; what volume of work is being directed 
to companies like Crude Oil Separators Limited? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the members of the Assembly, I have someone 
new to introduce in the gallery today and her name is Ms. 
Eleanor New. Ms. New is a constituent of mine and some of 
you may know her brother, Vern New, now a retired police 
chief for the Regina Police Service. 
 
Eleanor has spent many years involved in community and 
volunteer service in the city of Regina, where she has lived the 
majority of her life. Her most notable work has been within 
Regina’s Lutheran community; and she is an avid scholar, Mr. 
Speaker, and has studied in a vast array of subject areas from 
theology to native studies, and I believe she’s still an active 
student. Once it gets into your blood, you just can’t get rid of it. 
So Eleanor indeed epitomizes the goals of lifelong learning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Eleanor spent the morning here in our excellent 
Legislative Library and touring this magnificent building. And 
I’d be most pleased if we could all welcome her here to observe 
the proceedings. 
 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

New Nova Scotia Political Party 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be brief. I have a 
newsflash from Nova Scotia courtesy of a leaked document 
from my source buried deeply in the bowels of the CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation). Sorry, Mr. Speaker, if 
my imagery is a bit unseemly. 
 
When last we heard, the results of the Nova Scotia election had 
the governing Liberal Party deadlocked for first place with the 
upstart NDP (New Democratic Party) at 19 seats each. The rag 
and bone shop of Tories had 14 seats. This is a precarious 
situation for a government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, like Liberals and Tories from the beginning of recorded 
Canadian time, the Nova Scotia old-line parties have come up 
with a practical and unprincipled solution. My source tells me 
— and I am dismayed to report to this Assembly — that 
Liberals and the Tories have buried their differences, as if there 
were any, and joined together to form a new governing party. 
 
As our Premier would say, Liberal, Tory, same old story. The 
name of that new Maritime party, Mr. Speaker, is to be: the 
Saskatchewan Party. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Future Plans for Plains Health Centre 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP government is playing what many people hope is just a 
cruel April Fool’s Day joke on the people of Regina and 
southern Saskatchewan. 
 
The government has announced that it plans to make the Plains 
hospital the future home of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology). At the same time, the NDP 
is confronted with facts which clearly show that health care is in 
critical condition. The government says it will save $3 million 
in annual operating costs if it closes the Plains but is willing to 
spend $108 million to consolidate services and another $30 
million to upgrade the facility. 
 
This issue has never made sense in health care terms The fact 
that the NDP would even consider spending $138 million to 
save $3 million in annual costs underlines the fact that it doesn’t 
make sense in financial terms either. The role this government 
is taking is based on a poor plan or no plan at all. No 
responsible government could possibly make this kind of 
decision and we’re waiting to hear that this is the NDP’s idea of 
a sick April Fool’s Day joke. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Statements on Party Membership 
 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The great 
philosopher George Santayana said, quote, “Those who cannot 
remember the past are sure to repeat it.” 

To prevent some members from falling into this historic trap, 
allow me to please quote from Hansard of April 2, 1996. Sort 
of an instructive trip down memory lane. On page 673, we see 
the member from Kelvington-Wadena saying, I would like to 
remind some people that April Fool’s Day does not last all 
week and I would like to inform the people of Saskatchewan, 
particularly those in Liberal constituencies, that we are 
continuing our loyalty and support to the cause of the Liberal 
Saskatchewan Party, the official opposition, to the people of 
Saskatchewan. To which some hon. members said, “Hear, 
Hear!” 
 
And on page 672, in the worst mixed metaphor in history in this 
Assembly, the member from Saltcoats said, the media states 
today that an offer has been made for the members of our 
caucus to join another club — a third-place club, I might add 
. . . I might add, but none of us can swim and we’re not about to 
jump on a sinking ship. 
 
Rather than jumping from a sink . . . from the rink onto a 
sinking Tory ship, the non-swimmers and the members of the 
Liberal hockey team were said, he said, standing pat. Believe it 
or not, Mr. Speaker, a couple of members who claimed to 
understand him were heard to say, “Hear, Hear! 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Peewee Hockey Championships 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, to become a provincial 
champion in a sporting competition is extremely difficult. But 
to do so two times in a row is a tremendous accomplishment. 
This rarely happens in minor hockey because the roster is 
constantly changing due to age restrictions. 
 
I’m very pleased to report that the BIRS peewee Raptors 
hockey team from my constituency is a provincial champion for 
the second year in a row. The team captured the peewee D 
championship by defeating Maymont-Perdue in the provincial 
final by identical scores of 5-3 in each of two games. 
 
I would like to acknowledge all of the players for their hard 
work, dedication, and team effort. They have worked together 
cooperatively to build a competitive team on local skill, talent, 
and pride. I would like to congratulate the players for their 
motivation. It is extremely encouraging for the older generation 
to see a group of young people with high goals and dreams. 
 
I would also like to congratulate coach, Brad Loshka, assistants, 
Julius Dziaduck and Louis Korchinski, trainer, Shelden 
Landstad, and manager, Lorne Matsalla; as well as all of the 
dedicated parents and fans for their part in making these young 
people’s dream of winning the provincial peewee championship 
a reality for the second time. Congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Arrival of Spring 
 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know 
by the weather out there, spring has arrived. 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

Spring is an exciting time of year with the bird migration on. A 
number of birds have already returned, the Canada geese among 
the first. Marsh hawks are arriving, tree sparrows, 
slate-coloured Junco, and of course bluebirds. Anybody that has 
bluebird boxes out are already out cleaning the nest boxes out, 
readying them for the coming year. 
 
Spring is a time when many plants become active as well, of 
course. And the crocus buds are already out on the south-facing 
hillsides. 
 
Soon the whooping cranes will be migrating through 
Saskatchewan. We have over 200 whooping cranes will be 
passing through our province this year and that migration will 
be going through the province within a couple of weeks already. 
 
Certainly this weather is very conducive to people becoming 
more active as well. Joggers and, heaven forbid, golfers will be 
out already batting these balls around, competing with the geese 
for the green lawns. Mr. Speaker, when the weather is great I 
like to let people know that the Environment minister is 
responsible for the weather, but if it’s bad weather it’s a federal 
responsibility. 
 
Nonetheless we look forward to spring and many more birds 
returning and many other sights and sounds. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Speed Skater's 
Record-breaking Performance 

 
Ms. Julé: — At the provincial short-track speed skating 
championships held on March 21 and 22 in Melville, 
eight-year-old Ebony Thiel of Humboldt broke the Canadian 
peewee girls 500-metre speed skating record by smashing the 
standing record of 1 minute 9.58 seconds with a time of 1 
minute 8.21 seconds. Then she broke her own record later the 
same weekend with a time of 1 minute 6.39 seconds. 
 
Now the week before, while competing at the western regional 
short-track meet in Moose Jaw, the eight-year-old St. Augustine 
School student broke the Saskatchewan record in the 500-metre 
distance as well as two other provincial speed skating records. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ebony’s mother says that Ebony is the fastest 
female peewee skater in Canada. Congratulations, Ebony; we 
are all very proud of you and your achievements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Signs of Spring 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it does my 
heart good to listen to the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
He reminds us that regardless of the noise level within these 
walls and irrespective of the importance of the issues of the day, 
which we all know are transitory, despite the fact the member 
for Kindersley can call a member of his own caucus, “clearly 
biased and incompetent" and get away with it because of his 
parliamentary immunity . . . that’s page 349 of yesterday’s 
Hansard, Mr. Speaker. 

Sorry, I got side-tracked. It is good to be reminded that outside 
these walls the natural world, in the famous and plagiarized 
words of Prime Minister Trudeau, is unfolding as it should and 
will continue to do so despite our best efforts to interfere. 
 
Winter is over, spring is here, and I am happy to report that 
things in the natural world of Regina are unfolding even better 
than they should or usually do. In the past I have noticed the 
one sure sign of spring in our town is the sulphurous smell 
coming off Wascana Lake and as the ice flows go out to sea. 
 
This year, miraculously, the ice is gone and so is the smell, Mr. 
Speaker. This must be a government decision, Mr. Speaker, and 
I want to congratulate the member for Regina Centre and her 
Wascana Centre board for making it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Country Music Awards Night 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Melfort area was well represented at the recent Saskatchewan 
Country Music Association Awards Night. Our local radio 
station was recognized in a big way at the Saskatchewan 
Country Music Association Night. CJVR was awarded the top 
honours of country music station of the year for the third year in 
a row. 
 
This honour is presented to the station which displays a 
commitment to playing Saskatchewan artists along with such 
things as interviews and public appearances. CJVR was also 
presented with its fourth consecutive board of directors’ 
selection for radio station award of merit at the president 
awards banquet. 
 
The station’s music director, Cal Granton, was honoured to 
accept three awards: the music director of the year; on-air 
personality, and country music person of the year.  
Shawn Dancey of Star City accepted an award for his band, 
‘Walking After Midnight’. They were presented with the best 
back-up band award for their work with Tommy Hunter. 
Congratulations to these recipients, who represent the talent and 
commitment of supporting talent all across Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are for the minister responsible for CIC 
(Crown Investment Corporations of Saskatchewan). Well, Mr. 
Minister, as predicted, the whitewash is on. We can’t question 
the Premier; we can’t question the Deputy Premier; we can’t 
question the ministers who were on the SaskPower board; we 
can’t get any of the documents we need. It’s a whitewash. It’s a 
cover-up and everyone in Saskatchewan knows it. 
 
The minister likes to quote from the Leader-Post editorial page. 
So let me read a few words of what was in this morning’s 
newspaper: 
 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

The NDP government must co-operate fully . . . if 
requested, past and present senior government officials, 
including the premier, should appear before the committee 
and fully answer all questions. 
 

Mr. Minister, what are you hiding? What is the Premier hiding? 
When is this whitewash going to stop? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member likes to 
quote from editorials. I have here an editorial from the Herbert 
Herald, March 31. It says “Out on a limb.” And in that column, 
referring to your actions as it relates to the Channel Lake, it 
says, and I quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party has yet to show any promise that 
it could be capable of running this province. 
 

Now this is an opinion from rural Saskatchewan. This is an 
opinion from rural Saskatchewan. I have another one from the 
Moosomin newspaper, from the Moosomin newspaper that says 
that you, sir, if that editor had been the Premier, would have 
taken you across his knee and spanked you because of the way 
you carry on. 
 
That’s what it says. That’s what the public are saying about 
you. You are disruptive in the committee. You went there with 
an attitude to disrupt the committee and that’s what you’re 
doing. And people call you names because you are that 
disruptive. 
 
And I say to you, why don’t you go there in a spirit of 
cooperation, work with the committee, rather than condemning 
the chairperson here . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, there’ll 
be spankings handed out all right, and it’ll be in the next 
election and it’ll be you guys that are getting the spankings. 
 
Let’s just review this NDP so-called investigation of Channel 
Lake, Mr. Speaker. We have an NDP judge that sits back over 
there; we have an NDP jury of committee members; we have an 
NDP legal counsel; and we have an NDP witness list. The only 
NDP we can’t get is the Premier of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Why? What is it that you are hiding over there? 
Mr. Minister, will you call off, will you call off your NDP 
henchmen who are protecting you and the Premier from 
testifying, or are you going to keep hiding behind your NDP 
members who are running this little NDP show trial? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, I understand why they put him up on the file because 
obviously he is the most disruptive of all that caucus. We know 
that. And we also know why the member from Melfort has 
baled out on the file. 

Just watch with interest how the member from Melfort started 
asking the questions, failed miserably, and now they have the 
big disrupter, the big disrupter on the file. I say to the member 
opposite that you can accuse Mr. Priel of being an NDP or 
Liberal, but I can tell you it was also brought out in the 
committee today that he did contracts for the Devine 
government, for your government, when the Devine 
government was in power. 
 
Now why don’t you say that? If you’re talking about being 
truthful, you would say: Mr. Priel donated money to the 
Liberals; he donated to the NDP; he did work for the Devine 
government. Be fair and honest and truthful and maybe the 
system would work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In committee today 
when we finally did get a chance to speak to Jack Messer, he 
gave us some very interesting answers. He started pointing 
fingers and naming names, several of them over there. 
 
He said the board and the ministers responsible for SaskPower 
were informed of the key events in Channel Lake every step of 
the way. That includes the illegal move into gas arbitrage, the 
millions of dollars in . . . (inaudible) . . . losses, and the 
botched-up sale of Channel Lake and the $5 million loss. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have constantly told us that you didn’t know 
what was going on there. Well that’s not what Jack Messer said 
this morning. Mr. Minister, you knew what was going on all 
along. Other members of that cabinet knew what was going on 
all along. The Premier and the full cabinet I’m sure would have 
been informed of what was going on. 
 
Every one of you that were involved in this file should be 
handing in your resignations. Will you be doing that today, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, during this process 
that the member says has no credibility and picks and chooses 
what’s credible by now pointing out what he says is the credible 
part of the process, that makes you wonder a little bit about his 
sincerity and the meaning of his project. 
 
But you should not be surprised, as we go through this process, 
that you will have differing opinions on a different set of 
circumstances. That’s what the process is all about. 
 
But if you were to turn to page 22 of the Deloitte Touche report, 
had you read it, you would have read, and I quote: 
 

Documentation presented to the Board of SaskPower was 
at critical junctures incomplete to the point where the 
Board was not being effectively informed . . . 

 
Now you should not be surprised, I say again, if you get 
different opinions. That’s what an inquiry is about. And so the 
former Liberal who yells from his chair — now a Conservative 
— if you have credibility, you should go to a by-election and 
see if you could get elected as a Conservative. 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you paid Jack Messer 
$300,000 to shut up. And today he came to the committee and 
he started singing like a canary. Every minister, every step of 
the way, was aware of what was going on — that’s what he 
said. That’s what he said before the committee today. They 
knew about illegal gas trading; they knew about trading losses; 
they knew about the botched-up sale; and they covered it up — 
and that includes you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Your whitewash isn’t working in Saskatchewan. Jack Messer is 
singing like a bird for all of Saskatchewan people to hear and 
there’s nowhere left for you to hide. It’s time, Mr. Minister, to 
come clean before the people of Saskatchewan; it’s time that 
you and all of the members involved in this cover-up ‘fessed up 
for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s time, Mr. Minister, that 
you and the members responsible on that cabinet, around that 
cabinet table, tendered your resignations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say with all sincerity 
to the member from Kindersley that if anyone should resign on 
behalf of their constituencies, it’s those people there who in the 
dark of night deceived the Liberals in their constituencies, the 
Conservatives in their constituencies, and for political motives, 
to save your political skins, tried to put together a new 
arrangement with no consultation with anyone. 
 
As it relates to Channel Lake and the review that is now 
ongoing, I say to the member from Kindersley, I understand 
why you are the person on the file — very little finesse, 
clutching in the corners, putting a stick in here and there — but 
what you don’t have is credibility and that will come out loud 
and clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one 
wonders . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now — order — all hon. 
members will recognize that the hon. member from Moosomin 
is not located very far from the Speaker’s chair and I am having 
difficulty hearing him being able to put his question. I’ll ask for 
the cooperation of all hon. members. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one 
wonders really where the clutching and interference is coming 
from in this whole affair. But my . . . I have a further question 
to the minister responsible for CIC. 
 
Mr. Minister, we thought taxpayers were through paying for 
Jack Messer. It turns out we’re wrong. This morning we learned 
that SaskPower is paying for Jack Messer’s lawyer and a legal 
secretary. One asks why. Isn’t $300,000 enough to hire his own 
legal assistant? Mr. Minister, you are the minister for 
SaskPower. You fired Jack Messer; he no longer works for 
SaskPower. Why is SaskPower paying his legal bills? How 
much is this going to cost? And why do Saskatchewan 
taxpayers have to keep paying for Jack Messer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I say to 
the member opposite, who is the member from Moosomin 
where the editorial talked about giving a whopping to a couple 
of people over there if they had their way, I say to the member 

opposite in a serious way, I have checked with my officials at 
CIC and it’s their opinion and my opinion that we are not 
paying legal bills for Mr. Messer. 
 
I will check it further, but let me check and let me tell you that 
it’s my opinion — as I know it today and I’ve talked to my 
officials at CIC — that there will be no monies flowing for 
legal bills for Mr. Messer unless there is some legal reason that 
that would have to happen. 
 
But let me tell you this, that as I understand the situation we are 
not paying legal bills for Mr. Messer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s quite 
obvious the minister wasn’t down at Crown Corps this morning 
to hear what Mr. Messer was saying, or even what legal counsel 
was saying. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s totally disgusting. Why on earth should 
SaskPower be paying for Jack Messer’s lawyer? First he loses 
millions on illegal trading activity; then he loses millions more 
because he didn’t read the contract; then you give him a 
$300,000 severance package; and now even paying for his 
lawyer. How many more times are you and Jack Messer going 
to slap taxpayers in the face. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s time to end the free ride for Jack Messer. Will 
you cut off the free legal services he’s getting from 
Saskatchewan taxpayers and tell him to get his own lawyer? 
Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I think on one topic the 
member from Moosomin and I just might agree. I think the idea 
that we are reviewing the issue is the first I hear of it after the 
committee meeting today that there was anyone suggesting that 
we would have responsibility for paying legal bills. 
 
I say again, I say again, I have asked my officials at CIC to 
review the instructions to the legal counsel and if there is any 
potential that we would be paying legal fees for Mr. Messer, I’ll 
bring that report back. But it is my personal view that we are 
not and will not pay for legal counsel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal opposition has stated from the outset that the decision to 
close the Plains hospital was made by this NDP government 
and this government alone. 
 
During the noon hour, the minister in charge of SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) told CTV 
(Canadian Television Network) news that his department was 
notified about plans to close the Plains hospital in 1995. We 
find that strange, because it wasn’t until January of 1996 that 
the Regina District Health Board actually voted on the motion 
to close the facility. 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

Will the minister in charge of SPMC now admit that the 
decision to close the Plains was made long before the issue ever 
went to a vote of the district board? Will you tell the people of 
Regina and southern Saskatchewan why they were misled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I suppose we 
could spend time quibbling about the date, but the fact is that 
three decisions of the health boards have been to sustain the 
decision to close the Plains. And certainly for the last two and a 
half years SIAST has been in discussion with Sask Property 
Management about the development of a new and improved 
learning centre linked to the University of Regina. 
 
We believe that in an age of new technology, two centres of 
excellence in health, one in education, all the best technology 
and specialists at both centres, no loss of services, I think these 
are the kinds of matters that the member should focus on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Costs for Accident Victim 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Christina and Carl 
Christman of Central Butte are joining us today in the 
legislature and they’re sitting up in your gallery and they’re 
looking for answers from this government. 
 
Christina’s mother, father, and brother were recently involved 
in a car accident. And what followed was a perfect example of 
NDP bureaucratic buck-passing and bungling at its worst. Larry 
and Meryl and their son Danny were all seriously injured after a 
Highways department vehicle hit a huge pothole, jumped over, 
slammed into the Joel’s truck way back in February. 
 
Danny, who is mentally handicapped and is a ward of the court, 
now requires 24-hour care and nursing care will cost about 
$1,700 a week. Mr. Speaker, the Highways department has 
assumed no responsibility. So Mr. and Mrs. Joel approached the 
Thunder Creek Health District in search of answers. But the 
family was told that the district would not pick up the cost; they 
have no money. 
 
Will the Minister of Health explain why the Department of 
Health will not pick up the care for Danny’s 24-hour care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this is now the third case that 
the member has brought to the House for me to try and reach 
some consensus of what’s happened on an individual case. And 
I want to say to the member opposite, as I said to him a couple 
of weeks ago, that my door is open to all people across the 
province for us to talk about individual issues that might affect 
them. 
 
I have not had the opportunity to look at this case or discuss this 
case with — and I believe their names are Christina and Carl — 
and I would suggest to the member opposite that in the future 
what he might do is that he might advise my office if he has a 
circumstance in where there are issues of this nature so that we 
can sit down and try and resolve it within the bureaucratic 

system. This is not the place where you politic with people’s 
lives around very, very serious issues. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, use the appropriate venue so 
that we can deal with people in the way in which they should 
be, in dignity and compassion and not in this forum. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If this government 
was indeed in touch with the people of the province, the people 
that they’re here to serve, we wouldn’t have to go through this 
crisis every time someone has a problem in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Joels couldn’t get any help from the Health 
department so they took their case to Social Services. There 
they were told because Social Services already provides a group 
home that Danny resides in with that $800 a month, they 
shouldn’t expect any help from this department. 
 
Will the Minister of Social Services explain why his department 
will not assume responsibility and ensure that Danny has the 
24-hour care that he needs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with the Minister of 
Health, I and certainly officials of my department would be glad 
to sit down with the family to discuss their circumstance. That 
would be, Mr. Speaker, the appropriate, the appropriate means 
by which we try to solve individual problems in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would encourage that member, and in fact all 
members in the opposition, if we are truly interested in the 
interest of this family, or any family in our province, our doors 
are open. Our phones are connected. Let us know. We’ll do our 
best to help. 
 
We shouldn’t have to engage in this highly politicized 
atmosphere to bring these cases forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think I’ve heard a 
commitment from two ministers so far today that will meet with 
these folks after. We’ll go for one more. We’ve got one more 
loop in this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Joels were then referred to SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance), which agreed to pick up $570 of the 
weekly costs, which is well short of the total cost. The Joels 
were then told by SGI that they should go back to Social 
Services or the Department of Health; that perhaps those 
departments might help. 
 
When does the run-around stop, Mr. Speaker? At this point the 
family doesn’t care what government department picks up the 
cost. The only thing they want is this government to stop 
passing the buck, stop running them through this bureaucratic 
nightmare. 
 
Will the minister of SGI, along with the Minister of Social 
Services, and the Minister of Health, and the Minister of 



382 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

Highways, the minister whoever, and the Premier, all agree to 
meet with these folks afterward and stop their nightmare? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have already indicated to 
the member opposite that my office would be more than 
pleased, as we are on every occasion, to meet with individuals 
who are having difficulty, as the member points out, in dealing 
with the bureaucracy, if that’s the case. Now I say to the 
member opposite and to the folks who are here today, that we 
would be more than pleased to have that discussion with them 
on an individual basis. 
 
Now the member opposite has said some other things that are 
important to note here. He said that the individual was already a 
ward of the court, and in an environment where he was being 
cared for, I understand, likely through the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
The member opposite also talks about services that they tried to 
receive through SGI and it sounds like received some services 
in compensation through SGI. And the member opposite also 
talks about health coverage that’s being provided today through 
the health system, which I think is appreciative of the comments 
that he makes in terms of the services that are provided through 
those three organizations and departments, and corporations. 
 
And I say to the member opposite and to the people who are 
listening today, we would be more than happy on any occasion 
to sit down with individuals and deal with issues that are in the 
way, if they are, and helping them improve their quality of life 
for benefiting the situations that they live in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, when I asked the Premier a 
couple of weeks ago if it was true that he had intervened to 
prevent Doug Anquish from firing Mr. Messer, he told us he 
couldn't remember. Well today I asked Mr. Messer if it was true 
that he had a contract of employment which provided for his 
termination and severance, and J.R. couldn’t remember that. 
 
Well the Liberal opposition has learned that according to the 
contract of employment as CEO (chief executive officer) of 
SaskPower, he was to be paid severance at the rate of two days 
per year for service up until 1996 and five days for every year 
thereafter. That totals 15 days severance he was entitled to 
according to his contract of employment. 
 
Will the Deputy Premier confirm that was the contract and tell 
us why that wasn’t followed when there was in fact a contract 
in place. Was Mr. Garden aware when he gave his opinion that 
there was a contract in place covering termination? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that I don’t have the contract here with me. 
And what I will intend to do, as your committee progresses, try 
to make sure as clearly as we can to provide the information as 

it relates to this issue and others. I say to the member obviously 
there is a circumstance here. 
 
And I want to reiterate to him, because I’ve talked about this a 
number of times in the House — as members questioned me on 
the issue of Channel Lake and Mr. Messer’s severance — that 
when we came to the point of parting ways, the decision on 
whether or not to pay severance was given over to Milt Fair, 
who we said clearly should have the responsibility, without 
political interference from myself or from any other member of 
the CIC board, to come to the conclusion as to whether or not 
severance was applicable; and if so, how much should be paid. 
 
In fact that is the plan and the process that was followed. Mr. 
Milt Fair, in conjunction with legal advice, came to the 
conclusion that severance — given the parameters, reviewing 
the file in all its detail — should be paid. The payment was 
made on a legal basis, not a political one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier has admitted 
on more than one occasion that, in answer to questions I put to 
him in December, he misled this House. He has said on 
repeated occasions, he did that in good faith on the basis that he 
himself was misled. Well he said that he hadn’t gotten the true, 
full, and honest story from SaskPower officials, and he has 
apologized to this House. 
 
Well today J.R. told us that he had, at all times, kept the 
minister fully informed of all developments regarding Channel 
Lake — he held back nothing. When I last raised this, the 
Deputy Premier said I was it raising because of politics. This is 
not because of politics; this is an issue of the most basic 
integrity and credibility. Who is telling the truth? 
 
Mr. Messer says he kept you informed; you knew the truth; you 
knew the full facts. You are telling us you were not kept 
informed and that’s why you misled this House. Which is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member clearly 
knows, if he has read the Deloitte Touche report — and being a 
member of a law firm in North Battleford, I’m sure he has the 
confidence and capability — you will know that the Deloitte 
Touche report deals very directly with the issue of briefing 
notes as it would relate to the December session of the 
legislature. 
 
You know that; don’t you know that, Mr. Member from North 
Battleford? You know it’s in the report. You know it’s in the 
report. You know that. For you to say that you don’t know 
what’s in the report is not telling the truth here in the Assembly. 
And I say to you, you’re misleading the House when you make 
that accusation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order, order. Now the 
hon. member will . . . the minister will recognize that 
accusations about the characters of members in this House is 
not acceptable and I will ask him to withdraw that last remark. 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that 
remark, and I would ask the member opposite who made the 
same accusation to do the same. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I asked the minister just to withdraw 
the remark without qualification. I ask the minister to withdraw 
the remark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I make it in unqualified form. 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 

Tax Relief 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, I hope that 
you took note of the polling results in today’s Leader-Post on 
your budget. What a revealing number. Only 23 per cent — 23 
per cent, Mr. Minister — of Saskatchewan people think you got 
it right. 
 
Just in case you didn’t get a chance to read the paper, let me 
remind you one more time why people weren’t happy with this 
budget — because there was absolutely no meaningful tax 
relief. You keep telling the people of Saskatchewan that they’re 
better off because of all the sacrifices they’ve made. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government may be better off, Jack Messer 
may be better off, but the people of Saskatchewan certainly 
aren’t better off. When are you going to start listening to the 
people of Saskatchewan and provide meaningful tax relief? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member read the 
poll in today’s paper actually what the member would have 
seen is that there’s broad public support for the balanced 
approach we’re taking of continued lowering of taxes, reducing 
debt, and investing in people. 
 
What the poll said, Mr. Speaker, was there’s no clear preference 
for any of the options presented. In fact opinion was roughly 
evenly split. If for example we had focused exclusively on tax 
cuts rather than trying to pay down the debt and do more in 
health and highways and education, as we are, 70 per cent 
would have disagreed with that approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think the poll is well summed up by professor Joe Garcea 
of the University of Saskatchewan, who says, “. . . the results 
confirm the government is on the right track with its overall 
strategy.” 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, with paying down the 
Conservatives’ debt, reducing some of the taxes brought in by 
the Conservatives —that’s the agenda we’re on — that’s an 
agenda I think, Mr. Speaker, that the people will support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — In keeping with government policy to be 
open, accountable, and responsible, Mr. Speaker, I hereby am 

pleased to table question 18. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 18 is tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In my remarks 
this afternoon, I’m going to focus on the occupational health 
and safety program of the Department of Labour. I do that, Mr. 
Speaker, because during the whole of 1997, we recognized in 
many different ways the fact that the occupational health and 
safety program of the department is 25 years old. The program 
was established in 1972, and in 1997 we marked — in various 
ways, as I say — the birthday, the anniversary, the 25th 
anniversary, of the occupational health and safety program. 
 
I thought I’d take a few moments today to remind the House 
where we were at prior to 1972, what happened in 1972, and the 
significance of those developments so far as our province is 
concerned. 
 
Prior to 1972 the functions that relate to the safety and health of 
people who work, were spread across government in a rather 
haphazard way. The Workers’ Compensation Board had for 
many years had responsibility for accident investigation and 
accident prevention. 
 
And they had a staff that was . . . worked within the 
bureaucracy of the board who had been performing that 
function for probably as long as there had been a Workers’ 
Compensation Board. 
 
The department, what is now the Department of Energy and 
Mines, had responsibility for mines inspections, and they 
carried out their inspections without any contact with the 
Workers’ Compensation Board staff. It was a separate function 
of government. The Workers’ Compensation people stayed 
away from the mines and the mines inspectors of course 
focused only on the mines. 
 
In addition to that, the Department of Health had a general 
responsibility for healthy working conditions everywhere in the 
province, and that included the health of working people while 
they were working. And beyond that there was really nothing, 
Mr. Speaker, nothing in the law that protected our people as 
they went to their jobs, worked with their jobs in the province. 
 
What happened in 1972 was that the new Blakeney 
government, after a quick but thorough investigation of the 
situation, decided to draw all those pieces together — draw 
them all together into one department, and they did that. They 
did that by establishing the occupational health and safety 
division in the Department of Labour, by transferring a lot of 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

the people who worked in other departments into Labour, and 
combining them into the one program. 
 
And at that time, the Blakeney government passed the 
occupational health Act, The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act in 1972. 
 
This Act was introduced into this legislature by a former 
minister of Labour, Gordon Snyder. Gordon Snyder had been 
the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from Moose 
Jaw from 1960 and he held that position until 1982. For 22 
years he was in this legislature, the last 11 of which saw him as 
the minister of Labour in the Blakeney government. 
 
I had the honour, Mr. Speaker, to work as the deputy minister 
under Gordon Snyder for five of those years. And I want to say 
publicly that I have never seen a minister of the Crown conduct 
his duties with such conscientiousness as Gordon Snyder. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Gordon Snyder had been a union man 
all of his working life. He’d worked for the CPR (Canadian 
Pacific Railway). He was a locomotive engineer. And he 
believed with every fibre of his being that working people are 
best off if they have the protection of a collective agreement 
and the protection of a trade union acting on their behalf. 
 
And he also brought the experience of all those years on the 
tools, Mr. Speaker, where he actually was out there on the job 
being subjected to all of the dangers that can confront a worker 
during the course of their employment. 
 
As a locomotive engineer he had worked in a noisy 
environment, for example, and that had an impact on his 
hearing. He was always concerned about the fact that his 
hearing was not as sharp as he would like it to have been. And 
there was no question that his employment related to that. 
 
So during his years as minister of Labour, he always paid 
particular attention to the audiology part of it, the hearing 
testing, and the dampening of noise in the work environment so 
that people’s ears were not affected. Where there was a noisy 
environment, some kind of protection had to be worn, and he 
was always particularly conscious of that. So he’d been there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And he introduced in 1972 the new Act which has been in 
effect since. There’ve been a number of improvements and 
modifications to it, but it provided the framework under which 
we still work. 
 
It was, Mr. Speaker, a radical change to the law of this 
province. I have already mentioned that it brought the 
administration of occupational health and safety matters under 
one roof. But that in itself is not particularly radical because 
there are other provinces that have done that since. 
 
What was radical though were some of the provisions in that 
Act. And probably the most important was it conferred on 
working people the right to participate in the occupational 
health and safety questions in their plant. And it did that by 
requiring every plant where there were 10 or more employees to 

establish a joint occupational health committee. 
 
The committee was under the Co-Chair of a management 
representative and a worker representative, and the committee 
consisted of an equal number of workers and representatives of 
management. And that structure, Mr. Speaker, has not changed. 
That continues to this day. But it was a radical change in the 
law of this province, and indeed in the law of any jurisdiction in 
Canada. 
 
What it did, Mr. Speaker, was take the responsibility for the 
administration of safety out of the hands of government 
bureaucracies and placed it into the hands of the people who 
actually worked in the plant. The managers and the workers 
working together were given the responsibility and the power to 
identify problems, to analyse those problems, to seek advice 
with respect to those problems, and to solve them. 
 
And for the last 25 years, Mr. Speaker, it’s worked, at plants, 
working places all across this province. The people who worked 
there, meeting at least once a month, have been busy about the 
task of making their workplaces healthier and safer. And it has 
worked, Mr. Speaker, as I will demonstrate later in my remarks. 
 
I mention the right to participate — a very important right — 
and the workers do it through the occupational health 
committees. In subsequent years, two other rights were 
introduced into the Act. I want to spend a moment describing 
those rights. 
 
The first one to appear was the right to refuse to do dangerous 
work. That was introduced into the legislation in this province 
just a few years after the Act was passed, still under the 
Blakeney government and the administration of Gordon Snyder. 
The right to refuse to do dangerous work. One would think that 
that right should have existed ever since there’s been work in 
this country. But the fact is that nobody thought of it; nobody 
thought to put it into the law that a working person has the right 
to say, I won’t do it because it presents too great a danger to 
me. It presents a danger of taking my life or injuring me. 
 
(1430) 
 
Now the working people now go to work and they know about 
this right, and I know that they think that that right has always 
been there. And I take advantage of every opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, to remind them that prior to 1972 they had no such 
right. 
 
So if the employer said, go down in that ditch, the employee 
went down in the ditch or stood a risk of losing their job. And 
of course it happened time after time after time that refusals led 
to terminations on the spot for insubordination. 
 
And it wasn’t until 1972 that an employee could say, I won’t go 
down that ditch because it’s going to collapse. There are no 
supports holding up the sides of the ditch. There’s no slope to 
the ditch, and I won’t go down there because if that ditch 
collapses, I’m going to die. 
 
Now that right was conferred in 1972, and I’m glad to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that the number of times in which refusals have taken 
place have been many, many indeed. And that has saved the 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

lives of countless number of working people. And I think we 
should all be proud of that because that right was born on the 
floor of this legislature and has been part of the law of 
Saskatchewan ever since. 
 
Other provinces, seeing what Saskatchewan had done, picked it 
up. The federal government, seeing it was done here, picked it 
up and introduced it into their laws. And so now it is a common 
right across Canada that employees have the right to refuse to 
do dangerous work. And if they refuse, they can’t be terminated 
or they can’t be penalized in any way. 
 
The third right that is a little more subtle, but none the less 
extremely important, is the right to know. And that right was 
also introduced near the end of the term of the Blakeney 
government. And by the right to know, Mr. Speaker, I mean 
that an employee has the right to know what he or she is 
working with. 
 
If they’re using a chemical in connection with some process in 
the plant and they’re breathing the fumes or getting it on their 
hands, they have a right to know what chemical that is — what 
it’s composed of, what are the effects of that chemical, and 
whether or not it presents any danger to their health and safety. 
 
Now that’s a subtle right but a very, very important one. And it 
has led to an opening-up of the process so that it’s 
commonplace now for an employer and all the people working 
in a plant to get on top of the question of a new chemical before 
it starts to be used; so that they’re certain before it starts to be 
inhaled or starts to be absorbed by their skin, they know what it 
is and they know what the possible consequences are — they 
know whether or not it’s safe. And as a result, in recent years 
we have not had chemicals introduced into the workplace 
before this kind of research takes place. Everyone’s aware that 
the right exists, everyone respects it, and we have had no 
particular difficulty in that area for some years now. 
 
Those three rights really form the muscle of the Act because 
they are so fundamental to the health and safety of working 
people. And our kids go to work now assuming that these things 
have always been there, and I think it’s well for us to reflect on 
the fact that that wasn’t always the case, but that due to the 
foresight of people like Gordon Snyder, those rights now exist 
and are now taken as a matter of fact. 
 
I mentioned Gordon Snyder. I should also mention my 
predecessor in the office of deputy minister, who is Don Ching, 
who served for nearly three years in that position and was there 
to oversee the drafting of The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act and do the staff work, do the background work that was 
necessary for the government to act. 
 
Another person that just must be mentioned, another person 
who must be mentioned, Mr. Speaker, is Bob Sass. Bob served 
as the director of that division and associate deputy minister of 
the department for many years and breathed life — breathed life 
— into this program; dramatized its contents and elevated its 
profile to a very high level. And Bob’s contribution to this 
program simply has to be recognized and I’m proud and pleased 
to be able to recognize it today. 
 
I have said, Mr. Speaker, that other jurisdictions copied the 

right to refuse dangerous work. I should expand that to say that 
the whole scheme of the Act has been much studied by 
jurisdictions across the country and indeed across the world. 
And features of the Act find their . . . have found their way into 
the legislation of all jurisdictions in Canada and in many 
jurisdictions in the United States and in Europe. 
 
The drafters of this legislation and the people who conceived of 
the ideas should take great pride in the fact that they built 
something that not only has lasted but has been much copied. 
Imitation, Mr. Speaker, is the sincerest form of flattery, and in 
that respect the drafters have been much flattered. 
 
We have tried over the years to keep the Act and the regulations 
up to date. And members will recall that in 1993 the legislation 
was recast in this legislature. There followed an extensive 
process of consultation with employer and trade union and 
worker groups to prepare regulations under the Act, and those 
regulations were promulgated some year and a few months ago. 
 
They were the product of this consultation process which we 
look back on now with great pride, because it achieved a level 
of consensus with respect to the content of those regulations 
which had never been achieved before. And it . . . in effect, 
everybody bought into it. And as a result, the regulations are off 
to a good start with a broad understanding of what they contain. 
A good deal of education going on about their content and a 
very high level of compliance with the new regulations. 
 
The program, Mr. Speaker, is the flagship of this government so 
far as workers’ rights are concerned, so far as the position of 
working people is concerned in this province. And all of us take 
a great deal of pride in it, a great deal of interest, as I know 
members opposite do as well. 
 
I said, Mr. Speaker, that it has worked and I want to just cite 
three statistics to demonstrate the fact that it has worked: 
fatalities last year compared to 25 years ago showed a drop of 
48 per cent; claims made on Workers’ Compensation last year 
showed a 25 per cent decrease from the number of claims 25 
years ago; time-lost claims were down last year 27 per cent 
compared to 25 years ago. And all of those improvements can 
be laid at the doorstep of The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act. I think all members of this House can take great 
satisfaction in that and in the work of our predecessors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The work is not finished, Mr. Speaker; 
much, much remains to be done. This is a huge problem for our 
society. Notwithstanding how the program has worked and the 
improvement that has taken place, problems still exist out there, 
and they are big, expensive problems. They cost a lot of money 
to our economy. They cost a lot of money to employers, they 
cost untold damage and inconvenience and hardship to the 
people who are hurt or become ill. 
 
I just want to cite one example and that is the construction 
industry. And I cite this to give members some idea of the 
measure of the problems that workplace accident and sicknesses 
result in. The numbers are really quite staggering. 
 
We have obtained through the Workers’ Compensation Board 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

information about the construction industry between 1980 and 
1990. And during those 10 years the Workers’ Compensation 
Board paid out more than $230 million for accident-related 
costs in the construction industry alone — $230 million. Now 
with the indirect cost factored in, so far as the industry is 
concerned, the total cost of those accidents was at a minimum 
$1.3 billion. 
 
That’s the advice that I get if you consider not just the Workers’ 
Compensation costs, but the other costs, that are related to that, 
to our society. And the total costs over those 10 years are 
therefore likely to be in excess of $10 billion. 
 
In that 10-year period, the 1980s, the construction industry lost 
over 6,000 person-years of work due to accidents. That’s the 
equivalent of 150 lost lifetimes of work. And that’s just one 
industry — that’s the construction industry. It’s a dangerous 
industry but not the most dangerous. But it does demonstrate 
clearly what the problem . . . that what kind of a problem is 
presented by unsafe and unhealthy working conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget contains provisions to 
strengthen our role in the operation of the health and safety 
system in this province. Just want to just remind you, and I’ve 
mentioned this before in these remarks, but remind you that the 
system is largely a self-governing system. The occupational 
health committees are the front-line troops in identifying and 
dealing with the dangers that exist at the workplace. And when 
they need help, when they need advice, or when they need the 
force of the law to deal with a dangerous situation, they come to 
the department. But primarily the responsibility lies with the 
committees. 
 
So we see our role as, in large part, supporting the committees 
— supporting the committee members, ensuring that they can 
exercise their responsibilities under the Act without any 
discrimination and without any worry about whether they’re 
entitled to do that. We try and support them in every way that 
we can. 
 
We are in this budget devoting additional resources to this end. 
We will have . . . members will know that there is a budgetary 
increase for the department, of a considerable size. There are 
new positions being allocated in the department. There will be 
two new mine inspectors, and there will be additional resources 
within the occupational health and safety division, which we 
will concentrate on accident prevention, on accident prevention 
and education with respect to workplace dangers. 
 
I’m very pleased that in these times of difficult government 
financing, our government has found it possible to substantially 
increase expenditures relating to the health and safety of 
working people. 
 
What it’s all about, Mr. Speaker, is work. When you get right 
down to it, what it’s about is work. Work is at the centre of the 
lives of all people in our society. It’s how we identify ourselves 
— the great pressure from the society for everybody to work 
and to contribute and to earn. Our whole society is set up on the 
premiss that everybody has good, full-time, well-paid jobs. 
 
And when people are unemployed, this society makes a 
considerable effort to get them back into the workforce. And it 

only makes sense, Mr. Speaker, that in those circumstances we 
do everything we can to ensure that that work is safe, and that 
that work is not unhealthy; so that people can enjoy a full 
working life earning a good income to keep themselves and 
their families without unnecessary risk to their life and to their 
limb. 
 
Nothing is as important to all of us as our own health, and that 
has a great value that for most people exceeds money — 
exceeds their own wealth and exceeds their concern about how 
much they make. Our health and the health of our family is 
uppermost in our mind. And as legislators we owe it to our 
society to ensure that work is as safe and healthy as can 
reasonably happen, as can reasonably be achieved. 
 
People are people, Mr. Speaker. They’re not units of 
production; they’re not just part of a production process. 
They’re individuals. They’re our sons and our daughters, our 
brothers and sisters, our friends and our neighbours. And their 
health and their safety, their very lives, must never be put at risk 
in order to speed production, or to enhance profits. 
 
It is the mission of the occupational health and safety division 
of the Department of Labour to ensure that they are healthy, that 
the conditions are healthy, that they are safe, and that people are 
properly protected. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
time afforded me this afternoon to reply to the budget. 
 
This government should be commended for its attempt, again, 
in budget ’98 to soften the burden of taxes on the people of our 
province. It should be commended too for its intention to 
encourage small businesses; but, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 
budget ’98 makes it easy to fear it is far too little and far too 
late. 
 
It is again awesome in its elegant presentation of numbers to 
make what isn’t seem to be what is. This budget is a milestone 
in Saskatchewan’s fiscal development. It illustrates more 
clearly than we’ve seen for some time three fundamental 
weaknesses in this government’s fiscal management scheme. 
 
First, Saskatchewan will continue at least until the end of the 
decade to use utility taxes to make the deficits from the 
government’s spending habits look like surpluses — as if the 
fiscal problems have actually gone away. 
 
What are utility taxes, Mr. Speaker? Well they are rates this 
government’s Crowns charge for services which are over and 
above what it costs to provide those services, including paying 
down the Crown debt for infrastructure. They are rates which 
give the Crown profits which are then transferred over to be 
used by government departments. 
 
There are two things wrong with this, Mr. Speaker. First, it 
means that this government has not brought its departmental 
spending under control. Secondly, utility taxes are astonishingly 
regressive. There are few taxes that are quite so regressive. The 
burden of them falls most heavily on low income families, on 
families with small children, and on small business. 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

These are the taxes this government uses to make deficits look 
like surpluses in its budgets and financial statements — to make 
deficits on its departmental spending into surpluses. And what’s 
more, it is highly unlikely that the two percentage points from 
the sales tax and the two percentage points from the income tax 
will offset the deleterious effects of those very utility taxes. 
 
Now, ironic isn’t it, Mr. Speaker, and to some it should indeed 
be embarrassing that what we have in Saskatchewan is a 
government that claims it is dedicated to protecting and helping 
those less fortunate. Those who are in low income families and 
small business, children of low income families. But it gives a 
little bit with one hand, like redesigned social assistance for 
children for example, while it takes away much, much more 
with the other. 
 
It takes away the basic services those families and small 
businesses need to survive and make a living — heat and 
electricity and communications. And why? The answer to why 
is to support its questionable spending priorities. 
 
Now is it not hypocritical to redesign social assistance for 
children and at the same time commit the government to 
collecting more and more utility tax revenues which adversely 
affect their families and the small businesses where their 
families may otherwise be employed. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, this government should be 
commended for paying down the debt, the debt it helped create 
for the people of Saskatchewan. By the end of the fiscal year, 
the one just ending, 1997-98, it will have reduced the 
province’s total public debt to what it was at the beginning of 
the decade. 
 
Now let’s think about that — what it was at the beginning of the 
decade. But what really is its debt reduction program? Still a 
fifth of this government’s spending goes to debt service 
charges, the second largest expenditure item after health care. 
 
And more than that though, in only two of the seven fiscal years 
from 1991 — pardon me — 1990-91 to 1996-97 did the 
government pay down more of the provincial debt than what it 
received from borrowing. 
 
Now let me say that again, Mr. Speaker, because I don’t think a 
lot of people actually understand this. The government, okay, 
the government — in only two of the last seven fiscal years did 
the government pay down more of the provincial debt than what 
it received in borrowed monies. About half of the debt it paid 
down in the fiscal year just ending 1997-98 came from 
borrowed funds. About half of the debt it will pay down in the 
fiscal year just beginning, 1998-99, will come from borrowed 
funds. 
 
Now can the people of Saskatchewan be sure this government is 
winning the debt management battle as it claims. A substantial 
part of the debt the province is paying off comes from what it is 
borrowing. It needs its debt to pay its debt. What else is there to 
say except that its claim to be the province’s fiscal saviour is 
very, very hollow. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, we have here a fiscal 
management scheme in which the people of this province 
should have very little confidence. 
 

Now thirdly, isn’t it curious that the level of spending on almost 
every program and service provided by this government is now 
higher than it was at the beginning of the decade. The only 
exception is in agriculture — is in agriculture. But presumably, 
and I say presumably, that’s because the government’s spending 
in that area now goes to processing. 
 
Now here we have higher levels of spending, but cut-backs in 
services everywhere. Cut-backs in health care, in education, and 
our roads. Saskatchewan’s spending on health care grew by 
almost 3 per cent a year on average, that’s from 1993-94 to 
1996-97. Even a quarter of a per cent a year, on average, from 
1991 to 1996-97. 
 
Now let’s just ask a very important question. Where has the 
money gone, Mr. Speaker? Because it most certainly has not 
gone on to front-line health care; it’s not gone into more beds; 
it’s not gone to more professionals who look after the sick. It 
most certainly is not going to the very things that people see as 
their priorities. 
 
And who’s really doing the counting of these numbers anyway? 
Are they counting the numbers of administrators who are now 
there, relative to those who were there in the past, compared to 
those people where there used to be nurses and now there 
aren’t? And are these the people who are doing the same 
counting as those who are doing the kind of figuring for who 
should and should not get severance packages for the work that 
they do? 
 
It hasn’t gone into our classrooms either, Mr. Speaker, where 
our children are supposed to be getting the education they need. 
 
And one other comment that I wish to make on this, and I’d be 
remiss not to comment on this, are about federal-provincial 
transfers. They are a weakness in this government’s fiscal 
management scheme. Still some 15 to 20 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s revenues come from taxing other Canadians 
and from taxing the people in this province by way of the 
federal tax system. 
 
Those funds are supposed to be transferred into the province for 
the administration of government; that’s called equalization 
payment. And for social programs, the Canada Health and 
Social Transfer. But I ask again, where have they gone, Mr. 
Speaker? They haven’t gone into front-line health care; they 
haven’t gone into more beds; they haven’t gone for more 
professionals who meet the needs of the sick. 
 
By taking tax revenue from other Canadians and by taxing the 
people of this province through the federal tax system, this 
government continues its spending habits, spending that any 
person you ask on the street will say is not meeting their basic 
needs. 
 
What happens, Mr. Speaker, when other Canadians get tired of 
underwriting the extravagance and the foolish choices of this 
government? Of this government’s inability to get its spending 
choices under control? Of its inability to get its revenues into 
services needed by the people of this province? Front-line 
health care and education for our young people? 
 
They find a way to ensure that their hard-earned tax dollars can 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

no longer be used by this government in this kind of priority. 
Priorities again like bringing pals and buddies to do the jobs 
they weren’t qualified for in the first place and then paying 
them a bunch of money to clean up after they’ve messed up. 
 
As for the people of this province who already were sick and 
tired of paying too many taxes, Mr. Speaker, they left, by the 
thousands. Not just the thousands, not just thousands, but 
thousands and thousands and thousands. 
 
Now Saskatchewan people . . . I think we should look at this all 
relatively. You see, I find that when things begin to actually 
come home to roost, we get some people commenting, Mr. 
Speaker. And they come home to roost if we look at trend lines 
in Saskatchewan, something this government should not want to 
do because over a long period of time, even from when they 
took power in 1971, the trend lines aren’t too hot, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan people should be wondering if this government is 
lost in the wilderness of fiscal management. Is it lost in a 
wilderness of an exceptionally high tax burden on low income 
families — families with young children and small businesses 
to support its spending habits. In a wilderness of borrowed 
funds to pay down its debt. In a wilderness of spending outside 
the core basic programs and services in health care and 
education. Of not spending on front-line services for the sick 
and the young and on health care and education. Budget ’98 
initiatives are far too little and far too late. More like 
window-dressing to make what isn’t seem to be what is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, budget ’98 is embarrassing. It shows as clearly as 
this legislature has even seen, a government that claims to be 
the protector of those in our province in need but isn’t; to be the 
quintessential fiscal saviour of our provincial government 
programs and services but isn’t. This legislature really must 
commit itself to working together to protect the people of our 
province from good-intentioned fiscal bungling. 
 
Now in 1995 there was a plan. It was called Restoring Health to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and it was all about restoring hope 
for the future. And budget ’98 again shows that this government 
just can’t do it. It continues to make our province a rather 
pathetic cliché now called “next year country.” As it promotes 
its so-called achievements, it fails to tell us that it has just 
barely finally managed to bring our province back to where it 
was in the 1980s before it was elected. 
 
Employment is scarcely more than it was in the mid-’80s and it 
has been growing at just a fifth of a percentage point since the 
beginning of the 1990s. Our population, whether people like it 
or not, is considered from elsewhere to be virtually stagnant. 
The message that was given in 1995 remains virtually 
unchanged. And I’m going to quote from it, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Saskatchewan has been called “next year country,” a place 
where opportunity is always over the horizon. For those of 
us who live and work in this province, we know that these 
should be times of opportunity. Everyone knows that the 
agriculture, mineral, and energy abundance of the land, 
combined with a smart, resourceful, and educated people, 
should provide opportunities for work and quality of life 
that are unsurpassed in western Canada and the rest of the 
world. Saskatchewan should be growing faster with more 

jobs and lower taxes. Yet what do we find? 
 

And it goes on to say later: 
 
People wanted a government to live within its means. We 
wanted an economy that created sufficient jobs to allow 
our young people to work at home. We expected to see a 
sense of cooperation and community restored to our 
society. We wanted hope restored for the future. 
 

And I state, Mr. Speaker, that from this government after seven 
years we have none of that. 
 
Now much has been said of the business practices and 
subsequent losses of SaskPower which as we all know, Mr. 
Speaker, means a loss for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And 
I’m going to take this opportunity to make comment on 
Channel Lake, the Public Accounts Committee, the Crown 
Corporations Committee, the ringing of the bells in this 
Legislative Chamber, and the need for a public inquiry. All of 
these topics relate to the finances of our province and I believe 
are appropriate to address at this time. 
 
(1500) 
 
The people of our province deserve to know what actually 
transpired with Channel Lake. They deserve to know if their tax 
dollars have been used judiciously. Mr. Messer and all of the 
individuals associated with Channel Lake deserve an unbiased 
and competent forum in which to explain their actions. 
Everyone, Mr. Speaker, everyone. The citizens of our province 
and the people who’s names have been so readily bandied about 
deserve justice. 
 
No one who has ever been a member of either the Public 
Accounts Committee or the Crown Corporations Committee 
would define them as unbiased. Some would even question the 
level of competence. I was fortunate to be member of both in 
the early first mandate of this government, and I remained a 
member of the Public Accounts Committee from 1991 through 
1997. 
 
I watched over that period of time, partisanship increase; 
disrespect among NDP members increase for the office of the 
Provincial Auditor; an increase in the unwillingness of 
government members to listen to the points of view of others; 
an increasing arrogance on the part of government members 
who appeared far more interested in flexing their majority 
muscle than participating in an all-party committee which in the 
past had the ability and commitment to fulfil its mandate. One 
of the proudest times I’ve ever spent in this Legislative 
Assembly was on that committee from 1991 to 1993. 
 
Neither the Public Accounts Committee nor the Crown 
Corporations Committee should be charged with the 
responsibility of getting to the bottom of this Channel Lake 
fiasco, Mr. Speaker. The Chair of the Crown Corporations 
Committee stated public yesterday that mistakes will be made 
because this is a new experience. Well I contend that an issue of 
this importance should not be put in the hands of novices, and 
that all concerned deserve an independent public inquiry 
conducted by people with appropriate expertise. 
 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

Now for those who criticize the cost of an independent public 
inquiry, I simply say this. How much should justice cost? 
Complaints by the government rang very hollow indeed about 
the bell-ringing antics of the official opposition. It was the NDP 
who out-rang and out-cost anything done to date when they 
rang those bells for 24 hours a day and 18 days. 
 
If they were so concerned, Mr. Speaker, with costs — if they 
were so concerned with costs and doing what is right, they 
could have, along with the cooperation of opposition members, 
established a reasonable budget for a public inquiry with a 
targeted timeline for completion, thereby ending the hold-up of 
legislative business. This would also make the ridiculous 
expense of televising their version of Days of Our Lives from 
room 10 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now hon. members will 
recognize why the Chair is on his feet and I know that they 
don’t need to be reminded. But apparently it needs to be said 
anyhow to be put in the record — that the debate on the budget 
is not well served by members shouting across the floor at one 
another and it is deserving of the members taking their . . . 
Order . . . taking the time to put their remarks on the record if 
they wish them to be noted. And in the interim I will ask them 
to accord the courtesy to allow the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Greystone to continue. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not only would 
this have not cost this Legislative Assembly any extra dollars 
from business not accomplished here, it most certainly would 
have made the ridiculous expense of supposedly televising their 
version of Days of Our Lives from room 10 in this building a 
moot point. 
 
And I’d like to make one final comment on this matter, Mr. 
Speaker. The citizens who have talked to me about Channel 
Lake are not only concerned about what really happened, they 
are not only questioning the severance package given to Mr. 
Messer, they’re asking why it is that an individual with no 
credentials, or very few credentials to run a company of such 
magnitude, was hired at $150,000 a year in the first place. 
 
When placed on the list of other people hired by this 
administration who also were charged with responsibilities for 
which they had no expertise, it becomes a damning indictment 
of this government’s approach to stewardship. Whether it was 
what happened at Casino Regina and Mr. Stengler’s 
questionable severance, or SaskPower and Mr. Messer’s, the 
people of this province know that something is not right. 
 
Now there are few people who articulate what politicians and 
governments should be better than Vaclav Havel, the Czech 
playwright who went from imprisonment for subversion to 
assume the presidency of Czechoslovakia. In his first address at 
the helm of his country he said, and I quote: 
 

My dear fellow citizens, for forty years on this day you 
heard from my predecessors the same thing in a number of 
variations: how our country is flourishing, how happy we 
all are, how we trust our government, and what bright 
prospects lie ahead of us . . . I assume you did not propose 
me for this office so that I, too, should lie to you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Havel went on to say, our country is not 
flourishing; that the enormous and spiritual potential of our 
nation is being wasted. That a country that was once proud of 
the educational levels of its citizens can no longer speak with 
the same level of confidence about quality and innovation. 
 
Havel spoke of his observations while flying over his nation 
and describes some of the serious challenges his people had to 
face. But it was not the extraordinary problems of poverty, 
pollution, and joblessness that he could see from the window of 
his small plane that he stated was their main problem, Mr. 
Speaker. He said, and I quote: 
 

The worst thing is that we live in a contaminated moral 
environment. We have fallen morally ill because we 
became used to saying one thing and thinking another. We 
have learned not to believe in anything, to ignore each 
other, and to care only about ourselves. 

 
Now if we were to fly over Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and put 
aside the physical beauty of the prairie landscape, what would 
we see? Would it be evident that a large number of our small 
communities are dying; that farms are growing farther and 
farther apart; that this means that there will be fewer 
neighbours, fewer towns, fewer people with rural values that 
have been the defining feature of Saskatchewan strength? 
 
Will we see that our cities are not growing exponentially, that 
we still don’t have an economy of scale in Saskatoon or Regina 
to compete with even Calgary or Winnipeg. Would we see that 
our roads are safe, that they’re competitive, an environment that 
is secure. And if we stopped and asked our citizens if they’ve 
felt that their Saskatchewan was flourishing, what do you think 
they would say? 
 
All the rhetoric in the world does not change the fact that this 
province, our province, is being led by an administration with 
no vision and little ability to inspire. It is very clear from this 
budget, from the rampant abuse of patronage, from the need to 
manipulate rather than show true confidence and courage, that 
as Havel said, quote: “The worst thing is that we live in a 
contaminated moral environment.” 
 
People simply want the truth; they live it every day. They have 
come to an unparalleled level of disdain and they want more 
from all of us. And I unhappily state that I have seen little 
evidence in this Assembly or in this budget to believe that they 
are going to get it. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, while many here call it good politics to 
make what isn’t seem to be what is, I do not. It is simply too 
costly — economically, ecologically, socially, and humanly. I 
will not be supporting this government’s budget because I 
refuse to believe that this is the best the Saskatchewan people 
should accept from its leadership. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to rise and support the budget 
speech and the budget of this province. Before I do that I’d like 
to welcome the pages to this jolly old Assembly and hope they 
enjoy their existence here for the next few months. 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my constituents who 
have worked very hard during the times of government to help 
the economy and make sure that the area of the Watrous 
constituency, from corner to corner, is being developed through 
regional economic development authorities, through the 
operational hog barns, small businesses of every description. 
And I want to acknowledge their efforts in making this province 
a better place to live and a little more prosperous place in which 
to live. 
 
I also want to acknowledge the full-time staff and the sessional 
staff that are here. Of course, Mr. Speaker, without them we 
would not be able to do our jobs, and so often we overlook the 
support that is given to this Assembly by those staff. And 
people sort of focus on the stage that’s in here rather than the 
supporting staff who make it all possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to express my personal thanks publicly 
to the Department of Agriculture and Food. I can certainly say 
that in terms of working, since I’ve been the minister over just 
about two and a half years now, I can honestly say that I’m 
very, very, very proud and pleased to have that department. 
There’s a bunch of excellent people over there. 
 
And the truth is, a department can make or break a minister, and 
these people are very conscious of doing the right things for the 
people of this province, and therefore that does make me look 
better. I want to acknowledge that their diligence and their 
expertise and articulate nature is very much appreciated. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to you I want to say that I know you’ve been 
out in the country talking to people — talking to people, talking 
to students basically in schools. And I’ve had the opportunity to 
share that with you in a couple of occasions and I want to say 
thank you for that. And I’m going to steal a little bit of your 
speech to make a point. 
 
In this world we have seen the change in attitude for people in 
democracies, how they respect and disrespect their government. 
We’ve seen it for self-centred reasons, political people 
undermining themselves, undermining their own integrity 
sometimes to achieve a point, therefore the end justifies the 
means. 
 
I think we see students in the schools today who are 
disillusioned with that, who don’t know what political life is all 
about and what politics actually means. You give the example, 
Mr. Speaker, in your speech, that there are two enemies of 
democracy. And I, having heard you say that, think about this a 
lot: apathy and ignorance — ignorance and apathy. And in a 
section of your little talk where you talked about a democratic 
system electing Adolph Hitler, until I heard you say that I didn’t 
really realize the importance of those words — ignorance and 
apathy. 
 
I commend you for going out and reaching out to the students 
of this province to try to reinstate in them what is absolutely 
necessary to maintain this Chamber and the debate in this 
House, and that is knowledge gathered to be sifted through your 
personal knowledge filter, or your personal filter, so you can 
express your views and then the ability to express that view, 
and not saying, it doesn’t matter to me. 
 

I really think that’s something that you should be proud of. I 
know it’s a start and a long step, long road to make sure that the 
people and the students of this province respect this institution, 
and maybe we can build that up again, which is absolutely so 
necessary. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there is a new politics today, a new politics 
in this province, in governments not just in Saskatchewan but 
across the piece. A politics that says if you’ve done something 
wrong just say you’ve done something wrong and apologize 
and continue on doing the best. Because as people we all make 
mistakes, every one of us. And if we admonish those people 
who make mistakes for one mistake, we are not living up to our 
role of respect and courtesy to others, because we all make 
mistakes, and the person who doesn’t make a mistake I don’t 
think exists. 
 
And we have done that, Mr. Speaker, in terms of trying to 
spotlight the things that have happened in this province, and I 
use Channel Lake as the example. Were there mistakes made? 
Well we’ll see as it unfolds in the discussion. 
 
We have people from this House who will be able to ask any 
questions. We will put a spotlight on this issue because it is the 
new politics, it is the new way to do things, not try to cover. 
And we expose the problems. 
 
Well the member over there, you know, Mr. Speaker, the lonely 
member sitting in the corner of the coffin over there, as we 
square off this — that’s sort of, that’s a political term — says 
we had no choice. Of course we had choice. 
 
I can remember his party, I can remember his party who tried to 
cover up after cover-up after cover-up and where did it end? 
Where did it end? It ended in the courts of this land with 
charges. If you can’t learn a lesson from that, Mr. Speaker, then 
you can’t learn a lesson. And we should not be trying to cover. 
So we put the spotlight on. 
 
The problem over there, Mr. Speaker, with the opposition is that 
there is a little bit of a struggle for power. There’s a little bit of 
a struggle for power in the old Tory Party over there because 
the new Liberals who came in, they come in and they sort of 
want to flex their muscles a little bit, and the old Tories who, 
well, actually they changed their name. You know there’s a 
song about, you can change your number, you can change your 
name, but they’re still the same old Tory Party with the new 
Liberals in it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe . . . I hear this member in particular 
speaking from his seat most of the time and when he stands up 
to say something, he’s really got nothing to say. So maybe he 
should listen for a little bit and he might learn something. And, 
Mr. Speaker, on the other side, there have been — this is not a 
personal attack on any member because any member, like I said 
before, any person has a right to make a mistake. And if the 
Liberals think that the choice they made was a mistake, that’s 
fine, when they went to the Conservative Party. 
 
If they think it was okay because they made a conscious 
decision, that’s fine too. But don’t go out to the public and say 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

you want to be government and be responsible to the people of 
this province. Don’t try to feign sincerity. We’ve got . . . and for 
some of the members over there, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a big 
step. The member for Saltcoats, when he took the plunge into 
the new Tory Party, it wasn’t a big step. He was going home. I 
know the history of some of the folks. That’s fine. That’s their 
decision. 
 
It’s a little bigger step for the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
— a lot bigger step. And it’s a big step for the member from 
Melfort, the member for Melfort who wants to be leader. And 
can’t you see it, Mr. Speaker, and I just marvel at the fact that 
these people can stand up there and do this, and then go out to 
the public of this province and say, oh but everything’s fine 
now; we promise we’re going to be sincere to you in this sorry 
party. We promise you that. 
 
Can’t you just see the Liberals who went over there, standing 
up there telling the people, as noted today in the beginning of 
this session, quotes from two members saying that they were 
going to be sincere Liberals. Did you see them? I swear to be a 
Liberal, a whole Liberal, and nothing but a Liberal, so help 
God. But maybe it was like this. Maybe they had their fingers 
crossed. I swear to be a Liberal, a whole Liberal, nothing but a 
Liberal, so help me God, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You can’t feign sincerity. You can fool me once — shame on 
you; fool me twice — shame on me. I don’t think the people are 
going to be fooled twice. This is why you have to have some 
kind of integrity in a political party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won’t go on about this, but you can recycle these 
people and you can reuse these people but I’ll guarantee you’ll 
regret it. It’s recycle, reuse, and regret. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is the opposition that wants to be 
government. So let’s just have a little look. I heard the member 
yesterday from Cannington saying that . . . a welfare case. We 
get $300-and-some million from welfare from Ottawa. That was 
the member from Cannington — that’s what he said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the same person who supported a party who 
spent a billion dollars a year in this province more than they 
brought in and drove the debt up to $15 billion. And he calls it 
welfare from Ottawa. Well I’ll tell you, the welfare of $300 
million from Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, is less than half of the $770 
million that we pay in interest every year. That’s integrity? 
That’s honesty? Well it’s a stretch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that same member in a speech yesterday said that 
the Government of Saskatchewan had not built into the, into the 
budget system a reduction for royalties in oil. And that’s in 
Hansard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member picked up the book, picked up the 
book of the budget address and on page 56, if he looks up oil, 
non-renewable resource section, went from $524 million 
forecast to $367 million. That’s $157 million less that’s been 
built into this. And he has the audacity to stand up and say the 
government didn’t do it. Is that integrity, Mr. Speaker? I don’t 
think so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but let’s really look at this, let’s really look at the 

want-to-be government over there, the want-to-be government. 
If you add it all up, the dollars that would have been spent in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, or lost in this province are 
atrocious. First the Conservatives wanted to sell the 
Lloydminster upgrader. That’s what they’re hollering about — 
sell the upgrader. You know what they wanted us to sell the 
upgrader for? The same time Alberta and the provincial 
government and the federal government sold theirs for less than 
8 cents on the dollar, they wanted us to do the same thing. We 
would have returned . . . if we would have listened, if the people 
of this province would have listened to that caucus over there, 
we would have got $20 million for the Lloydminster upgrader. 
 
We sold the old . . . the Lloydminster upgrader just recently, 
Mr. Speaker, for $310 million. And they would have sold it for 
20. That’s $250 million-plus of gain. And they want to be 
government to make decisions, economic decisions for this 
province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals and the Tories over there were 
hollering about Cameco shares, exactly. What about the 
Cameco shares? They wanted us to sell the Cameco shares 
when they were $18 a share — $18. They hollered, sell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, through the great good 
knowledge and graces of a bureaucracy who knows the 
business, sold for $73 a share. You know what a difference that 
is? That is $500 million difference that this province gained had 
they . . . because we did it the way we wanted to and not 
listened to the opposition. Another $500 million. 
 
We re-worked the Weyerhaeuser deal, Mr. Speaker, to the tune 
of $150 million. We reconstructed the Regina . . . the New 
Grade upgrader, exposure of $600 million to the taxpayer. Just 
add them all up. 
 
And this is the Tory caucus over here who’s always talking to 
us about Alberta. Well let’s go and listen to Alberta. You 
should do the same thing in Alberta. 
 
Just on the Lloydminster upgrader that we just sold, the Alberta 
government sold for $32 million. They sold it for less than 8 
cents on the dollar. That was a $424 million investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people who want to be government. Well I’ll 
tell you, the people in this province will not stand for that type 
of irresponsible action. Privatization for the sake of 
privatization. Just do it. Get it on . . . get on with it. They won’t 
take it and they won’t tolerate it, and I predict, Mr. Speaker, 
they will not accept those people. Because if you can’t have 
integrity, and if you can’t have principles of integrity and 
principles of managing the economy . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . There he goes again, Mr. Speaker, the member who can’t 
say anything on his feet but chirps loudly from his seat. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I want to move into some other areas 
pertaining to agriculture and my portfolio. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of things that are happening in 
this province, and one of them is the CTA (Canadian 
Transportation Agency) hearings in which the Canadian Wheat 
Board is challenging the railroads for the responsibility of grain 
movement for 1996. 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

Twenty million dollars demurrage is lost — $20 million in 
demurrage is lost — and we have to determine who’s 
responsible. We need a system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is 
going to have everyone who’s touching the grain from the 
farmers in Saskatchewan responsible if they are cause of delay. 
We do not have that system right now, and in this particular 
case we’re going to say . . . we’re going to try to find out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition says, just get rid of the board. 
That’s the opposition. The Tories just want to get rid of the 
board. 
 
Let me tell you a little story, Mr. Speaker. We know under the 
Canadian Wheat Board what demurrage is. We paid $20 million 
last year on it. That’s when the ships come in and they’re not 
loaded and we have to pay about $10,000 a day — $10,000 a 
day — for that ship waiting there if it’s not loaded by a certain 
time. 
 
But the would-be government over there, Mr. Speaker, says, 
well just give it to the Wheat Board; put it on the free market, 
like many grains are now. Well you know how it works if 
you’re going to load a non-board ship. The cost of 
transportation . . . Because the question you have to ask is, what 
demurrage is paid on non-board grains? So when you go to find 
out what demurrage is paid on non-board grains, you can’t find 
out. You know why you can’t find out? You can’t find out 
because the demurrage is built into the basis, the basis being the 
cost of getting the grain from farm to port. 
 
So the basis is like an insurance policy. They build in some 
basis points and some costs for transportation to cover 
demurrage. So if the demurrage is accrued, the grain companies 
are protected because the farmers have paid it, and they pay the 
demurrage. And guess what if there’s no demurrage? They get 
to keep it. This is the system these people want over here. 
 
And guess what else? If the grain ship clears the port early, they 
get paid a rate, a daily rate which is equivalent to about half of 
the demurrage charged for a ship that is there too long. It’s 
about $5,000 a day but varies a bit. And guess what? If a 
non-board grain ship clears early, the shipping company pays 
for that ship clearing early. Guess who gets that money? At 
least in the Canadian Wheat Board system that money goes 
back into the pool. 
 
The want-to-be, get-rid-of . . . the government who wants to get 
rid of the Wheat Board would say no, that’s okay; we’ll give 
that to the companies as well. And they say they’re the 
government . . . they want to be government and help rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you — they advocated the Crow gone. 
They got their way — $300 million every year out of the 
pockets of farmers of this province. They want to get rid of the 
Wheat Board — add $500 million every year, which is the 
benefit the board gives us. That’s almost . . . That’s $800 
million. That’s almost a billion dollars every year they would 
have out of this province. 
 
So what we’re saying in transportation, Mr. Speaker, is give 
Mr. Estey a chance to do his job. Give him a chance to do his 
job and in the meantime stop all the abandonments. Just stop 

them. Unless there’s a section of rail where every party — the 
people who are buying it, the people who are selling it, and 
other parties — who are agreed to transfer that, that’s fine. But 
stop the abandonment of those other lines. 
 
Because until we get a new system in place, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we will not have an efficient system. We have a 
situation now where we’re deregulating a system. There is 
tariff-sharing questions; there’s competition questions. Mr. 
Speaker, let me tell you, if you don’t have competition in a 
deregulated system the farmers of this province will lose. For 
every $10 a tonne they pay in transportation, it takes $200 
million out of this province every . . . now. For every $10 a 
tonne, $200 million is gone out of this province. 
 
We are paying $32 a tonne roughly where I live, and on the 
United States side, where they have deregulation with no 
competition, they’re paying $52 a tonne. That would be another 
$400 million out of our system. We cannot tolerate that; we 
can’t operate that way. So you need competition. And, Mr. 
Speaker, if there is no competition you don’t get the best price. 
 
I live in an area where there are a number of potash mines. The 
potash mine . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that man is still talking over there. I mean I know there’s 
nobody else; he’s the only one on the opposition benches. I 
don’t know where they all are, but I mean he doesn’t have to 
make up for the rest of them. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Now I’m sure that the member 
realizes that he cannot refer to the absence or the presence of 
members in the House. I would advise him to leave that out of 
the statements and continue on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I actually did know 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back to my point if you don’t have competition. 
The potash corporations in this province have competition in 
just about every mine because they have two railroads running 
in. Do they pay demurrage? No. Is their rate equivalent? They 
are their private rates, but I don’t think they’re paying any more 
than we are for grain right now. 
 
But if you don’t have that competition — you don’t because 
every elevator doesn’t have two railroads into it — and you’re 
deregulating the system, then you better create competition. It’s 
incumbent upon the federal government to create competition 
through the use of joint running rights, where any railroad can 
buy grain from any point and move their train across the tracks 
to the port. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the system has to be built such that those 
joint running rights will be of benefit to the producers. We have 
a report, and the railways don’t disagree with this . . . well 
maybe they don’t disagree with it. I want to tell you that in 
1992 there was a report done for the National Transportation 
Act Review Commission entitled: “Rail Competitive Lines.” 
 
In this report they used a quote from a May 1990 application 
from Unitel to the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission) who was asking permission 
to use other telephone companies’ infrastructure for their calls. 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

In other words they were applying for joint running rights in the 
telephone system. Now Unitel’s position, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
was, and I quote: 
 

That competition between it and other telephone 
companies will result in lower prices, greater innovation, 
more responsive service for telecommunications users. 
 

That was the position. And that’s happening. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, guess who owns 60 per cent of Unitel shares — 
Canadian Pacific Railroad, CP. Now if it’s good to have 
deregulation and joint running rights in the telephone company 
when they owned 60 per cent of Unitel, what’s wrong with joint 
running rights in the rail system? 
 
Now I would agree with them here, but somehow when it 
comes to the rail, they don’t want to do it. And you know what, 
Mr. Speaker, I know why they don’t want to do it. And you 
know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t blame them. CNCP’s 
(Canadian National and Canadian Pacific) job is to do the best 
job that gets the highest return for their shareholders that they 
can get. That’s their responsibility. 
 
And if the government of this country — the federal Liberals in 
Ottawa — allow them to do that, they will do it. If we 
deregulate without re-regulating competition, they will collect 
all the money they can for their investors because that’s their 
job. You can’t be mad at the railroads; they’re being allowed to 
do it. That’s why we as people in Saskatchewan — as 
governments, as producer organizations and individuals — have 
to lobby and lobby hard to ensure that the federal government 
gets the message. You re-regulate the system at your own peril. 
 
Because it’s the same thing with anything else, same thing with 
the Canadian Wheat Board demurrage. If there’s no 
responsibility from the people who are causing a change then 
the people who are in that change are going to suffer. We’ve got 
the federal government allowing the railroads to deregulate. No 
responsibility. Who’s paying? Taxpayers and the farmers. 
 
We’ve got grain companies putting their system out of 
terminals around this province with really no responsibility, 
because who’s building the roads? — the taxpayers, the 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn’t matter if it’s in a Canadian 
Wheat Board or if it’s in grain transportation. If you don’t have 
some buy-in, some responsibility by those people who are 
affecting the system and touching the system and using that 
system, then you don’t have any responsibility. 
 
You need to put them . . . encumber them with responsibility. 
And that is the federal government’s job in this country, and 
they are falling down flat on their face because they’re allowing 
this massive change without any risk-taking, any responsibility 
for it. 
 
And this massive change is doing one thing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — it’s providing for a tremendous tax shift from the 
federal government to the provincial government. They took 

away the Crow of $320 million. They’re allowing deregulation 
and abandonments. All this money is coming out of the pockets 
of Saskatchewan producers and Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
The federal government has a responsibility, Mr. Speaker. That 
is what we’re going to be saying to them over and over and over 
again and we’re going to be presenting on April 21 in Calgary 
to Mr. Estey, in saying a number of these things to impress 
upon him the need for responsibility in the system, to impress 
upon him the need for regulating competition if competition 
doesn’t occur naturally. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to do that and we’re not going 
to let up until we achieve what we have to achieve. And that is a 
system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in which the grain from my farm 
can run unencumbered across those lines at the best price, 
which would be the competitive price; a grain which can then 
be hauled into a ship-port system where demurrage is not paid 
or is paid by those people who cause the delay and by nobody 
else. 
 
It’s really nice right now when anybody in this transportation 
system can cause a delay and pass the cheque onto the farmer, 
the bill onto the farmer. That’s a pretty nice situation to have; 
it’s deplorable that the federal government would allow this to 
continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make one more point on this issue, and 
that is the point about tendering at port. This is becoming kind 
of a cog, a catch-word now. Well the Wheat Board, it’s okay, it 
can stay there, but we should really let them sell the grain just 
to the port; they should have nothing to do from the farm gate to 
the port. 
 
Well isn’t that a lovely situation. That’s another way of killing 
it. Because if I sell the grain before the tenders are called, then 
the grain companies are going to know that they’ve got me, 
because I’ve got to get the grain to that port, so they can dicker 
with the price. 
 
If I tender the grain before the sale, then the buyer’s going to 
know, well I’m going to get that . . . that the grain’s tendered; 
it’s going to be at the port. He can sit back and juggle the price 
because he knows the grain’s going to hit the port, it’s going to 
be blocked solid, and then he can bargain for a lesser price. 
 
The Kraft-Tyrchniewicz-Furtan study, Mr. Deputy-Speaker, 
showed that there was almost $6 a tonne gained from the 
Canadian Wheat Board being able to organize the system. And I 
talked about the demurrage. I talked about demurrage. And 
what would happen is, if we went to that kind of a system, the 
basis would be increased. Because guess who then would be in 
. . . self-insuring themselves to make sure that they didn’t have 
a cost if that grain didn’t get there. It would be the grain 
companies. And the farmers again are going to pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the right system. This is not the right 
system, and putting the Wheat Board as a seller at port position 
simply will mean the end of it. The proponents of tendering at 
port have not demonstrated this will improve the service, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll tell you why. We know the car turnaround for 
non-board grain is greater than car turnaround for board grain. 
 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

And there are a number of other points that can be made on this, 
but I wanted to just put this on the record — that if we go to a 
point of tendering at port, simply the Canadian Wheat Board 
will not have the ability to organize the system, to have the 
grain hit the ship when the ship comes in. Because you start the 
grain moving from the farm. You move it through the system. 
Same time you start moving, but before that you order the ship. 
The ship takes 30, 40 days, sometimes 60 days, 50 days to get 
in. It’s got to hit the same time. 
 
If you don’t have them in some kind of control of organizing 
that system, Mr. Speaker, the system will not work. And every 
time the system doesn’t work we know who pays for it — it’s 
the producers and ultimately the taxpayers of this province. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask people, please forget about that concept because 
simply it’s another diversion to try to kill the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some great stories to tell in agriculture in 
this province. We have tried to lead the way, lobbying for 
transportation, lobbying for support of the board, reorganizing 
the marketing systems for hogs, looking at a chicken industry 
and the beef industry to see what we can do there, and 
especially livestock, and it goes on. 
 
One of the most important things I think we have done though, 
because a lot of our producers still produce grain and grain 
only, is recognize that input costs are a major factor. Input costs 
are one of the largest factors in this province and that’s why I 
took this to the federal-provincial table two years ago and we 
will be getting a report hopefully this summer from the working 
committee to see if there’s anything that governments can do 
collectively to keep input costs down. 
 
Now as the free market system, Mr. Speaker, we can’t put price 
controls on. But certainly we can act as some kind of a 
watchdog in some process to ensure that there’s no gouging or 
price fixing or anything else that’s going on. In Saskatchewan 
we address this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by doing one thing I 
think, by doing something that is the only sustainable reduction 
in input costs in this province. 
 
Over two years we reduced crop insurance premiums by 33 per 
cent. The only sustained reduction of input costs in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. I am very, very proud to say that this 
government, through the Department of Agriculture, has been 
able to accomplish that. We’ve taken off the $11 big game 
hunting fee, and moved to a system where 85 per cent of the 
coverage in the field comes from our government. And the 
farmers are going to get paid for grain that’s laying in the fields. 
 
Mr. Speaker, input costs are very important and we’re going to 
lead that battle. But that battle won’t be won simply by 
reducing input costs by government. It takes many more 
players. And what I have come to realize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that over the years there is one way to maintain your farm. And 
there is only one way, and that is to maintain that farm by 
farming within the margin that you receive. 
 
The price of grain in nearly irrelevant, because we see as it goes 
up and down the input prices go up and down. So if you don’t 
work within that margin, you won’t be surviving. And the 
question is, how long can we do that. And the question 

becomes, is it not true that your ability to maintain your 
operation is directly proportional of your ability to capitalize 
your operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many people out in the rural areas today 
who are having difficulty in the grain sector because of input 
costs and because the prices are down. We have to address this 
issue. We simply can’t just not talk about it because if we don’t 
talk about it and don’t address it, the system is going to change. 
And I’ll tell you what it’s going to change into. It’s going to 
change into a corporate system where you’ll have land trading 
and farms trading on the ABC land company on the Toronto 
and Chicago stock exchanges. 
 
We don’t want that. So how do you prevent that. You prevent it 
by addressing and taking the issue head-on. You talk about 
what alternatives we have. Is it custom farming? Is it leasing? Is 
it corporate farming or is it new generation co-op farms? 
 
And that is something, Mr. Speaker, I think we have to look at. 
I’m going to take a moment here to outline a possible project 
that we should be looking at in this province. If you had 10 or 
15 farmers together and they sold all their machinery and put 
their land into a new generation co-op and have that land 
capitalized by the money that they sold their machinery for — 
and I’ll bet you you’d have money left over — each one of their 
acres would be a share in that co-op and they’d have to sell their 
grain to that co-op and that grain would market it for them. And 
you’d have to hire a manager because in today’s world you 
need managers. And then they can be the board of directors. 
 
We have examples of new gen co-ops all over . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Corporate farming is what that is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well the member over in the opposition 
benches says that’s corporate farming. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s the same thing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well he says the same thing. And I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it may be, but let me tell you the 
difference. 
 
The difference between corporate farming and new gen co-op 
farming is that when your land, Mr. Member, is traded on the 
Toronto Stock Exchange I know who’s getting the best result 
out of it. It’s the people who hold the shares in that land. 
 
If a new generation co-op is operating in Saskatchewan with 
Saskatchewan farmers being the board of directors and voters, I 
know who is getting the benefit out of that corporate farm or 
co-op farm. It’s the people of Saskatchewan. And that’s the 
difference between those benches over there and these benches 
here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — So, Mr. Speaker, the member over there 
tries to . . . He’s got a black crayon and he’s got a white crayon, 
Mr. Speaker, but he’s living in a grey world. And his black 
crayons and white crayons don’t work in a grey world. Because 
you always have to compromise and manoeuvre and manipulate 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

and make sure your farming organization fits the bill so that you 
can maintain yourself. Manipulating your farming operation to 
be as profitable as possible is done better through a cooperative 
system than it is through a corporate system that drains that 
profit out of this province or this country. 
 
(1545) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — So we have to learn to work within the 
margin and I think there are some things I think we can do, Mr. 
Speaker. But most importantly, and what I’m trying to do, is get 
the conversation going; we have to talk about this in rural 
Saskatchewan. Why? Because we can’t continue the way we 
are. 
 
If you sit at a railway crossing watching a hundred-car unit train 
go full of grain to the West Coast, you’re looking at, within 
three minutes of that passing you by if it’s going full speed, 
$320,000 approximately in one little train. Farmers’ money. A 
hundred-car unit train going for three minutes across the 
crossing, you’ve just watched $320,000 farmers’ money going 
by you — just in freight. 
 
Understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that every week an average of 
5,000 cars are unloaded in Canada, most of them at the West 
Coast — that’s $16 million a week of transportation costs out of 
Saskatchewan. And these are the people over here who want to 
change this system and to deregulate it. 
 
Well it’s not a black-and-white world, Mr. 
Members-Over-There, it’s a grey world and you’ve got to be 
able to work in that world. And you don’t do it by saying just 
deregulate, it will take care of itself. It’s not possible. 
 
So we’ve got though that $320,000 every train load going out of 
this province. What we have to do, Mr. Speaker, is keep that 
money here. You keep that money here . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . There he is, that member — I’ll tell you he 
talks a good game from his seat but when he gets up I’ll tell you 
there’s a void. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to keep that $320,000 here and you do 
it by diversifying. We’ve done it with this government by 
working in partnerships, by investing in the people of this 
province. Working in partnerships in the hog industry, pork 
central, a unit that works with the hog people by taking tax off 
intensive livestock operations, give the people a little bit of an 
advantage. 
 
We have worked with the bison industry. We’ve worked with 
the elk industry. In fact on Saturday night I was at the elk 
annual meeting in Saskatoon. That was the largest . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member 
from Watrous has as much right to put his views on the record 
as anyone else and anyone else will have the right to do so 
when he is finished. Right now the hon. member for Watrous 
has the floor and I would ask him to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have broadened 
our base. Elk — 500, over 500 people have an annual meeting 

in Saskatoon. The largest meeting of the elk industry in Canada 
except for the North American in Edmonton, where there are 
700. We’ve gone from 20 herds of elk in this province, in 
permits, to 300 in 10 years. It’s a tremendous growth in that 
industry. 
 
And we have to continue doing that, with bison, with spices, 
with chickens, with beef, with specialty crops, all of those. We 
have to build on the great infrastructure we have like the Prairie 
Swine Centre, the Beef Development Centre, the Co-op 
Development Centre, VIDO, which is the Veterinary Infectious 
Disease Organization that is leading, world-leading technology 
on animal serums, preventing disease. 
 
We have to build on those things that we have in this province. 
The biotech centre, which is going to allow us to be more 
flexible — because everybody’s on our tail. They’re trying to 
build . . . you know, grow a soy bean now that is comparable to 
canola oil. Will it come? Probably will, but by the time it comes 
we better be that much ahead of the game with some other 
developments in our canola oils to make it that much better. 
And we can do that here, and this government is working in 
partnership with industry, with private corporations, to make 
sure that happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the trick I believe, is to having investment in this 
province. And when I look at the industries like the hog 
industry, the beef industry, any of the livestock industries, we 
have to have money coming in. You have money coming into 
this province from out of province or from within, for 
investment. The next thing you have to do, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is secure that investment. And you secure the 
investment in the livestock industry in this province one way — 
and that’s by ensuring that the environmental aspects are taken 
care of. 
 
That is why we in Saskatchewan have the best environmental 
regulations in North America, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we’re 
going to continue that legacy and we’re going to improve them 
because you don’t have an industry unless your investment’s 
secure; you can’t secure your investment unless you take care of 
the environment, because the people all over this province have 
a right to make sure they have a good environment to live in 
and also have a good economy to live in by securing 
investments. Mr. Speaker, we do have the best system and 
we’re going to continue to build on it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know I’ve gone on a bit but I want to add 
just a couple more things. I want to talk to you, Mr. Speaker, 
about law and order. I want to talk about crime for a minute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you again this is not a black and 
white world like the opposition says it is. The hang ’em high 
Tories over there live in this black and white world I just say, 
just throw them in jail — just throw them in jail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, individuals are responsible for their crimes. Those 
who commit crimes should be and will be brought to justice. 
And there can be no excuse for crime — none whatsoever. 
 
People of this province have a basic right to live in peace. We 
all have a basic responsibility to respect that right of our fellow 
citizens, to live in peace. The breakdown in law and order, Mr. 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

Deputy Speaker, is intimately related to the breakup of cohesive 
communities and families. 
 
Canadians believe in a strong, supportive community and are 
committed to rebuilding and reclaiming the streets for all 
Canadians and this government is on track with that. This 
requires though, all of us to work together to defeat crime. We 
need a society prepared to act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and a 
criminal justice system that works. We can rebuild Canada’s 
communities without . . . rather we can’t rebuild the 
communities without some sense of shared responsibility. 
 
That’s what Canada has lost — the sense of shared 
responsibility. And this is what has manifested our social 
disintegration, this is what’s manifested in our social 
disintegration and the levels of crime we see around us. That 
sense of purpose will come about through developing new 
notions of citizenship where rights and responsibilities go hand 
in hand and where we see a creation of a strong and cohesive 
society that is backed up by individual efforts and 
responsibilities. 
 
There are three elements that constitute, I believe, a modern 
approach to tackling crime. First, it’s our duty as a society. 
Secondly, it’s our responsibility as an individual, and it’s the 
impact of the family. Mr. Speaker, it is largely from the family 
that social discipline and sense of responsibility is learned, a 
modern notion of society where rights and responsibilities go 
hand in hand. It requires nurturing. 
 
Out of families grow sets of communities; the family is the 
starting place. If Canada’s parents do their job in a very 
effective way, and if we as a society support that with all the 
mechanisms and enthusiastically support it with all the 
mechanisms, then we will reduce crime. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to be tough on crime. But we also 
have to be tough on the causes of crime. And this isn’t just a 
catch-phrase. It’s not just an empty slogan. It is sensible, an 
effective approach to combining a multifaceted strategy — 
personal responsibility, community action, punishment and 
prevention, condemnation and understanding; a criminal justice 
system and a society that works together and acts together to 
address a serious problem. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is how we’re going to combat crime. 
Not the black and white nature of the people opposite who went 
out there when somebody’s committed a crime, say hang ‘em 
high. Doesn’t work. We have to be tough on the toughened 
criminals, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we have to be tolerant of 
the troubled, because if we’re not tolerant of the troubled, Mr. 
Speaker, and take care of those people who can’t be taken care 
of and remould them — and remould them into honest, 
hardworking, dedicated citizens . . . And it can be done because 
it’s been proven over and over. 
 
We’d be tough on the toughened but tolerant of the troubled, 
Mr. Speaker. That is building a society that works to prevent 
crime — works together to make sure all the tools are necessary 
to prevent the causes of crime. 
 
I can’t stand, Mr. Speaker, when these oppositions over there 
paint this business of law and order in black and white, all for 

popular . . . populism, political benefit. Because, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not what this province is built on. Those are not the 
foundations of the society that we live in. The foundation of this 
society, Mr. Speaker, is built on common sense and tolerance 
and toughness and responsibility, not just to yourself but to your 
neighbours and your neighbours’ children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a black and white world, and I wish 
those people over there would stop calling it a black and white 
world. Well, Mr. Speaker, there they go again. One at a time 
they’re flopping back. Mr. Speaker, I want to end by saying a 
couple of things. I’ve never seen so many people say so much 
from their seat and so little from their feet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we invest in people to create an economy that 
works. We’re putting $1.72 billion in health care — $1.72 
billion in health care, the highest in the history of the province. 
And do you know where the Liberal leader was last night? He 
was out in Watrous trying to disrupt the meeting. And he got a 
very cool reception, by the way. 
 
But do you know what he said? Just more money; just say no 
and ask him for . . . demand more money. Okay. Well we’re 
spending more money that we’ve every spent in health care and 
he says spend more. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we spend another 
billion dollars on education while the Liberals and Tories say 
that’s not enough; just build more schools, just spend more on 
everything in the education system — just spend more money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these folks . . . I don’t know. Anyhow, 1.72 in 
health care, 1 billion on education — $2.72 billion. If you 
subtract the $770 million of interest we pay every year, that’s 
under $5 billion — under $5 billion — of spending in our 
budget. In health care and education we spend over 50 per cent 
of our budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And these people over there 
say spend more, spend more. 
 
Well I heard that in the 1980s. I’ll tell you, I heard that in 1980 
— spend, spend, spend. You know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
In the 1980s, that Tory government spent a billion dollars a year 
more than it took in from the people of this province — a 
billion dollars a year more than it took in. A billion on average, 
a billion dollar deficit every year. 
 
You know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Since 1991 when we 
took government, we’ve reduced that by over $300 million a 
year. And you know what? We’ve maintained our social safety 
nets. We’ve maintained our education system to the point where 
our children are scoring as high as any province in Canada. 
 
We’ve maintained a health care system that has changed but 
continues to be extremely effective. Mr. Speaker, we can’t have 
. . . And also we’ve reduced taxes every year. We’ve cut taxes 
and maintained the services and balanced the budget. 
 
But the folks over here, those want-to-be government over here, 
they say spend more, spend more, cut more taxes, and balance 
the budget. It’s not possible. It’s not possible because we saw it 
tried to be accomplished in the 1980s. You cannot do it. 
 
The Liberals, the Tories, Mr. Speaker, governing this province? 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

I say no thank you. I say no thank you because we have become 
a society that is pragmatic and it requires pragmatic 
government. We have supplied pragmatic government to this 
province where you protect the workers, where you help the 
farmers in rural communities, where you maintain education 
and social services and health care. 
 
We’ve protected our society through pragmatism. We’ve asked 
the people of this province to cooperate with us. They have 
responded by saying yes. When Mr. Melenchuk was up in 
Watrous, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and said spend more, you know 
what? He didn’t get one hand clap — not one hand clap. You 
know why? Because the people of this province understand 
pragmatism. The CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) was built on it under Tommy Douglas and it’s been 
maintained until today, where we have the best social programs. 
We’ve been able to convince the rest of Canada to implement a 
national child . . . There they go again, Mr. Speaker, I can’t 
understand it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the opposition have lots to say so I will 
give them that opportunity. But I want to say this before I take 
my seat: that with this budget, with continued tax cuts, we are 
going to continue on the road, the pragmatic path to prosperity 
that we’ve set out for this province. We have done it since 1991 
and I’ll predict that we’ll do it through budgets like this for a 
good many more years to come. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to have this opportunity to rise today and reply to the 
1998 budget address. It is important to recognize that the 
Minister of Finance’s budget reflect the priorities and the values 
of the NDP administration. It does not reflect the priorities and 
needs and values nor the hopes and aspirations of the tough and 
resilient people of Saskatchewan. And I use tough and I use 
resilient advisedly, Mr. Speaker, because to their credit, the 
people remaining in Saskatchewan have hung in there and 
survived the past seven years of this NDP administration. 
 
During the past seven years they have endured the merciless 
slashing, hacking, and dismembering of the health care system 
in the guise of reform. The dismantling of the education system, 
the disintegration of the road system, and stratospheric tax 
collections. They have seen the growth of child hunger and 
poverty as evidenced by the growing number of food banks in 
our province. 
 
Our people feel helpless in face of all of this but, Mr. Speaker, 
they are not without hope. 
 
(1600) 
 
Now the record of this government and the era of their 
provincial government is nothing to boast about, Mr. Speaker. It 
certainly does not merit the exaggerated praise heaped by the 
Minister of Finance on himself and the members opposite. And 
when this time and this government and their record are long 
past, what will remain enshrined in the memory — the 
collective memory — is the indomitable spirit of the stalwart 
people of Saskatchewan, a spirit that shone brightly in spite of 
the decadent activities of the ’90s NDP. 

Mr. Speaker, it is terribly unfortunate for all of us in 
Saskatchewan that the short-term tunnel vision of this NDP 
government has led them to nothing more than tactics 
improvised to make excuses for their lack of a broader vision; 
to make excuses for their mismanagement of the public purse; 
and to make excuses for their incompetence rather than them 
focusing on their own responsibility and lack of inspiration. 
These tactics have indeed demoralized the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Premier, yours have been an administration characterized 
by whining, complaining, and downloading. Mr. Speaker, first 
this government castigated the federal government for not 
getting its financial house in order and balancing its budget. 
And then when the federal government brought those 
expenditures under control, including transfer payments, the 
members opposite holler hypocritically about their loss, 
abandoning your responsibilities, and you proceeded to inflict 
far greater revenue losses on all municipalities, school boards, 
and health districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health care system in this province can best be 
described as being on life support and in dire need of 
resuscitation. And that is being charitable. People in this 
province live in a state of high anxiety fearing for their lives 
because of the interminable hospital lists. 
 
Seniors continue to be shuffled to distant nursing homes if they 
are able to access one. It is a shame, Mr. Speaker, that this has 
come to pass in Saskatchewan, the province that pioneered 
public universal health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care has long been touted as the Holy Grail 
of the NDP administration. Well there is something unholy and 
something unhealthy about the condition of this health care 
system. It is no longer a system that takes care of the sick and 
elderly. Dozens and dozens of hospitals have been shut down 
and hundreds of beds have been cut and hundreds of nurses laid 
off. 
 
Nurses in Saskatoon state that the patient care is at a breaking 
point and is a tragedy waiting to happen. The distances between 
health care facilities in rural Saskatchewan are ever expanding 
with people driving greater and greater distances over a very 
dangerous highway system. One more piece, Mr. Speaker, in 
the systematic dismantling of rural Saskatchewan by this 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ambulance drivers are panic stricken because they 
don’t know which hospital to take critically ill or injured 
patients to, or if there will be beds available when they arrive. 
And so, members opposite, this result, this so-called health care 
reform, are nothing more than month-long . . . have resulted in 
miles-long waiting lists of people who live in great pain and 
fear for their lives. People of Saskatchewan are hurting and they 
are angry as they realize the absence of any compassion by your 
government in this so-called reform. 
 
To paraphrase, Mr. Speaker, something is rotten in the state of 
health care in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, there is 
something unholy and unhealthy about the government’s 
attitude of defeating the very people who put them in office, 
regarding their fiscal management. 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

Before the shoulders of the members of the government 
benches get too sore from their constant self congratulatory 
backslapping for their fiscal powers, let’s look at the facts. We 
hear ad nauseam that the budget has been balanced, so how was 
it balanced? On the back of the members opposite? No. It was 
balanced on the back of the people of Saskatchewan. Let me 
count the ways, Mr. Speaker. Let me count the ways. 
 
Between 1991 and 1997 the total amount of tax revenue 
collected by the government increased from 1.9 billion to $3.1 
billion. Mr. Speaker, that is an increase of 57 per cent. I say 
again, Mr. Speaker, that is an increase of 57 per cent. 
 
In fact, the average family in Saskatchewan pays 54 per cent of 
their income to the various levels of government. That is no 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, because we have had taxes piled upon 
taxes piled upon taxes. We have the basic personal income tax, 
the high income surtax, debt reduction surtax, and the 2 per cent 
flat tax on net income and the 7 per cent sales tax, provincial 
sales tax. 
 
No wonder, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan incomes are flat 
and Saskatchewan people feel flattened by a tax burden that is 
piled higher and deeper than any other province except 
Newfoundland. And on top of that, there is a taxation through 
utility rates. A blatant example of that is the Messer 
reconstruction . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order! Now the Chair is having an 
awful time trying to hear the member from Humboldt. If the 
people would like to talk rather than holler across the floor they 
could maybe meet behind the bar and have their conversations 
back there. 
 
Ms. Julé: — And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, there is the 
taxation through utility rates. A blatant example of that is the 
Messer . . . Messer reconstruction charge, named for the newly 
departed but unlamented ex-CEO of SaskPower, John R. 
Messer, of Channel Lake, and forever enshrined in the taxpayer 
rip-off hall of fame. 
 
Between 1991 and 1997, Mr. Speaker, government monopolies 
such as SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SGI, and SaskTel rocketed 
their revenues from 2.4 billion to 3.4 billion, an increase of a 
cool $1 billion, Mr. Speaker — an increase of 37 per cent. 
 
In the context of this administration’s confiscatory tax regime 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you, sir. The 2 per cent 
reduction in the basic personal income tax, though better than 
nothing, is almost laughable. It does nothing to improve our 
competitive position versus our neighbouring provinces, 
Alberta and Manitoba. 
 
The Canadian Taxpayers Federation, in its pre-budget 
submission to the Minister of Finance, makes the observation 
that tax freedom day in Saskatchewan arrived on July 11 last 
year. Tax freedom day is the day that we quit working to pay 
taxes to government and start working for a living. 
 
In contrast, Mr. Speaker, the people in Friendly Manitoba get 
off the hook 19 days earlier, and in the Wild Rose Country of 
Alberta, 23 days earlier. Hard as it is to believe, Mr. Speaker, 
the average family in Saskatchewan works an additional 3 

weeks per year to pay for their taxes compared to our provincial 
neighbours. And it is no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that according to 
the Saskatchewan Bureau of Statistics’ most recent figures, over 
1,700 more people left Saskatchewan in the first three-quarters 
of last year than arrived from other provinces. 
 
Clearly, clearly, Mr. Speaker, the state of the Saskatchewan 
economy is not what it is cracked up to be by the members 
opposite. It is not difficult to balance a budget when you tax the 
living daylights out of everything and everybody in sight, 
download on municipalities, school boards and health boards, 
and receive $834 million in transfers from the federal 
government. 
 
And now we see a whopping increase of $280 million in 
equalization payments from the feds from last year. A 900 per 
cent increase reflecting the fact that in spite of the incessant 
boasting by this administration over its management of the 
economy, Saskatchewan is still a have-not province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is again reflected in the many social ills 
besetting our province. High rates of child poverty, the highest 
infant mortality rate in the entire nation, uncounted and 
uncountable teen suicides, high teenage pregnancy rates, child 
prostitution, and hunger resulting in the continued and 
increasing need for food banks. And, Mr. Premier, in spite of 
your much touted prosperity, there are still close to 80,000 
people on social assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the ugliest blights on Saskatchewan’s 
society and on our collective conscience is the sexual abuse of 
children. In particular, sexual abuse in the form of child 
prostitution by child molesters. We have not and are not doing 
nearly enough to eradicate this cancerous sore. And to the 
Minister of Social Services I say we have a floating brothel in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Recently in Saskatoon a child had been held for three months in 
a basement by pimps for the purpose of using her for the 
prostitution trade. Police could not even go in though they had 
been notified of the situation. The only thing that police and 
communities in Saskatchewan have the right to do is to notify a 
social worker about such circumstances.  
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these are dangerous situations in need of 
immediate action by police who are most often better equipped 
to take urgent action on site. Mr. Speaker, if we are serious 
about dealing with this appalling situation, the province should 
undertake the following measures. 
 
The province should fully develop prevention and early 
intervention strategies to help children who may be at risk as 
victims of sexual and physical abuse by becoming involved in 
prostitution. 
 
The government should provide pathways of support. It should 
empower the police to assist children in danger of being 
solicited for the purpose of prostitution. To place the children in 
a safe place, out of chaos, and stabilize for up to 72 hours until 
assessment and placement has taken place. 
 
It should enact provincial legislation that would inject a 
stay-away order restraining anyone who interferes with the 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

healing process of victims of child prostitution. Anyone who 
threatens in any way the healing while it is taking place should 
be subject to a $25,000 fine. 
 
(1615) 
 
The province should provide police with the authority to search 
a place where they believe a child is being held by pimps or any 
perpetrators of this crime for the purpose of engaging in child 
prostitution activities. Presently to my knowledge, in 
Saskatchewan, there is no provision for this. 
 
I have introduced a Bill, Mr. Speaker, to accomplish these 
essential steps to effect protection for sexually abused children. 
And I trust, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill will receive all parties’ 
support for a vital cause that transcends all partisan politics. No 
one is exempt from being responsible for the well-being of our 
children. If any one of us should ignore this responsibility, we 
should reflect on the words of William Pitt the Younger when 
he urged the abolition of the slave trade. And I quote, Mr. 
Speaker, “How shall we hope to obtain forgiveness for those 
enormous evils we have committed.” 
 
Earlier this week, Mr. Speaker, I had a discussion with Regina 
Mayor Archer about the sexual abuse of children through child 
prostitution. It is interesting that Mayor Archer, along with 
many others, are referring to sexual abuse through the 
prostitution trade as a form of slavery — and that is exactly 
what it is. What is wrong with a government that will tolerate 
and accept this modern day slavery? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s announcement last week of 
initiatives it’s taking towards building independence is to be 
applauded. The Canadian child tax benefit and the national 
child supplements based on the number of children in a family 
and the family income is indeed a step in the right direction. It 
is a stepping-stone to building independence and experiencing 
the pride and self-fulfilment that comes with the work ethic and 
a sense of interdependence. It is most appropriate to thank the 
federal government for that benefit. 
 
The employment supplement benefit and additional health 
benefits will hopefully ensure that people will be better off 
financially than if they were on social assistance. The drug, 
optometrist, emergency ambulance, medical supplies, and 
chiropractic services are benefits that are most welcome for the 
children of Saskatchewan. 
 
To reiterate, Mr. Speaker, the child benefit initiatives 
announced last week are indeed a welcome improvement. These 
initiatives are long overdue and only begin to remedy the array 
of deeply rooted social problems I previously referred to. 
 
I do have a number of concerns with the initiatives and I’m 
going to state them here today. I note that under the family 
health benefit, many parents will be eligible only for drug 
coverage which would include a hundred dollar semi-annual 
deductible and a 35 per cent consumer co-payment thereafter. 
This may not be sufficient. In effect if parents are ill and they 
cannot afford the needed medication, their children will 
ultimately suffer. Children need their parents to be healthy, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that they are healthy. 
 

Another concern I have is in regards to the Youth Futures pilot 
project in Prince Albert. This program restricts eligibility from 
18- to 20-year-olds. There are many men and women over that 
age, Mr. Speaker, in their 20’s and 30’s who are trying to 
provide for a family and who are struggling to access training 
and employment opportunities. They are excluded from this 
opportunity and are forced to remain on social assistance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the provincial training allowance program 
appears to ignore employment realities. There are already cited 
instances of persons who have entered the program and 
completed the academics side only to be told that there are no 
job placements presently available. This is discouraging and 
unfair to those who enrol, Mr. Speaker. There needs to be more 
factual assessments done with employers and business places 
on the availability of spaces for job placements. In order for the 
program to be successful it is essential that job placement be 
initiated concurrently with or immediately after completion of 
academic training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other group of people that I am greatly 
concerned about are single women between the age of 55 and 
60. This is the group with the highest poverty rate. These people 
have very little chance of accessing jobs. They are not eligible 
for training and they cannot access their pensions yet. Their 
plight, Mr. Speaker — their plight has been overlooked as has 
the plight of the disabled. 
 
Those who are disabled and on assistance that have no children 
and no opportunity to be self-employed are not able to access 
any of the options in the redesigned social assistance program. 
These disabled persons have not had their rate of assistance 
increased either. 
 
One other point that has been circumvented and should be noted 
by the Premier, his government, and the minister responsible 
regarding the employment supplement program, is that it cannot 
be accessed unless people are employed. And we all know that 
meaningful employment is in short supply in Saskatchewan at 
present. 
 
People will not be able to get jobs, Mr. Speaker, unless we 
focus on wealth creation through lower taxes and fees, lower 
utility rates and lessening of regulatory burden. 
 
Workman’s compensation, Mr. Speaker, and occupational 
health and safety regulations and costs must come in line with 
Alberta and Manitoba to ease the burden of existing and 
perspective employers, and the Crown Corporations Tendering 
Agreement should be terminated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that excessive regulations restrict 
growth and cause financial burdens, resulting in no start-up, no 
investment business climate, and economic stagnation. The end 
result is no new jobs. And, Mr. Speaker, the scorched earth rule 
policies of this government appear to be deliberately designed 
to lay waste to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
My constituents tell me what is needed and they have been 
saying it for a number of years. They say they need financial 
support for farmers to set up short-line railways. They need an 
accelerated road repair program, accessible rural health care, a 
moratorium on school closures, and proper funding for 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

education. They need the restoration of municipal funding to 
former levels. They need job opportunities for young people 
other than part-time, dead end, minimum wage jobs. They want 
you to get rid of the policies that restrict and constrict business 
initiatives. 
 
Mr. Premier, the budget didn’t deliver on any of these. This 
administration has betrayed the faith of rural Saskatchewan. 
The rural roads are strewn with broken promises like so many 
potholes. And where are the VLT (video lottery terminal) 
revenues that municipalities were promised? 
 
Last year municipal revenue sharing was reduced by 29 million. 
This year when SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) was asking for $56 million for their 
revenue-sharing pools, the Minister of Finance provided a 
measly $3 million. How many miles of roads does the minister 
think that will repair or rebuild? One wonders if the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs carries any clout in cabinet. 
 
On the education front, Mr. Premier, you are slowly but surely 
dismantling the rural school system. Rural residents of 
Saskatchewan have serious worries about the distances their 
children are now forced to travel and the stress it places on their 
lives. And they are certainly concerned about the declining 
resources that diminish the quality of education in larger, 
post-secondary educations. 
 
It is sad but true, that what rural people have come to expect 
from this government are closed facilities, lower quality 
services, and higher costs. Perhaps this is a reflection of the 
fact, Mr. Premier, that you hold hardly any rural seats and don’t 
expect to win any in the next election, and therefore, don’t 
much care. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, you seem to lack comprehension of your 
very words issued through the throne speech that communities 
are the bedrock of Saskatchewan. Your statement, if you 
believe what you are saying, does not match the reality of your 
absence of support for communities. 
 
To sum up, Mr. Speaker, the only reason the budget is balanced 
is by sleight of hand in the form of federal equalization 
payments, revenue transfers from the Crowns, and ruinous 
income tax collection. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Premier, you have managed the economy about 
as well as you have managed the Guyana, Channel Lake, and 
the Messer severance mess. Worst of all, our debt is being 
addressed through borrowed money. And you have failed to 
harness the unlimited wealth of our human and natural 
resources. And that is why Saskatchewan is still a have-not 
province. And that is why we cannot celebrate either our social 
or economic growth. 
 
And for these reasons, I cannot support the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m proud to 
stand in this Assembly and give my support to a budget which 
has given the people of Saskatchewan a feeling of confidence, a 
feeling of comfort as we approach the new millennium. 

The prior speaker — I don’t know where she’s living. Good 
grief! The United Nations has stated that Saskatchewan is the 
best place in the world to live. If this is the case, where is she 
living? We’re not sure. 
 
Let’s take a look at the economics. What do credit companies, 
what do the credit rating things do? What have they done with 
the credit rating of Saskatchewan? It went up. Just like the 
Telemiracle — it goes up, up, up. But we don’t need a miracle, 
because we have sound fiscal policies which those people do 
not know of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this budget, Investing in People: 
Building on the Momentum, concentrates on job growth; 
stronger, safer, healthier communities; financial freedom and a 
prosperous future; and strong fiscal management. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the fifth consecutive budget of this government. A 
remarkable feat attesting to the perseverance and the resiliency 
of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day when the Minister of Social Services 
introduced the new building independence, investing in people 
plan, for Saskatchewan people it was one of the proudest days 
in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is the first new legislation of 
social assistance in 30 years. When the minister said that this 
legislation would stand social assistance on its head, he knew 
what he was talking about. This government wants to reduce 
dependence on social assistance, not by cutting benefits as some 
other provinces have done, but — and this is so important, I 
hope the member opposite is listening — it gave families a 
choice that makes economic sense. 
 
Thousands of families across the province will benefit from this 
strategy over time. The objectives are to reduce the depth of 
child and family poverty, to decrease dependence on social 
assistance, to reduce the trend towards generational social 
assistance dependence, enhance the accountability of the social 
assistance program. 
 
And what’s so exciting about this program is that it’s geared to 
the children and families, the cornerstone of any society. Mr. 
Speaker, statistics show that in Canada we have a staggering 
number of children living in poverty. And what is even more 
frightening is that the rate is growing. This new program will 
assist not only those on welfare, but it’s geared also to those 
children of the low income family. Depending on the income of 
the family these children will be provided with free health 
services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is to be commended for its 
insight, its compassion, its dedication to all people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier that this blight 
of child poverty in this richly endowed country is a damning 
indictment. I also mentioned the alarming rate at which it is 
rising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I truly believe that ours is the correct philosophy, 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

the correct path to help eradicate this blight. This is not 
Alabama North, this is not a one-way bus ticket out of the 
province, this is not workfare as advocated by Tories. This is a 
compassionate, realistic, meaningful program to alleviate a 
growing concern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the rate of increase in child poverty 
in this province is growing at a rate of 7 per cent, a statistic that 
I am not very proud of. But, Mr. Speaker, the rate of growth in 
child poverty in Tory-rich Alberta has grown by 34 per cent, 
while Tory Ontario has an unforgivable growth rate of 99 per 
cent — 99 per cent. 
 
And guess what the Tory plans are? Presently they are 
negotiating with a private American company to take over 
control of this issue. Estimates vary, but this company expects 
this contract will have a net profit of well over $180 million — 
$180 million on the backs of the poor. Once a Tory, always a 
Tory. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget also addresses the issue of safe 
communities. The Young Offenders Act has been on the minds 
of many people lately. This is a federal Act but this government 
has made several proposals regarding young offenders. They 
are as follows: 
 

We have proposed tougher sentencing for young offenders 
convicted of serious violent crimes. 
 
Youths who commit violent crimes such as murder, 
attempted murder, manslaughter, or aggravated sexual 
assault should usually be dealt with in an adult court. 
 
And the names of these serious young offenders would be 
released once they were convicted if, in so doing, it would 
help the public in the opinion of the court. 
 
Public protection should be the first principle of the Young 
Offenders Act. 
 

(1630) 
 
But what we must remember though, that most of our kids who 
come in contact with the young offender system don’t 
re-offend. The Premier stated in one of his speeches: I believe 
these proposals speak to the glaring weaknesses of the current 
young offender system while protecting its strengths. The 
public has the right to be protected from serious violent 
offenders. The public also has the right to attack the causes of 
youth crime. And that’s what we’re going to do. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the most important part to remember 
of all of this is that most of our kids are good kids. The vast 
majority of them — the ninety-nine and a half per cent — are 
doing their homework. They are playing hockey. They are 
taking part in various activities. Their worst offence is probably, 
as the Premier said, that they think their folks are a little behind 
the times. And they’re probably right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province is a trading province and relies 
heavily on transportation to carry its goods to market. Last year 

this government made a 10-year $2.5 billion commitment to 
Saskatchewan’s road and highway system. This year’s budget 
has set a goal to repair or resurface 3,600 kilometres of roads 
and highways — a distance equivalent from Saskatoon to 
Quebec City. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also begun to twin the remainder of 
national Highway No. 1. Our commitment is to complete the 
twinning of No. 1 and the Yellowhead within 14 years. Too 
long, the Tories cry. Let’s see a five-year plan, scream the 
Liberals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I truly wish that the Liberals would use their 
influence — if they have any — to convince their cousins in 
Ottawa to advance this national cause. The Tories remain quiet, 
and rightly so. Who sold all the highway equipment at fire sale 
prices? What we could have done if they would have not done 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today in a rapidly changing world all governments 
must demonstrate a new vision for national transportation that 
links us together as a nation and is so vital for our economic 
health. North-south trade is becoming more important than 
east-west interprovincial trade. And that’s a sad commentary on 
this nation building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a national vision on Canadian 
transportation but I have little faith in any Liberal vision as they 
remain a government of no policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our roads and highways will be completed on time 
within budget and without reduction in other health areas . . . 
other areas. 
 
I’d like to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to spend a few minutes 
on the health. We hear so much about how this health system 
has deteriorated and how we are not . . . that we are not taking 
proper care of the health system. I’ve stated in this House many, 
many times and with a great deal of pride, but it bears repeating 
that the south-west Saskatchewan was health region no. 1. A 
model first for the province, and then for all of Canada. 
 
Our investment this year in health care was increased by $88 
million, and yet the member from Humboldt states that we 
should have put in a lot more. Already our Health budget is 
$1.7 billion and amounts to 33 per cent of our budget. Health 
care received almost half of all the new spending in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, could our health program be improved? Of course. 
Could we afford pharmacare? Of course, if we got a little bit of 
help from the federal government. And even Allan Rock, the 
federal Minister of Health, concurs if they would increase their 
funding just a little bit. What would happen if they increased it 
to 40 per cent from the paltry 13 per cent which they now do? 
 
The sad part about all of this though, Mr. Speaker, is not the 
funding. Provinces like Alberta are thinking seriously of 
dropping out of this national program. If they drop out of this 
national program, what will happen to the standard of care in all 
of the other provinces? Within Alberta we would have private 
health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I plead — I plead earnestly — that the opposition 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

would join us in asking the federal cousins to increase their 
funding in this important area but it’ll probably fall on deaf 
ears. 
 
But hope springs eternally in the human heart. We will continue 
to work with health districts and health professionals to secure a 
publicly funded modern health system for our children and our 
grandchildren. 
 
Contrast this with the Tories who would introduce a two-tier — 
or as the member from Redberry said, three-tier, all-tier system 
— one for the rich and the other for you and me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, “The Doctor is Not In” is an essay by Ronald 
Glasser, a medical doctor, which appeared in Harper’s 
magazine in March 1998. I wish that all of the opposition would 
take time just to read the synopsis of it. Glasser is an 
Minneapolis pediatrician and the author of several books on 
health care in the United States. In this essay, he describes the 
health care and how it is with the private plan. And he states: 
one hundred and sixty point three million of us (and he’s talking 
about the doctors) now find ourselves held captive to a 
corporate health care system that earns $952 billion a year but 
can’t afford the luxury of a conscience or a heart. 
 
This is the type that these people opposite are advocating in line 
with this tone and temper of the time, 2,300 Massachusetts 
physicians in December of last year signed a despairing 
manifesto in The Journal of the American Medical Association, 
and they state: 
 

The time we are allowed to spend with the sick shrinks 
under the pressure to increase through-put as though we 
were dealing with industrial commodities rather than 
afflicted human beings. Physicians and nurses are being 
prodded by threats and bribes to advocate allegiance to 
patients and to shun the sickest, who may be unprofitable. 
Some of us risk being fired or de-listed for giving or even 
discussing expensive services, and many are offered 
bonuses for minimizing care. 

 
Is that the kind of system we want to see in Saskatchewan? Is 
this the kind we want to see in Canada? There is no way that we 
want to see this type of system, and yet our opposition would 
say that we should go with this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I have a few other things with regards to it but I 
want to just make one other thing. An average doctor in the 
United States on average in 1995 roughly got $250,000 — not a 
bad sum. But the sums dwindle into pittance when compared 
with the earnings of the executives of these companies. These 
CEOs have a salary of up to $10 million. They’re not doctors. 
They run this corporation and those $10 million were taken 
away from those people who need it — the sick. 
 
And if this is the type of system which the Tories want to talk 
about I hope that they do, and I hope that they say it loud and 
clear that they want this two-tier system because we will defeat 
them each and every day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this party will never, ever allow 
these people to privatize health care. Mr. Speaker, we hear all 
kinds of hollering from opposite because they finally realized 
that they’ve heard some of the truths about private health care. I 
would hope that this would sink through to them. I have not got 
much faith. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another topic which has been in . . . that we’ve 
been hearing a little bit about is the Crowns. Now the Crowns 
play a vital role in our province’s economy and in the lives of 
Saskatchewan people. The four major Crowns in the six major 
investments account for 17 per cent of the Saskatchewan gross 
domestic product, or approximately 4.2 billion, and 9 per cent 
of the employment in Saskatchewan. That’s a large part of our 
economy. And we are so proud of that, and so are the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The Saskatchewan people take great pride in the service which 
is provided by the Crowns. The cost for these services are either 
the lowest or the second lowest throughout all of Canada. And 
that is a proven fact. The Crowns provide the people with a 
reliable service at a reasonable cost. Even with rates that are 
among the lowest in Canada, our Crown corporations earn 
profits that are comparable to privately owned outlets in other 
provinces. The only difference is that the money goes back to 
the people in Saskatchewan. It doesn’t go to London, Zurich, 
and New York. 
 
Half of these profits are taken from the Crowns to pay for 
capital expenditures which are needed to provide services to our 
children, our grandchildren in Saskatchewan. The other half of 
the profits provide a dividend to Crown Investments 
Corporation, which we all know as CIC. 
 
Some of this money is used to fund the remaining costs of 
megaproject investments, thanks to the former Tory 
administration who left a legacy of near bankruptcy for this 
great province. The remainder of the dividends become part of 
the General Revenue Fund and are used to help pay for health, 
education, and highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some Crowns have been active in other countries 
for about 10 years. There have been some successes, and there 
have been some failures. But overall, these activities have 
generated over $100 million in profits, not for the money barons 
in London, New York, or Zurich, but for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Every dollar earned in the other countries is a dollar that does 
not have to come from Saskatchewan ratepayers. Mr. Speaker, 
these Crowns provide many jobs in this province. Just imagine 
what would occur if the Crowns were privatized, as the Tories 
would do if they had the opportunity. 
 
Why just the other day the real leader of the Tories, the member 
from Kindersley, stated that if — and thank goodness it’s a 
mighty big if — if they formed governments, the Crowns would 
be gone at the snap of his fingers. Sold to his free-wheeling 
friends at fire sale prices. 
 
A comment by the member from Melfort-Tisdale regarding the 
privatization of part or all of the Crowns strikes fear in the 
hearts of the citizens of Saskatchewan. Following the advice of 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

big corporations, they would sell off the Crowns at fire sale 
prices and profits would flow in a gushing torrent out of this 
province. 
 
Just imagine the social upheaval that would be created in just 
selling off one of these Crowns. Thousands of high-paying jobs 
would disappear. The dislocation of citizens would bring utter 
chaos to this province. Do they really believe that the head 
office, which employ over 3,000 workers, would remain in 
Saskatchewan? Dream along. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they offer an alternative. An alternative of social 
dislocation, utter chaos, and the revenue loss of hundreds of 
millions of dollars. Is this the vision of this party of 
opportunistic politicians spawned in the murky depths of 
midnight? I say, and the people who echo the same sentiments, 
pooh on this party, pooh on their plans to sell the Crowns — 
this party of opportunistic politicians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now Mr. Speaker, this is not the vision of this 
government. It is not the vision of the people of Saskatchewan, 
and they will never forget this renegade mob of politicians who 
were inspired divinely and who, like that former administration, 
will bring this province to the brink of bankruptcy and would 
replicate this heinous plot. 
 
The Tories opposite honestly and fervently believe that 
government has no part to play in business. Big business will 
create jobs and this will alleviate any and all social issues. 
Medicare will be handled by private insurance companies, who 
I’ve just showed in the United States who reap huge 
multimillion profits on the backs of the sick. Welfare will be 
operated by private firms, again making obscene profits on the 
back of the poorest of the poor. Education will not be universal, 
free, and a stepping-stone for the masses, but a system catering 
to the rich, while the poor folks will be relegated to remain in 
the lower stratum with little or no hope for advancement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sound far fetched? Let’s take a look at what the 
huge multinational corporations which the Tories favour have 
planned for the wealthy nations of the OECD (Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development). For three years these 
members, encouraged and abetted by our federal government, 
have been meeting secretly — sound familiar? — to set up an 
organization by which investment will flow freely between 
nation states without any regard to labour standards, no regards 
to culture, no regards to safety nets, health care, and universal 
education. A banquet for a few, and abject poverty for the 
masses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the MAI, the multilateral agreement on 
investment, as presently drawn up, is not designed to ensure 
that the rights and freedoms of the world’s people are held by 
democratically elected governments. It is bluntly speaking, a 
charter of rights and freedoms for corporations only. A charter 
to be guaranteed by national governments in the interest of 
profitable transnational investment. It is meant to protect and 
benefit corporations, not citizens. It endows privately owned 
corporations with the power of nation states, without the 

accountability of national government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that we must do everything we possibly 
can to oppose the MAI as it is presently structured. As Murray 
Dobbin states in his book, The Myth of the Good Corporate 
Citizen, corporations do evil to the public, to the environment, 
and to democracy itself. Corporations are usurping the role of 
government, he says. His specific complaint is that so-called 
transnational corporations have persuaded governments to sign 
on to the multilateral agreement on investment, a proposal that 
levels the playing-field for international investment and capital 
movement. I say we have to oppose this with everything that we 
can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Education minister talked about the education 
funding which has been released and so forth. I’m not going to 
dwell on that except to say that we have started a trend and we 
are committed to where we will as a government pay more for 
education as the circumstances warrant. Our government has 
acknowledged that the provincial share of K to 12 operating 
costs has been steadily declining to the point where it is just 
under 40 per cent in 1997-98. But we have said our objective is 
to reverse that trend, and this is the start of that trend, albeit 
very small, but it is a start. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on March 25 the member from Kindersley 
ranted and raved about fiscal mismanagement of this 
government. But what those Tories forgot to mention was that 
citizens of Saskatchewan have paid — and are still paying — 
millions of dollars in interest because of the fiscal 
mismanagement of the Devine Tory government. Seven 
hundred to $800 million each and every year, a total of over 
$5.5 billion, has been spent on interest alone since 1992. Don’t 
talk to us about fiscal mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this sum is equal to more than this year’s budget. 
Just imagine what $700 million a year would do. It would build 
many kilometres of highways. It would replace many buildings 
on the campuses. It would provide many bursaries for the young 
people, social housing for the needy, and additional schools. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister for Property 
Management Corporation. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much. And thank you 
also to the members for giving leave. I would like to take the 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to the members of the 
Assembly a number of guests seated in your gallery. Some of 
them are former colleagues of mine from the credit union back 
in Meadow Lake who are down here on a training course this 
past week. 
 
I will introduce them one at a time. Gloria Harris is on the far 
right. Beside her is Charlene Villeneuve, Jolene Dyck, and 
beside her is Jenny Zuchotski, and then also Angela La Brash 
who works here in the Legislative Building. If all members 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1998 

would join me in welcoming them here to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seven hundred to $800 
million each and every year — that’s what we’re paying in 
interest. Two million dollars a day because of the 
mismanagement that we had in the former Tory administration. 
This sum is equal to more than this year’s budget, and it would 
supply us with many social programs. 
 
The Tories opposite are attempting to convince the citizens to 
support them, and their fiscal management will save the best 
interests of the people. Let’s just quickly review how the 
members opposite would have performed on two of the last 
transactions of this government. First the Conservatives yelled 
and screamed — no, they ranted and raved, tore out their hair 
— because we would not sell our interest in the Lloydminster 
upgrader for 7 cents on the dollar. And do you know why they 
opposed . . . they wanted us to do it? Because Alberta was 
doing it and Alberta knows how to do big business. And so 
Alberta went ahead and they did it and they lost their shirt. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ask them how much the NOVA 
Corporation lost — $500 million. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Exactly. As the member stated, Alberta lost $500 
million. What did we do? Well at 7 cents if we would have sold 
it, we would have realized $20 million. Now that’s a lot of 
money. However we sold a few years later — hang on to the 
seats of your pants you people over there, you financial gurus 
— we sold it for a net gain of $310 million. Much better than 
the 20. A net gain of around $250 million — not too shabby a 
transaction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next the Liberals and the Tories demanded, 
absolutely demanded, that we sell our Cameco shares for 
approximately $18 per share. This would have brought in, this 
would have brought in $180 million. Now that is a real lot of 
money. Instead, later we sold 10 million shares for 
approximately $73 per share and garnered over 700 million. 
That’s right, 700 million for a difference of — hang on to your 
hats you financial wizards — 500 million for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these two examples illustrate the 
careful planning of the members opposite and what they would 
have done. 
 
In addition to the above, the fixing of Tory deals of the ’80s, 
such as the Weyerhaeuser deal, 150 million saved; NewGrade 
Upgrader, 600 million worth of taxpayers’ money at stake 
amounts to savings of — don’t blink — of $1.5 billion. Mr. 
Speaker, maybe someone could have done better on the 
Channel Lake deal, but I tell you this, but I tell you this, I 
wouldn’t give the members opposite the opportunity to deal 
with my $50 weekly allowance, no siree. I would not trust them 
with that. I would lose. 

Mr. Speaker, who are these new Tories? I would like to 
congratulate the member from Kindersley and his three 
henchmen and the beautiful snow job they gave in convincing 
the four former Liberals to join this group of political 
opportunists. Mr. Speaker, what is so sad is not that they moved 
— that isn’t the sad part — but that they gave up their 
principles, their compassion, and their honour for a political 
opportunity. This unholy alliance spawned in the murky depths 
of the night lacks credibility, it lacks honour, it lacks honesty, 
and it lacks truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, a party of opportunistic politicians. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the citizens of Saskatchewan will say . . . 
you know what they will say to this party of opportunistic 
politicians. Mr. Speaker, how could anyone trust these 
opportunists? Last Thursday we were treated to an extreme 
victory, all by the member from Kindersley, who ahead of time 
— and this is the way the House operates — had agreed to a 
plan. And his promise was that there would be ample time for 
the minister from Regina . . . or the member from 
Regina-Victoria, to give his judicious delivery. Well this sounds 
like a minor thing, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not really a minor thing 
— but let’s say it’s a minor thing. 
 
How could anyone in this group . . . how could anyone trust this 
group with major decisions when they will not keep their word 
even on a minor thing like this? Because, Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan will recognize them for what they are 
and will echo the same sentiments — this party of opportunistic 
politicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the leadership race 
presently being run by the Tories — an interesting scenario. 
This is the party which is hoping that a white knight on a black 
steed will lead them out of the darkness of night from whence 
they came. When the first knight declined their pleas and 
urging, the race was on. 
 
Who are the candidates? Well, Mr. Speaker, true to form this 
Tory Party has a Tory, it has a former Liberal, and it has a 
Reform artist vying for this unenviable position. Mr. Speaker, a 
leadership race is a time for rallying the troops, a time to let the 
public know the principles — if any — of the party, of 
consolidating and the reaffirming of the platform of the party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this leadership is not being held in a legion hall in 
Saskatchewan, it’s not being held in an Elks hall, it’s not being 
held at the Centre of the Arts in Regina or Saskatoon, it’s not 
being held in the phone booth — but it’s being held in our 
mailbox. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Whether it’s a personal mailbox, a legal mailbox. 
And what’s that other mail that they don’t deliver any more? 
Junk mail. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, all of the above is irrelevant, as the member 
from Kindersley has already anointed the next leader, the 
candidate who was defeated in the last federal election and who 
will be defeated in the next provincial election despite the 



April 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

support of the member from Kindersley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the main thrust of this budget was to 
be fiscally prudent. We will not spend more than we have 
received, we will reduce taxes when it is feasible and 
sustainable, and we will lessen our children’s mortgage as much 
as possible by reducing the horrendous debt left by the former 
Tory administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I appeal to all members, on the basis of 
compassion, care, and cooperation, that all members of this 
House would stand to support our program for building 
independence, investing in people; our program for increasing 
the funding for health; our program for increasing educational 
funding; our program for tax relief; our program for debt 
reduction; and our program for job creation. 
 
However, I am not so naïve as to believe that the members 
opposite will find it in their hearts to support the poor, the 
young, the elderly, the ill — those members of society who so 
desperately need our support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that all of the New Democrats will support 
this enlightened budget and that the vast majority of 
Saskatchewan citizens will endorse this plan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair would just like to check with the 
hon. member for a moment. In the noise in the House, I 
couldn’t tell, did he move adjournment of debate? 
 
Mr. Wall: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I would adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................375 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................375 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................375 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................375 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................375 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................375 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................375 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................375 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................375 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................375 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................376 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................376 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................376 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................376 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................376 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................376 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................376 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................403 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 New Nova Scotia Political Party 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................377 
 Future Plans for Plains Health Centre 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................377 
 Statements on Party Membership 
  Whitmore...................................................................................................................................................................................377 
 Peewee Hockey Championships 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................377 
 The Arrival of Spring 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................377 
 Humboldt Speed Skater’s Record-breaking Performance 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................378 
 Signs of Spring 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................378 
 Saskatchewan Country Music Awards Night 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................378 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................378 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................379 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................380 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................380 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................381 
 Health Care Costs for Accident Victim 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................381 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................381 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................381 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................382 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................382 
 Tax Relief 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................383 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................383 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................383 
 
 



 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................383 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................386 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................389 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................397 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................400 
 


