





























































Hansard: March 20, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 217 
 March 20, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 
regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from the 
communities of Spalding and Annaheim. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 
regardless of their heritage. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 
regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved with the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
the town of Rose Valley, and Wadena. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 

regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And these petitioners come from Quill Lake, Saskatoon, 
Watson. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise as well with a petition 
on behalf of Saskatchewan people. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and the wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 
regardless of heritage. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, 
Regina, and rural areas around there. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present on night hunting: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 
regardless of their heritage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Quill Lake, 
Saskatoon, Watson, and Englefeld. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have a petition 
to present today on behalf of people in Saskatchewan. This 
petition surrounds the whole issue of hunting at night — a very 
serious issue, as you know. And I’m pleased to present the 
petition on their behalf today. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of the province, and the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the community of Coronach. I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
today to present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1998 

by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the residents of 
Coronach. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I also present a petition on behalf 
of the good citizens of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by 
the good people from Neudorf and Lemberg. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues today to bring forward petitions also in regards to 
the Plains hospital here in Regina. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from the Bracken and Frontier area of the province and this 
definitely would bring it over the hundred thousand that have 
been submitted to date. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out the time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project with or without federal assistance. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These folks, Mr. Speaker, are basically from all across the 
province, some from Saskatoon, Maple Creek, and all around. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to cause the 

government to halt investments in foreign countries by all 
Saskatchewan Crown corporations; to cause the 
government to reach necessary agreements to fund the 
twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; to act to save the 
Plains Health Centre; to end the practice of night hunting; 
to cancel severance payments to Jack Messer, and to call 
an independent inquiry into Channel Lake. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure on 
behalf of the member from Regina Elphinstone, to introduce to 
you and through you to all members in the Assembly, a group 
of 16 students from grade 11 and 12 economics class at Martin 
Collegiate. I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, they are interested in what 
was contained in the budget yesterday and would be looking at 
the benefits of balancing budgets. 
 
I’d like to also note that among the students, Mr. Speaker, is an 
exchange student from Durben, South Africa, and her name is 
Shann Burchell. They are here today, Mr. Speaker, with their 
teacher, Peter Flasko. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me in giving them a warm 
welcome on this day of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to my colleagues in the legislature on 
behalf of our colleague, the member from Yorkton, seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 11 students from the Grace Bible 
Christian School in Yorkton, Saskatchewan. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Kerri Payne, and their 
chaperons, Pastor & Mrs. Jim Bellis. 
 
I hope that they will enjoy the proceedings today and I look 
forward to meeting with them later on this morning. Please join 
me in extending a warm welcome. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to this Assembly the lady who keeps my office on 
track. Seated in your gallery is Colleen Smith, my constituency 
assistant. She is a former teacher so please be on your best 
behaviour. Please welcome her to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Day to End All Racism 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I rise 
today in the Assembly with some mixed emotions about the 
International Day to End All Racism, which is tomorrow — 
mixed emotions, Mr. Speaker, because it pains me to know we 
have failed to rid our world of this hatred which is sometimes 
manifested in words and sometimes in violence. Either form, 
Mr. Speaker, leaves permanent scars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we look back over our history, many horrific 



March 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

acts have been committed in the name of racial intolerance. As 
a human race we must never forget the loss of human life 
caused by the Holocaust or the loss of human dignity inflicted 
by slavery in all parts of the world. We must never forget and 
we must never become complacent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tomorrow I am sure many will ask themselves, 
will we ever triumph over racial hatred and violence? I believe 
we will. But, Mr. Speaker, the only way it will happen is for 
each and every one of us to be responsible for our own words 
and actions. Mr. Speaker, I would challenge all of the members 
of this Assembly, as leaders of this province, to adopt a policy 
of zero tolerance with respect to racial discrimination of any 
form. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Quality Health Care 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan was 
the birthplace of medicare. Yesterday’s budget reflects and 
builds on the parental responsibility we feel towards health 
care. We expect that our health care system will be top quality 
and there when we need it. 
 
This year’s budget helps to ensure that our health care system is 
able to meet the challenges it faces. Challenges like improving 
technology. Challenges like an ageing population. Challenges 
like increased demand for services. Compared with 1991 there 
are 30 per cent more hip and knee replacements, 80 per cent 
more cataract operations, and 100 per cent more angioplasty 
procedures in Saskatchewan every year. 
 
In order to meet these challenges, we are investing $1.7 billion 
in health care this year — an increase of 88 million over last 
year. The additional investment will be used to allow health 
districts to provide more specialist services, improve cancer 
treatments, improve emergency on-call access to physicians in 
rural areas, operate a new MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) in 
Regina, and a new CT (computerized axial tomography) in 
Prince Albert, thereby improving diagnostic services in both the 
South and the North; constructing, upgrading, and renovating of 
health care facilities and better immunization programs. 
 
We are also building for the future with the Saskatchewan 
Health Information Network, a high-tech system that will give 
people faster access to important information and reduce 
duplication of medical tests — good news for the people of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial 4-H Curling Bonspiel 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of 
Agriculture Week it is appropriate to talk about the future of 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. One of the those areas for the 
future is the youth. 
 

This past weekend I had the opportunity to participate in the 
provincial 4-H curling play-offs. The provincial bonspiel was 
held at Redvers in my constituency, with representation from 
the six 4-H regions and the host club, Alida. 
 
In the seniors, the teams were from Canwood, Aneroid, Val 
Marie, Major, Choiceland, Nipawin, Punnichy, and Creelman, 
and the host club, Alida, my home town. The juniors were 
represented by teams from McCord, Major, Meadow Lake, 
Meskanaw, Ethelton, Punnichy, and Alida. 
 
The event was well attended, with the Saturday night banquet 
had approximately 180 people in attendance. Two special 
gentlemen provided the evening’s entertainment — cowboy 
poets Lee Bellows of Moose Jaw and Jim Hyde of Alida. Both 
kept young and old in stitches with their irreverent poetry about 
the cowboy life. 
 
The bonspiel was an example of good curling and good 
sportsmanship. Over the course of the weekend there were nine 
or ten games which needed extra ends to determine the winner. 
The wining senior team was from Canwood; the winning junior 
team was from Punnichy. 
 
I would ask all members of the House to congratulate the 
winners and to congratulate all 4-H members for their positive 
attitude in helping to maintain Saskatchewan’s way of life and 
agriculture in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Crisis 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) member from Swift Current is 
always quick to jump to his feet during members’ statements 
when a good news announcement is made in the area he 
represents. Unfortunately, I do not see him jumping to his feet 
today so it must be a bad news announcement. And that can 
only mean more news, more bad news, about the sad state of 
our health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s budget isn’t at the top of the 
newscast in south-west Saskatchewan today; instead people are 
hearing that specialists in Swift Current have reached a boiling 
point. 
 
Until further notice, all on-call specialists will not be available 
to treat patients. Yet indeed we keep hearing from this 
government that our health care system is in fine shape, that 
people are overreacting, that there is no health care crisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each and every day in this House we demonstrate 
that health care is ailing, and unlike some we don’t need a study 
to prove it — we only have to listen to what the people are 
saying. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to send across to the 
Premier, the Health minister, and the member from Swift 
Current, copies of the important notice sent out from the doctors 
in the Swift Current area this morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1998 

Building Independence: Investing in Families 
 

Ms. Murrell: — Mr. Speaker, raising a family, caring for 
children, it can be a big job, particularly if you don’t have much 
money or if you need help for things like child care. We only 
get one chance to raise a child, so it is important to do it the best 
we can. 
 
That’s why in this budget we are investing in children and 
families. Our investment in the award-winning Saskatchewan 
action plan for children is doubled to $53 million. This 
investment will be used for things ranging from improvements 
in licensed day cares to providing 25,000 children in low 
income families with essential school supplies. 
 
But our most significant investment is called “building 
independence: investing in families”. This strategy has several 
parts. The Saskatchewan Child Benefit will help 80,000 
Saskatchewan children, and the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement will top up wages of low income families. Family 
health benefits will be extended to children in low income 
working families. Building independence will give low income 
families a hand while making it easier to work or to go to 
school. It is designed to help low income families get off or stay 
off assistance. 
 
As a mother and a grandmother, I know how important families 
are. We are not only investing in our families, we are investing 
in our future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Reducing the Debt 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 
know what happens when we live beyond our means. We’ve all 
experienced it. During the 1980s the Tory provincial 
government ran up a series of massive deficits. The result: over 
$14 billion in debt . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well they say 
that they’re the Saskatchewan Party and they’re not Tories; I 
don’t know why they’re getting so worked up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But anyway, over $800 million per year in interest payments, 
credit rating downgrades — never again. Mr. Speaker, this 
budget is our fifth consecutive balanced budget. Working 
together, Saskatchewan people reduced our total debt to just 
over 12 billion — still too much — but we’re headed in the 
right direction. This year we plan on paying off another $500 
million in debt. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Speaker — five years ago, nearly 19 cents 
of every dollar taken in by the provincial government went to 
pay interest on the public debt. This year we will cut it to 14 
cents on the dollar; by the year 2000 we’ll cut this down to 12 
cents. That’s our plan — to slowly but surely get out of debt. 
 
On the first day of spring, Mr. Speaker, it is worth reminding 
ourselves that it took a Tory government, born in the dead of 
winter, to freeze us in debt. 
 
Now the people of Saskatchewan — and especially the children 
of Saskatchewan — can look forward to the promise of spring. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Highway Improvements 
 

Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan roads 
and highways need some help. Federal elimination of the Crow 
benefit, rail deregulation, and rail-line abandonment have 
moved heavy traffic from rails to roads. 
 
Increased economic growth has created heavier traffic on major 
highways like the Trans-Canada and the Yellowhead. Last year 
our government announced a 10-year, 2.5 billion commitment 
to improve our roads and highways. 
 
As a first step we increased our Highways budget by 18 per 
cent. This year we are continuing to ramp up construction and 
repair in accordance with our commitment with a 10 per cent 
increase in spending. 
 
This will mean work on twinning the Trans-Canada from Gull 
Lake to Tompkins. We will finish engineering work and issue 
tenders for the section between Indian Head and Wolseley, and 
we will resurface or repair 3,600 kilometres of roads or 
highways this summer. 
 
In my constituency this will be an improvement on Highway 
No. 35 from Colgate to Oungre. It will mean an upgrading of 
the North Portal border crossing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is a big job, repairing our highways, and we’re getting 
on with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Budget Addresses Education 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this week, 
grade 12 students were here visiting from Greenhall School in 
Balgonie with their teacher, Heather Gunn. When I was talking 
to them they were very interested to know what we would be 
doing this year for education, and particularly post-secondary 
education. 
 
From yesterday’s budget you would know that we are investing 
$136 million in job skills and training, enough to support 7,100 
people as they get adult basic education; train 2,800 
apprentices; and bring 4,600 people into programs like JobStart 
and Future Skills. 
 
Operating grants to universities and federated colleges are $181 
million, up $9 million from last year. Capital funding to 
universities is up 66 per cent, enough to get on with the job of 
badly needed renovations and repairs. 
 
To help students get access to post-secondary education, we’re 
introducing a bursary program. This gives help to students 
without increasing their debt upon graduation. Individuals work 
hard and make sacrifices to get an education or help their 
children to get one, and these are the ways that we will be 
assisting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tomorrow is also International Day Against Racial 
Discrimination, and I would note that our principle is to help 
institute all equity programing in the curriculum, in K to 12, in 
post-secondary work as well. It’s one small way we can help to 



March 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

celebrate this very important day. 
 
This is good news, Mr. Speaker, in the budget for the families 
in Regina Wascana Plains and for everyone in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Tax Rates 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, your 
budget failed to provide any meaningful tax relief for 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party believes the government should 
continue to cut the PST (provincial sales tax). Last year you did 
provide a meaningful tax cut, a 2-point cut in the PST. You 
expected that it would cost you about $120 million. It turns out 
that it only cost about $30 million because of the economic 
activity and jobs that the tax cut created. 
 
So what did you learn from this success? Nothing. Your budget 
should be called . . . Your budget is called, Building on the 
Momentum; it should be called killing the momentum. Based 
on your budget figures, last year’s PST cut only cost the 
government about $15 million per point. Why didn’t you knock 
off at least one more point this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we have heard from these 
people before that they will increase spending for health, 
highways, education, and so on and so on, and they will cut 
taxes and they will pay down the debt. 
 
The problem with that kind of thinking, Mr. Speaker, is it does 
not work. These people were in power in the 1980s and what 
they did when they were in power, Mr. Speaker, is rack up a 
$14-billion debt. And it’s my duty to inform the House and the 
people of the province, Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Finance, 
that the Estimates tabled in this House yesterday revealed that 
every day of this fiscal year we will spend almost exactly $2 
million in interest payments on the debt that those people 
racked up. 
 
What we will do, Mr. Speaker, is not build up a debt. We will 
pay down the debt and at the same time we will have 
sustainable, responsible tax cuts, as we did in the budgets in 
1995, ’96, ’97 and once again yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
you’re telling us that the economy is strong and we’ve turned 
the corner. You brag about all the new jobs you say you’ve 
created. And yet we see in this year’s budget that your 
projections for revenue from corporate taxes and capital taxes 
on business are down from last year. Since you haven’t changed 
the tax rates, you must think that the business sector isn’t going 
to do nearly as well this year as it did last year. 
 

Mr. Minister, if the economy is doing so well and you haven’t 
changed the corporate tax rates, what’s the plan and what’s the 
problem? Are you planning to drive business out of the 
province or are you just going to shut us down? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know it’s very confusing listening to 
the member, Mr. Speaker, because usually, usually they’re 
complaining that taxes are too high. But if they see taxes going 
down they complain about that too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But for the information of the member, what I will tell the 
member is this, Mr. Speaker. The Estimates that were tabled in 
the House yesterday show that corporate income tax will be 
down this year over last year. Corporations, because of 
increased economic activity, will actually pay more income tax 
to the federal government, Mr. Speaker, but the federal 
government will give the province of Saskatchewan less money. 
The corporate income taxes are not going down. It is a matter of 
accounting between the federal government and the provincial 
government. 
 
We do not collect corporate income tax directly from 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. We collect it from the federal 
government. Last year we were overpaid; this year we will pay 
the federal government back, in effect, what we were overpaid. 
There will be increased economic activity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Road System Funding 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
also for the Finance minister. Mr. Minister, unless you’ve been 
hibernating for the past six years, even you should have noticed 
now that rural roads are literally falling apart. Early on the NDP 
told us your government’s vision for Saskatchewan highways 
system was to turn most of them into grid road, and by the 
looks of things you’ve been successful. 
 
Now it’s become increasingly clear that your plan for grid roads 
is to turn most of them back into pasture land because you 
completely ignored them once again in this year’s budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) president Sinc Harrison has indicated it will 
take 30 million in new funding this year just to maintain the 
rural road system in its current state of disrepair. And what was 
your response? Last year you cut municipal government by 29 
million and this year the best you could do was come up with a 
measly $3 million. A $29 million cut last year and a $27 million 
shortfall this year. 
 
Mr. Minister, what advice do you have for rural residents who 
can’t even get to town or haul their grain because of the lack of 
your government’s funding for rural roads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I would point out to the 
member that the budget for rural roads is increasing this year by 
14 per cent. I announced that in the House yesterday, Mr. 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1998 

Speaker. 
 
The advice I would have for rural residents — the member asks 
what advice I would have — my advice would be this: to never 
again elect the Conservative Party to govern this province. That 
would be my advice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Because little by little and step by step, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re doing more on highways, we’re doing more on 
roads, we’re paying off the debt, and we’re lowering taxes. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re on the right track; we’re going in the right 
direction. What we don’t need is to be taken down the garden 
path again by those people sitting over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would suggest that 
the $5 million Jack Messer blew and the 300,000 you just 
handed him for nothing would have also helped make . . . build 
a few roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grants in Lieu of Taxes 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, you’ve just slept through 
consultations with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) as well because if you short-changed the rural 
municipalities, you totally outright shafted the cities and towns. 
 
Your government has cut the heart out of municipal funding at 
every opportunity and driven local property taxes through the 
roof. Now you’re telling us things are going to get better. And 
now you say we’ve turned the corner. Then you promised some 
grants in lieu of taxes for government buildings and then 
reneged on that promise. 
 
Mr. Minister, the city of Regina was counting on $12 million 
from grants in lieu. Yesterday, Regina found out that the NDP 
government is going to give them a measly 1.5 million instead 
of 12. Mr. Minister, what are you going to tell the taxpayers of 
Regina when they find out you reneged on your promise and 
their taxes are going to sky-rocket? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — For the information of that member, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to advise him that if he read the article in the 
Leader Post this morning, it explains that the city of Regina in 
its most current budget budgeted $1 million this year, grants in 
lieu. The city of Regina will receive 700,000. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is $300,000. 
 
The city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, will do a very good job, as it 
has in the past, dealing with that kind of shortfall as the member 
puts it. But I want to tell the member that the city of Regina has 
advised me, Mr. Speaker, that as far as they’re concerned, we 
have lived up to the commitment that we made. The difference, 
Mr. Speaker, is that someone overestimated the amount of the 
assessment and the amount that the bill would be. 
 

The city of Regina knows that we have lived up to the 
commitment that we have made, Mr. Speaker, and will continue 
to live up to that commitment. We took two steps yesterday in 
the budget to assist urban municipalities, one being a 
restructuring of policing costs which will assist 100 
municipalities, lowering their policing costs; the other, Mr. 
Speaker, being meeting the commitment we made on grants in 
lieu. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Channel Lake Legal Opinions 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this morning are for the minister responsible for CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) or his 
designate. 
 
Mr. Minister, did you or anyone in your government like CIC or 
SaskPower ever ask the law firm of Olive Waller to provide a 
legal opinion on Channel Lake. What was Olive Waller asked 
to look at and whatever happened to that legal opinion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows we 
have invited the members opposite to come to the Public 
Accounts Committee in less than two weeks where the 
members opposite will have the opportunity — they chair the 
committee — to ask any questions they like, and the appropriate 
answers will be given. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’ll have witnesses appear before the 
committee to get to the bottom of the matter. And the question 
that I have and members on this side have, Mr. Speaker, is why 
is it that the members opposite do not want to go to the Public 
Accounts Committee, or are they committed . . . will they 
commit to attending the Public Accounts Committee so that this 
matter can be examined, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, we have been 
informed that another law firm was prepared to give you a legal 
opinion saying that you had just cause to fire Jack Messer. We 
have been told that at the last minute, just before you fired Jack, 
that that legal opinion was suppressed, and that when you went 
running off to MLT (MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman), your 
favourite law firm, to get an . . . you went running off to them to 
get an opinion that said pay Jack Messer. We have been told 
that it was Olive Waller who did this other opinion. 
 
Is that what happened, Mr. Minister? Is there another opinion 
that was squashed and was Olive Waller contacted about 
preparing that opinion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I suspect, being a lawyer 
myself, that if you asked a hundred lawyers you could get a 
hundred different opinions. But what we need to do, Mr. 
Speaker, is not debate who has what opinion. What we need to 
do is look at the facts. And I say to the members opposite, they 
should come to the Public Accounts Committee; they should 
call witnesses; and they should look at the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’d like to know what it is about this deal that makes these 
members not want to look at the facts, Mr. Speaker. 



March 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, everyone 
knows that you can get legal opinions for everything you want 
under the sun. How many did you have to go through to get, 
before you got the opinion you wanted? Mr. Minister, what was 
the rush to pay Jack Messer? How thoroughly did MLT really 
study this issue? This was a rush fix-up job and you know it. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government took a year, a full year to decide 
to pay Saskatchewan families when you hurt them with your 
babysitting laws in this province. A year — a full year for the 
families of this province. One week for Jack Messer to get fixed 
up. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Party bell ringing is about more 
than Jack Messer. It’s about ending patronage — political 
patronage — and political pay-offs. Jack Messer just seems . . . 
Jack Messer just seems like a good place to start with. 
 
When are you going to live up to the Premier’s commitment to 
end patronage? Will you start today by cancelling Jack 
Messer’s obscene severance or do we have to keep ringing the 
bells until you do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, not only are the members 
opposite not willing, apparently, to go to the Public Accounts 
Committee to get the facts about Channel Lake out, any facts 
that haven’t been tabled, of which I think there are very few, 
Mr. Speaker. They also are not prepared apparently to get on 
with implementing, debating the budget that was introduced 
into this House yesterday. 
 
And I say to the members opposite that if they’re concerned 
about the good and welfare for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, what they should be doing is joining with us — 
debating the increases to health care that we proposed; the 
increases for education that we proposed; the increases for jobs 
and training that we proposed; the increases for highways and 
roads that we proposed. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that for every 
day that they are ringing the bells . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I will ask the hon. members in 
the opposition to allow the hon. minister’s answer to be heard 
by the Speaker. I am unable to hear the answer being put and 
I’ll ask for the cooperation of the House. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, for every day that the 
members opposite refuse to discuss the business of this House, 
for every day that they ring the bells, they are wasting $90,000 
in taxpayers’ money. So far, Mr. Speaker, they have wasted 
$180,000 in taxpayers’ money. And I say to the members 
opposite, let’s get down to the business of the people of 
Saskatchewan which is debating the budget so that we can have 
better health care, better support for schools, universities, and 
highways, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we should be debating in 
this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hospital Waiting-lists 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions today 
are for the Premier. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. Now again I will 
ask the hon. members of the official opposition to allow the 
question to be heard. I am unable to hear the Leader of the 
Third Party, and I’ll ask for the cooperation of the House. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I’m anxiously awaiting Hansard 
this evening so I can hear some of the answers to the questions 
from earlier. 
 
When the NDP government delivered yesterday’s budget, Mr. 
Speaker, we hoped it would provide solutions to the current bed 
crisis; provide funding to keep the Plains hospital open; and to 
help address the long waiting-lists. In spite of what some parties 
may suggest, no study is needed to know that there are major 
problems in these areas. 
 
Will the Premier or his designate tell this House what he and his 
government consider an acceptable waiting-list for medical 
treatment in Saskatchewan? The official opposition doesn’t care 
because they’re trying to squelch my question to the minister or 
the Premier, and unless he hears the question, how can he 
answer it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I say for the benefit of the 
Liberal members of the House, and the Conservatives as well, 
that yesterday’s budget contained the biggest single expenditure 
for health care in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yesterday’s budget committed the 
province of Saskatchewan to putting $88 million more into 
Health this year than last year. And I would contrast that for the 
benefit of the Liberal members, Mr. Speaker, by pointing out 
that in the recent federal budget there was not one penny for 
health care, Mr. Speaker, not one red cent. 
 
Health care for the Liberal Party in this country is not a priority. 
It has never been a priority for them, Mr. Speaker. And this 
member gets up, when we have the largest increase to health 
care spending in the history of the province, the largest health 
care budget — after the Liberals wouldn’t give us a penny — 
and complains about what we’re doing. I don’t think so, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — . . . that the minister did not hear the question I 
asked. What are acceptable waiting-lists? Mr. Speaker, nine 
years ago in this House, the NDP member for Regina 
Coronation Park spoke of a conversation he had with the 
Minister of Health from the Blakeney administration. He noted 
that the minister had been called on the carpet by the Premier 
because the waiting-list had surpassed the 2,000 mark, 
something Mr. Blakeney found unacceptable. 
 
The member explained, and I quote: 
 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1998 

The Premier gave him a limited number of months to get 
the situation in hand, to get the waiting-list down below 
2,000 or else the then premier of the day would simply find 
a new Health minister. 
 

Mr. Premier, according to a recent published report, there are 
more than 6,600 people that occupy waiting-lists in this 
province, more than three times what Mr. Blakeney found 
acceptable. Do you plan on giving the present Minister of 
Health the same alternative, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things we can be 
very proud of in this province is that we have had many authors 
who have won Governor General’s awards for fiction, and I 
think there may be another potential winner right over there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member, what are we going to do? What we’re 
going to do is this. We’re going to make the largest single 
expenditure for health care in the history of our province as a 
result of the budget that was introduced in the House yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to do that without the assistance 
of the Liberals, without the assistance of the Conservatives. 
We’re going to do it with the assistance of the people of 
Saskatchewan who believe in public medicare, no thanks to the 
Liberals, Mr. Speaker, and no thanks to the Conservatives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — It seems, Mr. Speaker, I have to once again 
repeat the question. What are you going to do about 
waiting-lists? What is an acceptable number? They’re getting 
longer and not shorter. The problem is getting worse every day 
under this administration. In fact Jim Fergusson, the Saskatoon 
Health District, told the media only a couple of weeks ago the 
waiting had increased by two to three months in that city alone 
in the past year. 
 
Why is it that Mr. Blakeney understood how important health 
care was but this NDP government does not, and has lost it’s 
sense of priorities. I still have to ask the Premier if he would do 
the proper thing and give the minister a time line, or give him 
the hook. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, once again to the member, 
because I think perhaps he’s not hearing the answers I’m 
giving. 
 
We have increased funding to the health districts in yesterday’s 
budget. We are putting $88 million more into health care this 
year than last year. That money will go to physicians; it will go 
to specialists; it will also go to the Saskatoon Health District; it 
will go to the Regina Health District; then the Swift Current 
district; then the North Central district; and every other district 
in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our commitment is that we are making the largest expenditure 
in health care in the history of our province. We are putting our 
money where our mouths are, Mr. Speaker, unlike the Liberal 
Party which is not putting one red cent into health care this year 
as a result of the federal budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Cancer Treatment 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve just heard 
from the member from Melville talking about the massive 
waiting-lists in Saskatchewan. We’re also hearing nothing but 
rhetoric from the Minister of Finance. I’d like to give an 
example that will bring this point home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today we have Paulette Lochbaum in your gallery with us, Mr. 
Speaker. Paulette has been diagnosed with lymph node cancer. 
It happened one month ago. She needs an immediate bone scan 
before she can start cancer treatment, but she can’t get in for 
another month and a half — another month and a half. She 
called her New Democrat MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) from Regina Dewdney, but he said there’s nothing 
he could do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand here a referral by Paulette’s 
doctor to go to Saskatoon for this test. Can you imagine sending 
people from Regina to Saskatoon for a cancer test, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Will the Minister of Health explain why the people of Regina 
are not able to get the necessary services here in this city. How 
does that make any kind of sense, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 
opposite, as the member knows that we have in this province 
two locations where we do testing and where we do specialized 
treatment for people who suffer from cancer. And it’s not 
unusual, Mr. Speaker, for somebody from your constituency or 
somebody from my constituency or somebody from Regina 
getting those kinds of services either in Saskatoon or Regina, 
because that’s where those specialized services are provided, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so for people today to not expect to go to those 
communities to get those specialized services is unreasonable, 
because those are the only two places in the province in which 
we provide those services. And they will continue to be, Mr. 
Speaker. And they lead the nation as being the two best, highest 
qualified cancer treatment centres in the country. And we will 
continue to ensure that. 
 
In this year’s budget we allocate an additional sum of funds to 
ensure that the cancer clinic and treatment in this province will 
be provided in a substantial and effective way for all people in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — The question is, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, 
what are you going to do for Paulette? That’s the question here 
today. She awaits treatment; her condition goes untreated. Her 
tumour is growing daily, Mr. Minister. How would you like to 
have a family member in that position where you have to wait 
and wait and wait for treatment? It makes absolutely no sense. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you agree after question period to come out 
with me into the lobby out front here and meet with Paulette, 
that lady sitting up there in the Speaker’s gallery, and tell her 



March 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

why she can’t get treatment for her cancer that she needs now, 
and that she does not have to go to Saskatoon to get it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the member 
opposite and to Paulette that my door is open not only to her but 
all people from Saskatchewan who require health care services. 
On any occasion. On any occasion. And there isn’t any need for 
me to meet with Paulette in the lobby. I’m prepared to meet 
with Paulette in my office immediately after question period to 
have this discussion about her individual case. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that from time to time 
people do have to wait for their particular procedures. They 
wait today; they waited a year ago. Ten years ago they had to 
wait for some very specialized services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t know the individual circumstances around Paulette’s 
case, but if in fact her condition changes at any time where it 
moves from elective or urgent to emergency, those decisions 
are made by her specialists and her physician. And if in fact her 
case has changed from urgency to emergency, then those 
decisions, Mr. Speaker, are made by physicians and specialists, 
not politicians, Mr. Speaker. Not politicians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m appalled that 
the Minister of Health would talk about the doctors and the 
nurses not wanting to treat these types of people. It’s not the 
doctors and the nurses, our front-line workers; it’s your 
government policy. It’s your rationing of health care, Mr. 
Minister, that’s causing this. 
 
I’m happy to hear that you will meet with Paulette. Paulette and 
I will come to your office immediately after question period to 
meet with you. But do not blame the doctors and the nurses in 
this province, whom you’ve cut to the bone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to reinforce 
again that on any occasion where we have a situation where 
somebody is having some difficulty getting to the system and 
want to meet with me, those opportunities are always open. Are 
always open. 
 
But for the member opposite, for the member opposite to 
suggest for a moment that we have fewer specialists in this 
province today than we had in the past is absolutely not correct. 
We have more specialists practising today in Saskatchewan 
than we had in 1991 — more specialists, Mr. Speaker. And we 
have more money today in the doctors’ budget than we’ve ever 
had in this province, and just finished settling a $48-million, 
three-year contract with physicians, who say and have said 
publicly that this will provide insurance that we will have 
stability and tranquillity within the health field today. 
 
And I, Mr. Speaker, stand by the fact that physicians in this 
province today are practising under better conditions than 
anywhere else in the country, where we have strikes in Ontario, 
we have strikes in New Brunswick; and in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, we have an agreement that’s signed with physicians — 
an agreement that’s signed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Canadian Wheat Board Act Amendments 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we need a strong Canadian Wheat Board. I will be appearing 
before the Senate committee next week urging prompt passage 
of Bill C-4 amending the Board Act. Saskatchewan supports 
amending the Act to give the Canadian Wheat Board the 
flexibility to meet farmers’ needs. 
 
We have proposed some changes to Bill C-4 to strengthen and 
make the Wheat Board an even more effective marketer of 
prairie wheat and barley: for example, the board of directors 
select the president; the process for including other crops should 
be clarified to make it workable — for example, who gets to ask 
to have a crop included; implement a capital fund to allow 
board . . . the Board to maintain its selling advantage in the 
world markets; include parameters in the amendments for how 
cash buying is used; and maintain the pool period of the crop 
year and allow alternative mechanisms to respond to cash flow 
needs of producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board is an important 
marketing institution, and it needs these tools to be an even 
more effective marketer, and it needs them now. I urge the 
people of Saskatchewan to attend the Senate hearings in the 
province next week and encourage the House of Commons to 
pass these amendments. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I as well 
will be appearing before the Senate committee to speak to the 
whole issue of the Canadian Wheat Board restructuring, and the 
proposal before the House of Commons and before the Senate, 
to address the issue of Bill C-4. 
 
We have many concerns as well, as has been pointed out on 
many occasions. Certainly the inclusion clause is a great 
concern to us. Many farmers are telling us about the problems 
that they see associated with that. I would agree with the 
member, the minister, that there needs to be a clarification on 
that. We do not want to see this process hijacked and just 
unilaterally start putting additional crops under Canadian Wheat 
Board control. 
 
We also are concerned about the fact that we may wind up with 
a NFU- (National Farmers Union) dominated Canadian Wheat 
Board board of directors, which would do more to destroy the 
Canadian Wheat Board than anything else in the history of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, our position will be that we believe 
farmers should have an opportunity to market crops both within 
the Canadian Wheat Board and outside of the Canadian Wheat 
Board, making it a voluntary system. And those would be some 
of the points that we’d be arguing at the Senate hearings when 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1998 

we speak to them next week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We too will be 
attending the Senate hearings next week in the province with 
respect to the Wheat Board Act. 
 
We have many farmers expressing their concerns to us too with 
respect to marketing in this province, and we are intending to 
represent their views there to try and attempt to remove some of 
the partisanship out of it and get down to the business of 
representing the farmers’ concerns directly. 
 
A number of people are genuinely concerned about inclusion 
clauses with respect to the Wheat Board Act. 
 
Certainly we’re hearing those sorts of comments as well, as 
well as a whole range of them. And they’ll be well represented 
next week at the hearings. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 10  The Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 10, The Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 11, The 
Trustee Amendment Act, 1998 be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 — The University of Saskatchewan 
Foundation Repeal Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move 
that Bill No. 12, The University of Saskatchewan Foundation 
Repeal Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 13, 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 14, 
The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 now be introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Gas Inspection 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 15, The Gas Inspection 
Amendment Act, 1998 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Certified General Accountants 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Minister, I move that Bill No. 16, The 
Certified General Accountants Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Certified Management 
Consultants Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 17, The 
Certified Management Consultants Act be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting  
 

Bill No. 20 — The Election Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 20, The Election Amendment 
Act, 1998 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 18, The 
Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1998 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Physical Therapists Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby:— Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 19, The 
Physical Therapists Act, 1998 be now introduced and read the 
first time. 



March 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 237 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Abernethy) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 237, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village 
of Abernethy) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 11 a.m. until 11:10 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Draude Gantefoer 
 

Nays — 19 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Atkinson Tchorzewski Whitmore 
Upshall Calvert Trew 
Lorje Nilson Hamilton 
Sonntag Kasperski Ward 
Murray Langford Murrell 
Thomson   
 

Bill No. 238 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Adanac) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 238, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village 
of Adanac) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 11:12 a.m. until 11:22 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer   
 

Nays — 20 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Shillington Tchorzewski Whitmore 
Crofford Calvert Trew 
Renaud Lorje Nilson 
Hamilton Sonntag Kasperski 
Ward Murray Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 

Bill No. 239 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Admiral) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill No. 239, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village 
of Admiral). 
 

The division bells rang from 11:24 a.m. until 11:34 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Gantefoer  
 

Nays — 19 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Tchorzewski 
Whitmore Upshall Crofford 
Calvert Trew Renaud 
Lorje Nilson Hamilton 
Sonntag Kasperski Ward 
Murray Langford Murrell 
Thomson   
 
 

Bill No. 266 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Bangor) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move first reading 
of Bill 266, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of 
Bangor) be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 11:37 a.m. to 11:47 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas —- 4 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Gantefoer   
 

Nays — 18 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Tchorzewski 
Whitmore Upshall Crofford 
Calvert Trew Renaud 
Nilson Hamilton Sonntag 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 
 

Bill No. 267 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Battleford) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 267, The 
Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Battleford) be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 11:49 a.m. until 11:59 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 4 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Gantefoer   
 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1998 

Nays — 19 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Whitmore 
Upshall Crofford Calvert 
Trew Renaud Nilson 
Cline Hamilton Sonntag 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
Hillson   
 

Bill No. 268 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Beatty) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 268, The 
Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Beatty) will be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:02 p.m. until 12:12 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Gantefoer  
 

Nays — 20 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Tchorzewski 
Whitmore Upshall Crofford 
Calvert Trew Renaud 
Nilson Cline Hamilton 
Sonntag Kasperski Ward 
Murray Langford Murrell 
Thomson Hillson  
 

Bill No. 269 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Northern Village of Beauval) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move first reading of Bill No. 269, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Northern Village of Beauval) be 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:15 until 12:25. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Gantefoer  
 

Nays — 19 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Tchorzewski 
Whitmore Upshall Crofford 
Calvert Trew Renaud 
Nilson Cline Hamilton 
Sonntag Kasperski Ward 
Murray Langford Murrell 
Thomson   

Bill No. 270 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Resort Village of Beaver Flat) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill 
No. 270, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Resort 
Village of Beaver Flat) be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:27 p.m. until 12:37 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Gantefoer  
 

Nays — 17 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Tchorzewski 
Whitmore Upshall Calvert 
Trew Renaud Nilson 
Hamilton Sonntag Kasperski 
Ward Murray Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 

Bill No. 271 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Beechy) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move first reading of Bill No. 271, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Village of Beechy) be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The bells rang from 12:38 p.m. until 12:48 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Gantefoer  
 

Nays — 15 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Tchorzewski 
Whitmore Upshall Calvert 
Trew Nilson Serby 
Sonntag Kasperski Ward 
Murray Langford Thomson 
 

Bill No. 272 —The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Belle Plaine) 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move first reading of Bill No. 272, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Village of Belle Plaine) be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:49 p.m. until 12:59 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 



March 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Gantefoer  
 

Nays — 17 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Whitmore 
Upshall Calvert Trew 
Renaud Nilson Serby 
Hamilton Sonntag Kasperski 
Ward Murray Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, it now being 1 o’clock and the 
normal time of adjournment, first of all let me wish all hon. 
members an enjoyable first weekend of spring in your 
constituencies, at home, and with your families. 
 
Having said that, this House now stands adjourned until 
Monday afternoon at 1:30 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................217 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................217 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................217 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................217 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................217 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................217 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................217 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................217 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................217 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................218 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................218 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................218 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................218 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................218 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................218 
  Murrell.......................................................................................................................................................................................218 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day to End All Racism 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................218 
 Quality Health Care 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................219 
 Provincial 4-H Curling Bonspiel 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................219 
 Health Care Crisis 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................219 
 Building Independence: Investing in Families 
  Murrell.......................................................................................................................................................................................220 
 Reducing the Debt 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................220 
 Highway Improvements 
  Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................220 
 Budget Addresses Education 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................220 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Tax Rates 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................221 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................221 
 Rural Road System Funding 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................221 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................221 
 Grants in Lieu of Taxes 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................222 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................222 
 Channel Lake Legal Opinions 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................222 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................222 
 Hospital Waiting-lists 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................223 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................223 
 Cancer Treatment 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................224 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................224 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Canadian Wheat Board Act Amendments 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................225 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................225 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 10  The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Bill No. 11 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Bill No. 12 — The University of Saskatchewan Foundation Repeal Act 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Bill No. 13 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Bill No. 14 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Bill No. 15 — The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Bill No. 16 — The Certified General Accountants Amendment Act, 1998 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Bill No. 17 — The Certified Management Consultants Act 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Bill No. 20 — The Election Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Bill No. 18 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1998 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Bill No. 19 — The Physical Therapists Act, 1998 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................226 
 Bill No. 237 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Abernethy) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................227 
 Bill No. 238 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Adanac) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................227 
 Bill No. 239 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Admiral) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................227 
 Bill No. 266 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Bangor) 
  Bjornerud (Recorded division) ................................................................................................................................................227 
 Bill No. 267 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Battleford) 
  Bjornerud (Recorded division) ................................................................................................................................................227 
 Bill No. 268 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Beatty) 
  Bjornerud (Recorded division) ................................................................................................................................................228 
 Bill No. 269 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Northern Village of Beauval) 
  Bjornerud (Recorded division) ................................................................................................................................................228 
 Bill No. 270 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Resort Village of Beaver Flat) 
  Bjornerud (Recorded division) ................................................................................................................................................228 
 Bill No. 271 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Beechy) 
  Bjornerud (Recorded division) ................................................................................................................................................228 
 Bill No. 272 —The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Belle Plaine) 
  Bjornerud (Recorded division) ................................................................................................................................................228 
 


