





























































Hansard: May 05, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 945 
 May 5, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present from residents of the 
community of Carievale. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Carnduff and 
Oxbow areas of the south-east corner of this province. I so 
submit. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, as well to present 
petitions, and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals 
from the Radville, Weyburn, Ceylon areas of the province. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition. These are signed by the people from Lampman and 
Estevan. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

citizens concerned about the impending closure of the Plains 
hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Glen Ewen and Oxbow. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
People that have signed this petition are all from Radville. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring 
a voice of the Saskatchewan people to this Assembly through a 
petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Weyburn and Stoughton. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise to 
present a petition. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Weyburn, they’re from McTaggart, and all throughout the 
land. And I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities such as Whitewood, Moosomin, Langbank, 
Broadview, and Windthorst. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward petitions to prevent 
the closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential service provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are . . . 
it appears they’re from the Whitewood and Broadview area of 
the province, and all those hundreds of people that have been 
attending the rallies . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member of course will want to avoid 
entering into debate while presenting petitions. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I present petitions this afternoon 
concerning the traffic congestion and dangerous highway 
situation entering the city of North Battleford. The prayer of 
relief reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to relocate Highway 40 and the 
intersection of Highway 16 to east of the David Laird 
Campground in order to alleviate the congestion at the 
entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 

Your petitioners come from Battleford, North Battleford, 
Cochin, and Mayfair, and Ruddell. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
present the following petition this morning. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of Maple 
Creek, Assiniboia, Eastend. We also have some from Cochrane, 
Alberta; Golden Prairie, and from the Consul communities as 
well as from Piapot, and I’m happy to present them today. 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again today to present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned 
with seeking justice for those who lost loved ones in 
work-related accidents. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows, widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today are all from the Regina district. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to save the Plains Health Centre; to 
reinstate Workers’ Compensation Board pensions for the 
disenfranchised widows and widowers; and to relocate 
Highway No. 40 to alleviate congestion at the entrance to 
North Battleford. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my privilege to introduce to you and through you to members of 
the Assembly, three guests in your gallery. I have a constituent, 
Emily Brown from Fort Qu’Appelle — if these individuals 
could stand. And visiting with the Browns are relatives from 
Victoria Harbour, Ontario — Brenda and Adam Woloski. 
 
And I would ask that all members welcome these three 
individuals here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Casino Profits Fund Cultural Organizations 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month 
our government announced that $5,000 of casino profits will be 
used to fund a somewhat unique program for young musicians 
through the associated entities fund. 
 
Two provincial cultural organizations, the Saskatchewan 
Society for Education Through Art and the Saskatchewan 
Choral Federation, are working in partnership with singer and 
songwriter Don Freed and the inner-city students to produce a 
CD (compact disc), cassette, and song book. The project, called 
Inner City Harmony, started with a song-writing workshop. 
 
The students and Mr. Freed wrote songs, words, and music. 
After the music and singing are mixed at a recording studio, the 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

CD and cassette will be ready for distribution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1997 over $1 million of casino profits have 
been invested in the children, youth, and families of 
Saskatchewan through the associated entities fund. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Musical to Benefit Children in Brazil 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Melfort is alive with the sound of music. Friday was opening 
night for the musical that has become the hottest ticket in town. 
The local talent has raised the roof at the North East Leisure 
Centre in the most touching combination of production and 
talent we have witnessed in a long time. 
 
Mr. Alphonse Gerwing of Lake Lenore has brought the 
production to Melfort in aid of the street children in Brazil. Mr. 
Gerwing, a retired teacher, spent his summers in Brazil working 
with an organization of boys and girls of the street and 
continues to take an interest in raising money to help develop 
projects for these children. 
 
My most sincere congratulations to everyone involved in The 
Sound of Music. It was absolutely breathtaking to witness. 
Please join me in saluting the people who have worked so hard 
to put this musical together. I know there are still tickets 
available for the remaining performances. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canada Employment Centre for Students 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here without comment 
is a story in total from yesterday’s radio news, from station 
CJME in Regina. Headline: “Lots of summer jobs available.” 
The story: 
 

Good news for students looking for summer jobs. There 
are plenty available. The Canada Employment Centre for 
Students says they should be able to find a job for every 
student this summer. The centre opens for the season 
today. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Request for Apology from Premier 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker to 
put it simply, the actions of government members yesterday 
were simply disgusting and demonstrated how care and 
compassion have abandoned this group. 
 
Yesterday I introduced Heather Prystupa to the Assembly and 
described that her husband was suffering from a serious 
ailment; that infection had spread throughout his body. For 
some reason the government members found this amusing. 
They chuckled, they laughed, with Heather sitting in the gallery 
directly above them able to hear every smart-alec remark they 
made. 

Mr. Speaker, no one should be treated this way when they visit 
the Assembly. MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) on 
the government side crossed the line yesterday, and this is why 
the Liberal opposition today is calling on the Premier to deliver, 
in this House today, Mr. Premier, a full apology to Mr. and Mrs. 
Prystupa for the actions of his members, which are indefensible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Annual Multi-faith Fair 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Sunday I was 
pleased to represent the government at the third annual Regina 
multi-faith fair held at the University of Regina. This event was 
sponsored by the Regina multi-faith forum and the department 
of religious studies at the university. 
 
My presence though was more than official. There was a great 
deal to learn in one afternoon about the variety of religious 
faiths being practised in our community — practised, Mr. 
Speaker, in harmony and freedom. It was an opportunity for me 
and the many other visitors to see one more reason why Regina 
is such a special place to live. 
 
The main purpose of the fair was to teach us about the various 
customs, practises, and beliefs of different faiths. There were 
presentations from Christian, Jewish, Islamic, Hindu, Baha’i, 
aboriginal, Unitarian, and Sai Baba groups. 
 
As well there was a prayer and meditation room and the day’s 
program ended with a panel and discussion of human rights and 
racism — a human blight that all faiths should be dedicated to 
eradicating. 
 
The underlying theme of the multi-faith fair, it seemed to me, 
was understanding, appreciating, and celebrating our diversity. 
Understanding is better than suspicion, appreciation beats 
distrust, and celebration is preferable to prejudice. 
 
I congratulate the organizers of the multi-faith fair and 
encourage all to attend next year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteer Recognized 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, each year 
the North Central Regional Recreation Association recognizes 
individuals who volunteer in their community. 
 
The volunteer recognition awards program is designed to 
publicly recognize those volunteers whose outstanding 
volunteer service has contributed to the growth and 
development to sports, culture, heritage, conservation, or 
recreation at the community, district, and regional levels. 
 
A constituent of mine from Wakaw, Daryl Rudichuk, was 
recently honoured with the special service volunteer award. Mr. 
Rudichuk has spent most of his life working for the people of 
Wakaw. 
 
He has been on town council and is presently serving as mayor. 
He is a member of Carlton Trail REDA (regional economic 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

development authority), a board member for the SageHill 
Development Corporation, and the Wakaw hospital. 
 
As well, Mr. Rudichuk has spent time as a leader for the 
Wakaw Beaver and Cub Scouts and was a founding member of 
the Wakaw Air Cadets. 
 
Today he is still actively involved in the community of Wakaw 
as a member of the Lion’s Club, the fire department, the board 
of trade, and the Wakaw arena committee. He also volunteers 
his time to the church, the recreation board, the gun club, and 
the farmers’ market. 
 
Mr. Rudichuk was also instrumental in founding and organizing 
the bowling centre in Wakaw. Daryl’s positive attitude and his 
enthusiasm has rubbed off on other people and Wakaw is 
indeed fortunate to have such a dedicated volunteer. 
 
Congratulations, Daryl, on receiving this very deserving award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Forest Week 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 3 to May 9 is 
National Forest Week. This week is intended to expand our 
understanding of this national asset. About half of 
Saskatchewan is north of the south boundary of the north 
Saskatchewan forest reserve. 
 
Some people want to protect the forest; I say the forest can be 
managed, but it cannot be protected. Given the forces of nature 
that play in this natural environment — disease, pests, fire, and 
the need for renewal — the forest is unable to be protected. 
 
There are some 36 million hectares of forest in the province of 
Saskatchewan. About one-third is considered commercially 
viable. Fire-fighting, reforestation, roads, and other human 
activity in this area have increased the age, in some areas of the 
province, of the forest by 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on an annual basis the primary and secondary 
forest activities provide 5,000 direct, 8,000 indirect jobs. This 
$600 million a year industry is worth looking after. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party and Health Issues 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on at 
least two occasions in this legislative session we’ve seen the 
Tories let the NDP (New Democratic Party) government off the 
hook. Let me refresh a few memories. 
 
When the NDP announced that the Plains hospital would be 
converted into a SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) campus, we heard the Tory member 
from Canora-Pelly say the final nail had been pounded into the 
Plains coffin. He and his band of Tories threw in the towel. 
 
After the Liberal opposition arranged a series of Save the Plains 
meetings and highlighted concerns about this issue, we saw the 

Tories scratching and crawling, trying to maintain that they 
actually care. 
 
Last week we heard the Tories suggest that it’s strictly the 
federal government’s responsibility to compensate pre-1986 
hep C victims. In doing so they let this NDP government off the 
hook again. The Tories apparently believe that there’s no onus 
on this government to compensate victims. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition will continue to press this 
government for a moratorium on the closure of the Plains, and 
will continue to demand that compensation for all hep C victims 
be provided by this government. 
 
As for the Tories, maybe there’s another issue around the corner 
that they might decide is worth holding this government 
accountable on. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women of Distinction Awards 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on Sunday past, the Moose Jaw YM (Young Men’s Christian 
Association)-YWCA and Transition House held the second 
annual Women of Distinction Awards luncheon in Moose Jaw, 
to which you and I were both privileged to attend. 
 
The event was to honour the accomplishments of women who 
have contributed their energy, leadership, and commitment to 
our community. In the youth category, Jana Geisler, a 
university student, was honoured for her work at the Grinning 
Lizard Teen Wellness Centre, the Mental Health Centre, and the 
Big Brothers-Big Sisters program. 
 
Elsie Eade was honoured with the science and technology 
award for her work with the science fair in Moose Jaw, and she 
shared that award with all of those involved in environmental 
clubs in our city. 
 
The Community Mentor award went to Willy Hodgson, who 
has given of herself in so many ways, from her commitment to 
aboriginal issues, involvement in the United Way, Moose Jaw 
Housing Authority and the Thunder Creek Rehab Association. 
 
Maureen Rice was awarded for achievement in promoting 
emotional, social, or spiritual well-being of women in the 
workplace. Ms. Rice was a staff person at Providence Place and 
has given her support to health care professionals and patients 
alike. 
 
The Community Enhancement award went to Elaine Thoreson, 
who’s been a key part of a number of groups, including the 
community associations, helping with Kid Street Smart, fire 
prevention, and t’ai chi classes. She’s also been a volunteer 
with the Humane Society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these women have given of themselves for 
others and they were honoured on Sunday for that gift. They 
and many others have given so much of their lives to helping 
the community of Moose Jaw, and we thank and honour them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, Allan 
Rock is now admitting that the hepatitis C package may be 
reopened after the Ontario government had the courage and the 
compassion and the leadership to reconsider the unfair 
compensation package. 
 
Mr. Minister, you could have shown that kind of leadership but 
you didn’t. All we hear from you is no — no compassion, no 
courage, no leadership. 
 
Mr. Minister, Allan Rock is now saying he wants to convene 
another meeting of the Health ministers to take another look at 
the compensation package. Mr. Minister, what position will you 
take to that meeting on behalf of hepatitis C victims in 
Saskatchewan? Will you stand up for hepatitis C victims in 
Saskatchewan and say yes to a fair package that compensates all 
victims who contracted hepatitis C through tainted blood? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that if he’s read the communiqué accurately, then he 
would reflect it accurately in the House. The communiqué that 
Minister Rock issued had my name right beside it, which said 
that what we will have, what we will have in the very near 
future, is an opportunity for all Health ministers across the 
country to come together, including the federal government, to 
have the discussion further as it relates to the hepatitis C 
package. 
 
Now I want to say to the member opposite, and I’ve reiterated 
in this House before, that people who in fact have received 
blood through the tainted blood in this country and where the 
governments are in fact at fault, we have said we’re going to 
take responsibility for that. We have also said that we’re 
prepared to provide the best health care services to those 
individuals and folks who in fact have been infected by 
hepatitis C. 
 
We’ve gone on to say, Mr. Member, that we in Canada believe 
that there has been significant reductions in health care costs 
over the last several years, and there is an expectation from all 
of us, including for what Mr. Rock has said, to assist us in 
providing additional funding to improve the quality of health 
care services for all Canadians in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’m not 
sure if you exactly know what your job is. Mr. Minister, you 
could be the leader rather than following or just being the 
spokesperson. As Chair, you can be the leader leading the fight 
in the hepatitis C package and representing hepatitis C victims, 
not just here in Saskatchewan but all across Canada. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t know if you’re doing a very good job and 
I certainly know the hepatitis C victims don’t believe you’re 
doing a very good job. Mr. Minister, when are you going to 

show some compassion and some leadership, pick up the phone 
and call Mr. Rock and tell him that the next meeting must — 
must — find a way to compensate all tainted blood victims. 
Will you do that today, Mr. Minister? Will you give that 
leadership? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite once more that in this province we have made a 
decision and the decision is consistent with what all other 
Canadian provinces have said, and that is for the period of time 
between 1986 and 1990 there would be compensation for 
people. Because we say that there were governments, both 
federally and provincially, and the Red Cross, that had 
responsibility, and we say that we take that responsibility very, 
very, very significantly. 
 
We’ll make compensation to those folks because, Mr. Speaker, 
we said — all Canadian provinces and the federal government 
said — that we have responsibility here. And when we in this 
province, Mr. Member, say that we have a deal, we mean that 
we have a deal. And in this province we have a deal. And we 
keep our deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan 
Party is calling for a free vote today on the future of the Plains 
hospital. We have received no indication whether you intend to 
allow that vote. However, we will be proceeding this afternoon 
with a motion calling for the Plains to remain open until at least 
the next election. And we are asking you to allow your 
members to take part in a free vote on that motion. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you allow a vote today on the future of the 
Plains hospital, and will you allow that vote to be a free vote? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this being private 
members’ day, it is a day that belongs to private members and 
they’ll be partaking in this debate I’m sure, as the members of 
the opposition will. The situation with respect to the Plains 
hospital is clear. It was announced back in 1993 that, as part of 
the modernization and improvement of health care in 
Saskatchewan, the Plains will close. 
 
We’re adding exceptional additional space to the General and to 
the Pasqua. There will be an MRI (magnetic resonance 
imaging), the best of renal care, the best of cardiac care, no beds 
lost at all in Regina, and the finest health care system in 
southern Saskatchewan. That’s the commitment of this 
government and this party — the party that brought Canada 
medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hepatitis C debate in 
Ottawa is showing us the power of free votes. Yes, the Liberal 
majority managed to defeat the opposition motion, but many 
Liberal back-benchers are unhappy that they were unable to 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

vote freely. The concern is now festering. And it is one of the 
reasons that Allan Rock is now reconsidering his position. I 
think the NDP is going to have similar problems if it continues 
to muzzle its members on the future of the Plains. 
 
Mr. Premier, NDP MLAs in Regina and Weyburn and Estevan 
and Swift Current know that their constituents want the Plains 
to be open. Will you allow them to represent their constituents? 
Will you allow a free vote on the future of the Plains hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to see the 
Tory Party’s definition of a free vote. When this matter was 
debated last Tuesday, or whenever it was, it was such a free 
vote on the part of the Tory Party opposite there that they stood 
up to a person and voted absolutely, and would have this House 
believe that it was a free vote. 
 
Let’s be blunt about this. I understand totally the people who 
come to the rallies and their concern respecting health care, and 
their attachment to the Plains hospital. I have that attachment to 
St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon. I was born there; my mother 
and father passed away there. I know that attachment very well. 
 
But let’s not be mistaken about it. When they come to these 
rallies and they see a big Liberal sign at the back, when the 
advertisements say, make your contributions care of the Liberal 
party caucus, let us be absolutely certain about what’s taking 
place here. What’s taking place here is a campaign of politics 
and misrepresentation and scare for pure political votes. 
 
I repeat again, we are going to have the best health care in all of 
southern Saskatchewan, with no bed loss with this regeneration 
of health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
afternoon are for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, DEML (Direct Energy Marketing Limited) 
officials testified today under oath and those officials said that 
they first brought the sale agreement to their board of directors 
on April 2 before they signed the final documents. The DEML 
board was presented with all the details and then and only then 
did they sign the final agreement. 
 
Between April 2 and June 1, DEML officials held shareholders’ 
meetings in six provinces where the Channel Lake deal was 
explained in detail, and then they received regulatory approval 
from six different provincial securities commissions and the 
Alberta Energy & Utilities Board. 
 
And what did SaskPower board and officials do during the 
same period of time? Absolutely nothing. They didn’t even read 
the sale agreement. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit that the SaskPower board and the 
cabinet completely lost control of this deal and that a major 
overhaul of the SaskPower board of directors should take place 
immediately? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that I appreciate the fact that the member has now had 
time to read the Deloitte Touche report and the Gerrand report 
which was tabled some two months ago, two months ago in the 
House. And last week where he was way overreacting to 
statements made by the witnesses in the committee — Mr. 
Messer — today he wants to jump to some other conclusions. 
 
All I will say to the member opposite, who runs off in different 
directions, depending on which witness is appearing before the 
committee, is he should be patient, take care to listen to all the 
witnesses who will come before the committee, and once it’s 
concluded, then in a thoughtful manner come to conclusions, 
involve himself in the written report to the legislature, and that 
will be the most positive thing that he could do in the process 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, this morning Louis Dufresne asked 
questions about why $11 million was taken out of the Channel 
Lake bank account by SaskPower on April 2, 1997. And that’s a 
very good question. Dufresne said that Lawrence Portigal 
promised him there would be enough money in Channel Lake’s 
bank account to pay for the trading losses. So Lawrence 
Portigal was obviously counting on part of this money going to 
DEML, but SaskPower took all of the cash before they sold the 
company. 
 
Obviously SaskPower and Lawrence Portigal weren’t 
communicating very well. Can you explain this to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Why was Lawrence Portigal making this 
promise to DEML? And why was the money taken out of the 
bank account in the fashion it was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, who stands in the House each day of these hearings to 
try to grab headlines in the Black newspapers — and with a fair 
bit of success — I just advise you that Mr. Priel cautioned you 
last week when he said, you don’t know what evidence is going 
to be until the evidence is in, until you’ve had a chance to think 
about it. You certainly don’t jump to conclusions about what 
facts are in until you’ve heard all of the evidence. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s incumbent on all of us . . . 
including what Mr. Dufresne said this morning when he held up 
clippings from the front page of the Leader-Post and indicated 
that everyone, including committee members, including that 
member opposite, should wait until all of the evidence is in 
before he comes to conclusions. If he’s going to jump to 
conclusions with half a deck he should dismiss himself and find 
somebody else to ask the questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Ontario Tories 
have decided that they have responsibility to put up money to 
compensation pre-1986 hepatitis C victims. The Saskatchewan 
Tories maintain it’s strictly a federal responsibility and want to 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

let the NDP off the hook. The Liberals believe that this 
provincial government must ensure that all hep C victims in 
Saskatchewan are looked after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Health tell this House whether 
he intends to follow the lead of Ontario and do the right thing 
for victims in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the 
member from Arm River, if he was listening to my comments 
from the member for Moosomin, they’re much the same. And I 
say to the member opposite that in this country we’ve 
negotiated a deal and a package to compensate individuals with 
hepatitis C. And that package is inclusive of all of the provinces 
and the federal government. And that decision we made in 
Toronto four weeks ago, and announced it in Toronto, for all 
hep C victims across the country. 
 
Now I said to the member opposite from Moosomin and say to 
you, that when we sit down to negotiate an agreement with all 
Canadian Health ministers, and we walk away from the table, 
we believe that at the end of the day we have a deal. And our 
belief is that all of the Health ministers who came away from 
Toronto four weeks ago all had a package and agreed to the 
deal. 
 
The discussion that I had on Friday with those members is, that 
deal holds. And I want to say to you when in Saskatchewan we 
give our word, when we give our word in Saskatchewan, we 
keep our word here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One would wonder 
what this world has come to when a Tory Premier like Mike 
Harris is giving this NDP government a lesson in what is right 
— a lesson in compassion. 
 
Mr. Minister, your federal cousins, Mr. Minister, in Ottawa are 
saying that everyone in Canada wants all hepatitis C victims 
compensated, but this government still refuses to. It’s equally 
shameful that the other opposition party in this House doesn’t 
feel that you have a commitment to make here either. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you take the lead and make a commitment to 
ensure compensation for all hep C victims in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that, first of all, when he speaks freely about how it is 
that Ontario on Friday made the statement to all of the Health 
ministers on a telephone conference of which I was the Chair 
and then reported to you and to the people of Canada, that in 
fact we had a deal. And that deal was at noon. And then an hour 
later you have the Premier of Ontario making a statement that’s 
somewhat different from what his minister indicated. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, and I say to the member 
opposite — what we’re doing in concert with the federal 
minister, Minister Rock, of whom I’ve now had a discussion, is 
that we’re going to get together again and we’re going to meet 
at the table and we’re going to have that discussion. 

But I say to you, Mr. Member, that when we said, when we left 
the telephone conference on Friday, that we had a deal in this 
province, in this country . . . and Saskatchewan holds by that, as 
do all of the other provincial ministers across the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services 
recently accused the Liberal opposition of fearmongering when 
we raise concerns about accessing the General Hospital if the 
Plains hospital closes. 
 
The Liberal opposition has received letters from four ambulance 
drivers or EMTs (emergency medical technician) who echo 
these concerns and suggests the minister is wrong — dead 
wrong. 
 
An ambulance driver from Kipling writes, and I quote: 
 

From the first set of lights to get to the Plains takes two 
and a half to three and a half minutes. In the same scenario, 
getting to the Pasqua or the General, it takes at least 15 
minutes. In those 15 minutes someone could die. 

 
Mr. Minister, why do you refuse to acknowledge the concerns 
of people who truly know health care in southern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that I’ve now been at six of these what we would call 
Liberal rallies. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Liberal fund-raisers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And fund-raisers. Because . . . And the 
members opposite have the audacity to stand up in this House 
and speak about all the negative things that are happening 
across the province as it relates to health care. 
 
Why doesn’t the member opposite stand up and talk about the 
realities of what’s happening in Saskatchewan today? Why 
doesn’t he stand up and say that today we spend $1.72 billion in 
health care, the largest amount of spending ever? Of which your 
leader stands up and says that that’s not true. 
 
Why don’t you stand up in this House and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that we’ve invested a significant amount of 
additional dollars in ambulatory services, both for road and air 
ambulance, when your member stands up and says that we’re 
spending less money in health care today? Why don’t you do 
that? 
 
But instead what you do is you put your big Liberal banner up 
and front it as a Save the Plains coalition — and it’s a Liberal 
campaign and it’s a political campaign. Rather than initiating 
and encouraging the work that’s being done in health care 
across this province, you’re busy telling the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, an EMT driver from Moose 
Jaw writes, and again I quote: 
 

It is imperative that this hospital stay open. Going to the 
Plains as opposed to driving through traffic downtown will 
save time, which will save lives. 

 
Another EMT driver from Moose Jaw warns, and I quote, 
“Many lives will be threatened just getting to the General.” 
 
Mr. Minister, we aren’t fearmongering; we are passing on 
concerns from people who deal with life-and-death situations 
every day. Why do you refuse to acknowledge the urgency in 
transporting critically ill or injured patients as quickly as 
possible? Don’t you realize that every additional minute may 
spell the difference between living or dying? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 
question on behalf of the government. And I want to answer it 
in these terms. What is important in this House, and in political 
life I would argue, is to have as much integrity as one can 
obviously advance in the debate of public issues. 
 
On November 25, 1996, the newly elected Leader of the Liberal 
Party, one Dr. Jim Melenchuk, was being interviewed by CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) TV’s Costa Maragos. 
And Maragos said this, quote: 
 

What inefficiencies would you find to make up that $1.3 
billion? 
 
Melenchuk: Well, health care. 

 
Maragos: How much would you save there? Give me a 
number. 
 
Melenchuk: I don’t know because I haven’t seen the 
numbers. I’ll have to look at the numbers. 
 
Maragos: If you don’t know then how can you say that? 
 
Melenchuk: Because I know that there are inefficiencies in 
the system and I understand health care reform and I 
understand health care systems and I know that there are 
inefficiencies in the system right now. 

 
He was going to find $1.3 billion out of health care because he 
was a doctor and he knew the inefficiencies. 
 
Today that same leader and that same party would have us 
believe that what he said a year ago is not true, and today that 
there are no inefficiencies — today there is money to be added. 
This party has no credibility in health care at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, a brochure that that Premier’s 
government is handing out at each Liberal-sponsored Save the 
Plains meeting indicates that ambulance drivers and EMTs are 

going to receive route training for trips to both the General and 
Pasqua hospitals. 
 
Well you know as well as I that in the case of emergencies, 
family members, friends, and others are sometimes forced to 
rush patients into Regina for immediate medical treatment. Mr. 
Speaker, will the Premier please respond: are you also going to 
be providing route training for everyone who lives in southern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is — with the 
greatest of respect to the member opposite — one of the most 
ridiculous questions that I’ve ever heard in my entire life. 
 
Here there is a reorganization that is taking place, and for EMT 
people, the fact that they should be given route training . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now I’ll ask the . . . 
Order. Order. Now I will ask for the cooperation of the 
members of the third party to allow the Premier’s response to be 
able to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think I’ve 
made my point. 
 
Let me just close my answer by simply saying this. This Liberal 
Party in Saskatchewan, which a year ago took the position, and 
we will be continuing to remind the people of Saskatoon and 
Saskatchewan, of $1.3 billion inefficiencies that this doctor said 
he could find in the health care system. 
 
And now you have the audacity to get up in this legislature and 
call for more money when your leader a year ago said that he 
could find $1.3 billion in the health care system. I challenge 
him and I challenge you and I challenge the Conrad Black 
newspapers to stop being your calling board. Get out there and 
tell us where you’re going to find the $1.3 billion savings in 
health care. Tell us that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Chair of Crown Corporations Committee 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, almost daily the members of the Crown 
Corporations Committee get a sermon from the Chair of the 
Crown Corporations Committee about treating witnesses with 
respect. Today just after she finished one of those lectures, she 
used an inappropriate and very unfortunate term to refer to the 
DEML lawyer. 
 
Mr. Premier, it is now clear that the Chair of Public Accounts is 
unable to control her biases and her emotions. Will you 
immediately move to have her removed from the Chair role of 
the committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have only recently 
heard of this. But as I understand the situation, the Chair of the 
committee, at the first appropriate opportunity, publicly 
retracted the comments which were made by her, and did so, I 
think, in the correct and honourable fashion. 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

In any kind of a forum, especially a forum of this nature, it is 
possible for any person to make a slip of the tongue or say 
something which on reflection should not have been said. I’ve 
done it on occasion myself, Mr. Speaker. I hope never to do it 
in the future, but I am sure it will even happen in the future. 
This is what happened obviously with the Chair. The Chair 
recognized it and the Chair made the appropriate remedy at the 
earliest possible chance. 
 
I believe that the question of chairmanship is dependent upon 
the composition of the committee. I believe from what I’ve 
been able to see and judging by the witnesses who have come 
forward, that this Chair has performed the job very, very well, 
and in light of the apology, that should close this particular 
matter and let’s get on with the hearing of the issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Possible Sale of Crown Life 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Deputy Premier. Mr. Minister, the Saturday edition of The 
Financial Post reports that Canada Life is close to signing a 
deal to buy Crown Life. Crown Life employs more than a 
thousand people directly and thousands more indirectly in 
Saskatchewan. And Crown Life is an important and valuable 
member of the business community in our province. 
 
Mr. Minister, is Crown Life about to be sold? What will happen 
to these jobs and what steps is the government taking to ensure 
that those jobs stay in Saskatchewan in the event of a sale? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that there has been a great deal of speculation in the 
media, as it would relate to the issue he raised, for the last 
number of months. 
 
What I can inform him today is nothing that I haven’t added to 
this file a number of times here and outside of the Assembly; 
that there are many rumours going around about the situation. 
But I can assure him that obviously if there were any 
announcement to be made, it would be made by the company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 45  The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
45, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 
be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Health Care Funding 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People who live in 
Saskatchewan have always been proud of the leadership this 
province has had in developing health care in Canada. And 
today we remain proud as we take our health system into the 
21st century. 
 
At a time when other governments are slashing health services, 
we in Saskatchewan have, with the 1998-99 budget, announced 
the biggest budget in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell: — One point seven two billion dollars for health 
care services at a time when the federal Liberal government has 
decreased its input from 50 per cent of the shared costs to just 
13 per cent. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the federal 
government feels 13 per cent is more than enough to contribute 
to the health and the well-being of Canadians. 
 
But in Saskatchewan, the well-being of our people is this 
government’s priority and health is the number one priority of 
our people. So to ensure the quality of life for Saskatchewan 
people, we’ve increased health spending to $1.72 billion, the 
largest single expenditure of the total 1998-99 provincial budget 
— 38 per cent — and we are doing this in spite of the slashing 
by the federal Liberals. Even Allan Rock admits the slashing of 
the Health budget is devastating to health care. 
 
There are those who would say we are not doing enough; those 
who say we’ve made mistakes. And they’re right; it’s not 
enough. We have made mistakes. But, Mr. Speaker, we have 
had to look at what services would best meet the needs of an 
ever-changing population — a more urban population with far 
more people living in larger urban communities than in the past, 
and living longer than ever before with increased usage of many 
services. 
 
For instance, the number of examinations has increased by 31 
per cent over the last four years. The number of people 
requiring dialysis is growing by 10 to 20 per cent each year. Hip 
and knee replacements have increased by 30 per cent. Cataract 
surgery has increased by 81 per cent, while the procedure to 
remove a coronary artery obstruction has increased by 109 per 
cent. 
 
The city of Saskatoon alone has seen a 60 per cent increase in 
adult health . . . day health programs while the Thunder Creek 
Health District has seen a 28 per cent increase in home nursing 
visits. 
 
And costs for these services are also increasing. As indicated in 
this year’s Health budget — the largest in the history of 
Saskatchewan — we are meeting these increased needs: $2.8 
million to support specialized hospital services, including MRIs 
and CAT (computerized axial tomography) scans — one in 
Prince Albert, the first district outside of Regina and Saskatoon 
to provide this service; satellite renal dialysis in Yorkton and 
Tisdale; $2.7 million to the Saskatchewan cancer agency; and a 
new cancer treatment centre in Saskatoon. In addition, we have 
funded a package to strengthen rural and smaller urban centre 
24-hour emergency coverage, with assistance for the 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

enhancement of ambulance services and access to advanced 
EMT and paramedic services; 500,000 for community health 
initiatives with the focus on early childhood development and 
the introduction of improved vaccine for whooping cough given 
to children under seven in combination with diphtheria, tetanus, 
polio, and hemophilus b. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres 
will receive money for a conference addressing the issues of 
care, design, and delivery of services to persons with 
disabilities. 
 
In Ontario, Mr. Speaker, low income residents are quitting jobs 
and going on welfare to avoid paying the deductible fee 
required for the drugs they need. The 1998-99 Saskatchewan 
Health budget addresses this issue in our province with the 
family health benefits program, which provides supplementary 
health benefits to lower income families — just another way of 
encouraging people to remain independent; to encourage a work 
ethic without the concern of wondering if there is money 
available for health services for a loved one. 
 
But that’s not all, Mr. Speaker. We are investing in improved 
and expanded home care services. I don’t know about you, Mr. 
Speaker, but my home is important to me. It’s where I am most 
comfortable, most rested. And when I’m not feeling as well as 
I’d like, my home is the first place I want to be. 
 
And I’m not alone in that. Most of us want to be in a familiar, 
comfortable surrounding, especially when we’re trying to get 
back on our feet when we’re recovering from surgery or some 
illness. 
 
One of the key principles to health reform in Saskatchewan has 
been to provide more community care whenever possible. And 
since 1991, according to the Health Services Utilization and 
Research Commission, we have more than doubled the 
spending to home-based services. 
 
And those same studies have shown that people who received 
post-acute care in hospitals were no healthier two weeks after 
being discharged than those who recovered at home, whether 
they did so with or without home care. However, patients who 
did receive home care reported a lower level of mental health 
problems than those who didn’t; perhaps because they see 
needing home care as less of a loss of independence. In other 
words, Mr. Speaker, being at home after surgery is not, as 
fearmongers will say, detrimental to our health and recovery. 
 
Home care services increased approximately 62 per cent 
between 1991 and ’92, and 1996-97. This means that about 
8,700 more people are receiving home care services than in 
1992. These services include home nursing, homemaking, 
personal care, home maintenance, respite care, and some 
therapies. 
 
The main purpose of home care services is to enable people to 
remain as independent as possible while still enjoying their own 
home. Home care services are generally more flexible and 
responsive to the individual’s needs. 
 
The 1998-99 funding for home care and community-based 
services is $61 million higher than in 1991-92, with $38 million 

of that being for home care services. This $38 million is in 
direct relation to the increase of services being provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of fearmongering lately 
regarding health services in Saskatchewan. Much has been said 
about hospital beds and the waiting period for certain 
procedures. Did you know that in New Zealand, the waiting-list 
for orthopedic surgery is approximately three years? And the 
situation in Australia and England is no better. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order, order, order. I am 
having difficulty hearing the hon. member for Cut Knife, or 
Battleford-Cut Knife. There are a number of conversations 
between members taking place and I invite members to carry on 
those conversations either behind the bar, or better yet, outside 
of the Assembly. The hon. member for — order — the hon. 
member for Battleford-Cut Knife has the floor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Now in mentioning these facts, I am in no way 
condoning a long waiting-list for health services. But as I stated 
earlier, the demand and the costs for services is increasing at an 
enormous rate. And to meet all requirements right now, we 
would have to increase the Health budget at a rate that would 
mean huge cuts to budgets for education, for highways, and for 
many other services. This is, quite bluntly, unrealistic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote a few facts regarding health 
services in Saskatchewan and other provinces. Did you know 
that in B.C. (British Columbia) people pay yearly premiums for 
health services averaging $432 per person? And in Alberta 
health premiums are $408 per person per year? In 
Saskatchewan there are no health care premiums. 
 
Did you know, Mr. Speaker, that in 1997 Saskatchewan spent 
over one and a half billion dollars in health expenditures? 
That’s $1,547 per person per year. While Alberta, with its 
premiums of $408 per person, spent $1,418 per person; Quebec 
spent $1,527; and Manitoba spent $1,628. 
 
In Saskatchewan, where there are no health premiums, we have 
4.6 staffed hospital beds for every 1,000 people, compared to 
3.4 in Ontario, 4.9 in Manitoba, 3.1 in Alberta — with health 
premiums — and 4.2 in B.C. In other words, Mr. Speaker, we 
still have, in spite of what the opposition is saying, one of the 
highest rates of hospital beds per capita in all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan enjoy a long life. In fact 
Saskatchewan people have the fourth highest life expectancy in 
Canada. While we both know it’s nice to live a long life, but 
with longevity comes added health costs as our bones get 
creakier, our arteries clog up, our hearing weakens, and our 
vision dims. 
 
We need to make repairs to our bodies so that we can enjoy the 
best quality of life possible. The $88 million added to the 
Health budget this year will help provide services needed to 
assure this quality of life. We will see upgraded, modern base 
hospitals in Saskatoon and Regina, better emergency coverage, 
increased specialist services, and a fuller range of services for 
people all across the province. 
 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

In December 1997, 26 new physicians established a practice in 
rural Saskatchewan through the rural practice establishment 
grants. And the total number of specialists in Saskatchewan has 
increased slightly in the past few years, while the number of 
rural specialists have remained stable. All in all, this is good 
news, not only for Saskatchewan but for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, all too often we don’t realize the value of 
something until it’s gone. Medicare is something that has a 
value beyond compare. We have children, we receive surgeries, 
hospital care, and we receive home care without any real 
thought as to the dollar value of the services provided through 
our health care system. 
 
Many of our under-40 population simply cannot perceive what 
a two-tier system or total loss of medicare would mean to them. 
I’d like to share a bit of information with you, Mr. Speaker, and 
with all members of this House. 
 
As most of you know, our neighbours to the south, the people 
living in the United States, have little or no medicare so many 
people pay their own way or purchase health insurance at a high 
rate to cover their health costs. These costs can mean financial 
ruin, especially for seniors, who often need more health services 
due to ageing. 
 
But medicare makes a difference. For instance, in the later part 
of the 1980s a visit to the doctor’s office cost $35 in the United 
States; in Canada it cost an average of $25, which is paid for by 
medicare. 
 
During this same time, coronary artery bypass costs $4,000 in 
the United States — that’s not including the hospital stay — 
and it’s paid for by the individual. In 1991 a normal childbirth 
in the United States cost over $4,000, and a Caesarean delivery 
costs $7,286; an appendectomy cost $1,000; hip fracture 
treatment cost approximately $7,000, with an additional $4,692 
for in-patient home treatment. Again, these dollar values do not 
include hospital stay. And there is no medicare to cover these 
costs. 
 
All too often we see news stories of people in the United States 
who have had to declare bankruptcy and lost their homes in an 
effort to provide medical care for loved ones. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Now the member 
for Battleford-Cut Knife has the floor. All other members will 
have an opportunity to enter into this debate. As it’s obvious 
that other members do wish to enter the debate, I look forward 
to those interventions at the appropriate time. 
 
Ms. Murrell: — All too often we see stories of people in the 
United States who have had to declare bankruptcy and lost their 
homes in an effort to provide medical care for loved ones. In 
Canada, and in Saskatchewan, we have had medicare for 36 
years. We do not have to pay out thousands of dollars for health 
services. We do not have to wonder if we can afford proper 
health care for our loved ones. 
 
Imagine if you will, Mr. Speaker, today having to pay $2,150 
for cataract surgery; $9,000 to have a hip replacement; $2,100 

for a normal child delivery; $2,600 for an average hospital stay; 
or $3,200 a month for the average stay in a nursing home. How 
about $25 for a visit to the doctor during clinic hours; or $90 for 
a visit to emergency, not including the treatment, just the 
consultation with a doctor. 
 
For full treatment you can add a total of number cost . . . you 
can add a number of costs — $28 for a chest X-ray; $40 for the 
central insertion of a catheter; $26.50 for the collection of bone 
marrow; $80 for an emergency CPR (cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation); $1.19 per tablet for a prescription; and the list 
goes on. Yes, these are the costs Saskatchewan medicare covers 
for each and every one of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the 87,000 surgeries that were performed 
last year in Saskatchewan would not have taken place if 
individuals had to pay the full costs. Many of the 4.6 million 
people who visited family physicians would not have seen a 
doctor, and the 650,000 visits to emergency would have been 
considerably less if people were personally liable for the costs. 
 
Health care is not free, Mr. Speaker. As users we must not be 
abusers. We must be realistic and understand that to be 
responsible, this government, indeed no government, can meet 
all the demands being placed on the health system without 
cutting back drastically on other services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would all like instant care and hospital beds 
just around the corner. We would all like to have our health 
needs met at home, but this is simply not possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation-New Democratic Party) implemented medicare in 
Saskatchewan. It’s Saskatchewan’s gift to Canada. We believe 
everyone has a right to the best health care available. We want 
better services for all because we believe the 35,000 residents of 
Saskatchewan who are served every day through our health 
system deserve the best we can afford — the best we can afford, 
but not at the peril of all else. 
 
This government will not play on people’s emotions and make 
promises that are unrealistic, promises that we cannot keep. 
This government remains committed to the sacred trust of 
medicare without premiums, without private hospitals, without 
a two-tier system such as that advocated by those members 
opposite. We remain committed to providing the best care 
possible in the most responsible, sustainable way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is because of this government’s commitment to 
health care that I move, seconded by the member from Swift 
Current, the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly commend the government for 
increasing health spending in this budget to the highest 
level in the history of this province, thus ensuring that 
health care remain universal and publicly funded, and not 
slip into a two-tiered system; and further, that the 
Assembly urge the federal government to reverse its 
current practice of funding health care at 13 cents on the 
dollar, returning its investment to 50 per cent. 
 

Thank you. 
 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I consider it an 
honour and a privilege to stand in this Assembly and commend 
the government in its commitment to universal health care. The 
budget that was passed reinforces this commitment and, Mr. 
Speaker, it bears repeating. 
 
The 1998-99 Health budget is $1.72 billion. This is an increase 
of over . . . of approximately $88 million. The operating funds 
to the district health boards, totalling almost $1.1 billion, for 
acute and rehabilitation services, long-term care, home-based 
services, community and emergency services. All districts 
received an increase of at least 1.2 per cent. Maximum increases 
ranged up to 3.2 in the larger cities like Regina. 
 
Total investment of $45 million for upgrading and replacing 10 
to 15 health facilities. I had the privilege just the other day of 
attending the sod-turning at Shaunavon which will cost 
approximately $5 million — a new addition to it, very well 
received. 
 
An increase of 22 million for physician services which will 
provide greater stability and improve the recruitment and 
retention of physicians. An increase of 5 million in the 
Saskatchewan prescription drug plan to meet program needs 
and cover new medications. 
 
And of course we all know about the development and the 
implementation of the Saskatchewan Health Information 
Network at a cost of $20 million. This budget shows that this 
government is in full support of universal health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are indeed fortunate to 
be living in a province which is recognized internationally as 
having the best health system. Mr. Speaker, this would not have 
happened without the vision, the determination, and the 
perseverance of this and former CCF-New Democratic 
governments. 
 
Throughout its history from the early beginnings of universal 
free health care in the Swift Current Health Region No. 1, there 
have been numerous naysayers who feed on the fears of the 
people, and through innuendo and fearmongering tactics, attack 
the universality of medicare. 
 
My colleague, the member from Battleford-Cut Knife, 
eloquently outlined some of the benefits and the costs of these 
benefits to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, today 
medicare is under attack throughout Canada. When the federal 
budget is balanced at the sacrifice of health care, education, and 
social services, on the backs of not the profitable corporations 
but on the backs of the poor, the unemployed and the sick, the 
sordid message is sent throughout the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has not followed the lead of the 
federal government, especially with regards to the social safety 
net. In the area of health care, as the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife stated, the federal portion of health 
funding has dropped from 50 cents of every health dollar to a 
token payment of 13 cents. That’s right — 13 cents, a shaming 

indictment of the federal Liberals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the last few weeks the opposition has 
stated that the health care in this province is in crisis. The 
members opposite base this profound statement because of the 
closure of a hospital in Regina. 
 
Is health care in crisis? Let’s take a look at a survey which was 
conducted by the health board members and managers, and 
managers of Saskatchewan health. A brief summary of this 
survey is as follows: 
 
Ninety per cent of the board members agree that health reform 
is mainly about shifting emphasis from sickness care to 
wellness — 90 per cent. 
 
There is strong support among health board members for a 
publicly funded, comprehensive health care system. Few 
believe that a publicly funded system is no longer sustainable or 
that individuals rather than taxes should pay directly for the 
services — like some of the members opposite have advocated 
— that members should pay premiums. This is not of the 
opinion of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In their evaluations of health reform to date, more than 80 per 
cent of the board members and over 90 per cent of others, agree 
that the changes made in the last five years have been for the 
best. Again, we hear the opposition saying, no way. And still 80 
to 90 per cent of them say that the improvements have been for 
the best. 
 
And I agree with them. These responses confirm widespread 
support for both the philosophy of health reform and its 
perceived impact to date. 
 
Respondents believe that health reform has improved the 
quality of various aspects of the health system to date and are 
even more optimistic about the future — a good sign for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Large proportions anticipate 
improvements in the future with only 10 to 15 per cent 
expecting deterioration. 
 
Now that 10 to 15 per cent correlates very closely to the support 
that the Saskatchewan Party and the Liberal Party are getting 
out in the province. Ten per cent of them believe it’ll 
deteriorate; the other 90 believe that it will improve, and those 
are the people that we are so pleased to govern. 
 
Over 90 per cent of Saskatchewan health managers think reform 
has increased local control over services — another thing which 
the opposition says is not happening, that the provincial 
government has complete control. Well the health board district 
people, the health managers, and the CEOs (chief executive 
officer) say no, we have more local control under this new 
system than we had before. Where these people opposite get 
their ideas from is beyond me. 
 
(1445) 
 
Does this sound like a system in crisis, as the opposition parties 
would like us to believe? The members opposite say, well what 
about the people? Well, Mr. Speaker, poll after poll shows that 
those people who have had to use the health system, who have 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

used, actually used the health system, 80 to 89 per cent of them 
have expressed great satisfaction or satisfaction with the 
services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Where is all of this crying about the crisis of 
health in Saskatchewan? It’s not there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time after time we have heard various members 
over there promote a two-tier or privatized medicine. This 
government will oppose any and all attempts to destroy the 
universality of medicare and will never, ever allow the private 
sector to be introduced as it is in the United States. 
 
They point with pride to the American system of private health 
care. Mr. Speaker, “The Doctor Is Not In” is an essay by 
Ronald Glasser, and I mentioned this in my throne speech, 
which appeared in Harper’s Magazine in March 1998. Glasser, 
by the way, is a Minneapolis pediatrician and the author of 
several books. 
 
In his essay he describes the health care in the good old U.S.A. 
(United States of America). Here is a statement which was 
signed by thousands of doctors with regards to what it is like: 
 

The time we are allowed to spend with the sick shrinks 
under the pressure to increase throughput, as though we 
were dealing with industrial commodities rather than 
afflicted human beings . . . Physicians and nurses are being 
prodded by threats and bribes to abdicate allegiance to 
patients, and to shun the sickest, who may be unprofitable. 
Some of us risk being fired or “delisted” for giving, or 
even discussing, expensive services. And many are offered 
bonuses for minimizing care. 
 

Does this sound like a system that we want for Saskatchewan? I 
think not. 
 
Lately, with regards to the . . . there has been a campaign out in 
rural Saskatchewan called, let’s keep the Plains. A thinly 
disguised way of the Liberals and, to a certain extent, the 
Tories, attacking medicare. 
 
Here is an example of what they have done. In The Southwest 
Booster, which is a paper in my constituency, the headline reads 
“Comments alarm the provincial Liberals.” It really alarms 
these Liberals. And what does alarm them? 
 
Well they say that the NDP must understand how serious this 
situation is. If the number of beds in Swift Current drops below 
the 100 mark, the Swift Current Hospital will lose its status as a 
regional centre. Who said that? It was the hon. member from 
Wood River. Oh, and how he enjoyed that. Any time. 
 
So what happened in the second page, on the second page of 
this same paper, the same edition? Let’s read what they have to 
say: 
 

Dear Editor: 
 
Swift Current District Health Board wishes to assure the 
public that reports suggesting dramatic reductions in 

hospital beds are false (false). We are engaged in creating a 
vision for the future which will expand programs and 
services not reduce them. 

 
A complete contradiction of what the member from Wood 
River had said just previously. We will . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Knock on some doors in Swift Current 
and find out . . . 
 
Mr. Wall: — The member opposite says knock on some doors 
in Swift Current. I’m sure that I would be glad to — and I have, 
and of course we have more support there than we had before. 
We have a good health system. 
 
Now a few words to those Jeremiahs over there, those poor 
benighted members, especially the member from Wood River, 
who will go to all lengths, who will use false information, 
innuendo, and downright distortions of the truth to try to spread 
fear amongst the good people of Saskatchewan. Their hypocrisy 
leaves one ill. 
 
However, the people of Saskatchewan are aware of these 
fearmongering tactics, just as they were aware of the 
underhanded tactics that this former Liberal Party used in 1962 
to try to prevent the inception of medicare — underhanded. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker, the final result will be the 
same. They will be relegated to a non-status position and the 
Saskatchewan people will place their trust in the party who not 
only introduced medicare to this province and to this nation, but 
who are the only party which will fight for its very survival 
despite the vicious attacks by the federal Liberals and the 
cousins sitting opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second the motion 
of the member from Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a few comments before I move an amendment to this 
motion. But I want to just talk a few minutes about some of the 
comments that have been made by the members from Swift 
Current, and I think it’s Battleford-Cut Knife, if I’m not 
mistaken. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker or Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
how the members opposite always like to applaud themselves or 
pat themselves on the back. And it’s just interesting to also note 
how much easier it seems for them to be able to reach around 
them, like their arms are growing longer all the time from so 
many pats on the back. And I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that there are many people across this province who 
really don’t see the government having a lot to applaud 
themselves for, especially when it comes to health care. 
 
The government talks about increasing health care. I would like 
to just . . . and while it may be true this year, especially with the 
fact they put $88 million more into the health care budget this 
year, but if you take a look at the $88 million, you take a look at 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

the waiting-lists that people are on in the province right now, 
you take a look at the access to operating rooms or access to 
acute care beds or even emergency services, it’s interesting — 
of that $88 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan will see very little improvement in those areas. 
 
And why do I say that? Because look at how it’s divided: $20 
million is going to the Saskatchewan Health Information 
Network, to design the SHIN program; 44 million is going into 
construction; 24 million is going into rural health boards or the 
district health boards. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, take a look at what district health 
boards are facing. The Regina District Board, the Saskatoon 
District Board, between them have a $10 million deficit they 
have to address; East Central Health District, I believe is around 
3.5; Living Sky, 1.5. By the time you add the deficits up, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, $24 million doesn’t even help the health 
district boards deal with the increases that they’re facing this 
year, let alone address the deficits they’re facing. 
 
So what do you have at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Does it mean there’s going to be more beds in 
Saskatchewan or even just maintaining the bed levels to meet 
the growing needs in the province of Saskatchewan? No. In fact 
many of the district boards are cutting acute care funding, like 
Living Sky. We just heard the other day where they’re cutting 
back . . . in communities they’re cutting back to four or five 
acute care beds. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does that tell? What does that 
say to people living in rural Saskatchewan? What does it say to 
people here in Regina or Saskatoon? Even some of the 
comments when I was at the Lanigan meeting, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, where people even in Saskatoon become frustrated 
because there the hospitals that they look to for services are 
being clogged with people from the rural areas. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we’re not saying they shouldn’t be there, 
because that’s where the specialist services are. We need those 
services. But there’s a lot that rural communities can offer as 
well. 
 
But for this government to stand up and applaud themselves for 
how well they have done in maintaining or managing health 
care, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government is doing 
health care and even the memory of Tommy Douglas and 
Woodrow Lloyd a very great disservice. Because I do not 
believe that Mr. Douglas or Mr. Lloyd would even approve of 
the management of health care in the province we have today. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t have to go back too far 
and take a look at how the government is really managing 
health care. They talk about the wellness model. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, who introduced the wellness model? It was 
none other than Louise Simard in 1992. 
 
At the same time when she talked about wellness, why did she 
say we needed a wellness model? Why did she close, and the 
government close, 52 rural hospitals and announce the closure 
of the Plains hospital? Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Because they 
said they needed to do that in order to save money to address 
deficit spending. 
 

And then three years later we’re chatting with the minister — 
there’s been a change of ministers; it’s now the member for 
Saskatoon Mount Royal — we asked him, because I’ve been 
looking at the blues and looking at the financial statements and 
I found that in reality, despite all the closures, despite the 
number of hospitals that have been taken out of service, the 
number of beds that have been taken out of service, the number 
of jobs that have disappeared, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there really 
wasn’t any reductions in spending in health care. 
 
So we asked the minister, how does this . . . how do you 
attribute this fact that there really hasn’t been any reductions in 
health care spending? And the minister at that time, the member 
for Saskatoon Mount Royal, said that wellness was not about 
saving money; it was about spending money differently. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people across this 
province, when they look at this spending money differently, do 
not believe that the spending money differently is really 
meeting the needs of individuals. 
 
As the member from Battleford-Cut Knife said, people in 
Saskatchewan certainly do believe in the health care system. 
They believe in medicare. And they believe that they have 
attributed strongly to medicare. But I don’t believe at the same 
time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people in Saskatchewan believe 
they’re getting something for nothing. For the member to say 
that Saskatchewan people are getting something for nothing 
isn’t true, isn’t reality. 
 
We all pay taxes. We pay taxes into the provincial treasury, 
taxes which go to cover services such as health care. So 
whether you’re paying a premium, as the member is suggesting 
some other provinces do, or whether you’re paying it through 
taxes, we all are paying something towards our health services 
and we all expect to receive something in return. People in 
Whitewood said that last night. People have said that all across 
the province, even in Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at what the government 
talks about when they talk about increased spending, people do 
not see the increased spending. They see the cut-backs; they see 
the closure of another 10, 20 or 30 acute care beds. They see the 
closure of the Plains health care centre as taking away 
something rather than building a better health care program for 
the future. 
 
And I find it interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
government would prefer to blame somebody else. They always 
like to find somebody else to blame. Before it was . . . Well, I 
shouldn’t say it before, because it actually has always been. 
They continue to blame district boards. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find that very interesting. The 
district boards, who appointed the district boards? Who formed 
the district boards? The district boards were formed by this 
government. They appointed them all in the first place. Every 
one of them was a political appointee. And now they’ve got . . . 
and they still have control over the district boards by appointing 
one-third of the district boards. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the government really is serious and 
really wants to allow boards to have some real say and 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

autonomy, then they can move forward the private members’ 
Bill that is calling for the elimination of appointed board 
positions and have them fully elected. And if they really want to 
give boards autonomy, allow the boards to have . . . give them 
block funding and allow them to spend the funds in a . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. The hon. member 
for Moosomin is making his presentation. He waited his turn, 
and I invite other members who wish to enter this debate to do 
so at the appropriate time. In the meanwhile, the hon. member 
for Moosomin has the floor. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as I chatted with board members . . . and certainly not 
all board members see my point of view — I will acknowledge 
that. And the facts are, we’re all individuals and everyone has a 
different perception of how they view the delivery of health 
care. 
 
But I know many board members really feel constricted under 
the current guidelines and under the current board program. 
And if the government really talks to . . . and means business 
about allowing the boards . . . and especially blaming the 
boards, then give the boards the autonomy to operate and 
function. And if they don’t do it the way you like it, then you 
have the right to blame them. But to blame them for something 
that when you have a number of at least a third of the positions 
appointed, when the government through the department still 
controls how a lot of the funding is spent, isn’t fair and isn’t 
right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well the government likes to blame the federal 
government. Well to say the federal government’s responsible, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, yes the federal government has their share 
of responsibility as well. The federal government has used 
health care to balance its budget. Yes, they have. 
 
This government as well though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not 
innocent. They have used other agencies as well. They continue 
to blame; they’ve offloaded onto rural governments; they’ve 
offloaded onto local governments, district boards, boards of 
education. Almost every board in this province and the taxpayer 
of this province has had to carry an extra load as the 
government offloads to try and balance the books on one hand 
or the other. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to say that one or two 
individuals or groups are responsible is not true and it’s not fair, 
and it’s time the government recognized that. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at this motion before us, 
the motion talks about maintaining a universal and publicly 
funded program and not slipping into a two-tiered system. Well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe we’re there already, and I believe 
we’re maybe even past the two-tiered system. To say that we 
don’t have one in this province as well is not . . . untrue. 
 
There are individuals in this province who have gone outside of 
the province for services because they’re not prepared, and in 
many cases while the problem they’re facing may not be 
life-threatening, but to wait for 375 days or 365 days and just as 
a recent phone call came to my office, an individual saying that 
they were told last June that they might have to wait a year for 

this operation; so they were expecting to at least by June of 
1998 have the operation they were looking for, now are just 
informed that it could be September or even later. That’s even 
more than 370 days. 
 
So you wonder why people leave the province to receive some 
of the services they’re looking for in this province. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when people do that, it’s already an indication to me 
that we’re beyond or we’re into, well into a two-tiered system. 
 
And it’s time the government took a serious look at how we are 
addressing health care, where we are putting our funding, and 
how we are reaching out to meet the needs to address long 
waiting-lists, to address the problems that we’re having in 
emergency care and the lack of beds and the fact that in many 
cases people do not receive an operation because just about the 
time they’re there . . . In fact as we saw last spring, an 
individual from close to where to I come from had been exactly 
. . . had called me from the hospital and she was irate. And I 
don’t blame her. 
 
Actually she was laying, she was just in fact on the operating 
table when they came in and said to the doctor, we can’t 
continue, we can’t go ahead with this operation because we 
don’t have a bed to place this individual into. And the 
government’s talking about closing the Plains health care 
centre, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we’re lacking beds. 
 
The physician, everybody, was ready to perform the operation 
but there wasn’t a bed available for post-operative care, and that 
was really tragic and unfortunate. Especially, especially, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when this individual had to make plans for 
someone to manage the business and then had to go home and 
re-function or shift everything in order to accommodate a 
postponed operation which would come later on and the 
uncertainty of it. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find it appalling that this government 
continues to commend itself. As always, they’re about the only 
ones that are giving themselves any credit. There aren’t a lot of 
people out there who are giving them credit. And I feel, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that this government has really failed in many 
cases, certainly in the area of health care. With that in mind I’d 
like to move this amendment: 
 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
condemns the provincial government for its continued 
mismanagement of the health care system in Saskatchewan 
and for its lack of compassion for those people in 
Saskatchewan who no longer have adequate access to 
health care after the NDP’s massive reductions in health 
care services. 

 
I move, seconded by the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — The Chair will take a few 
moments to make sure that the amendment is in motion. Why is 
the member for Regina Victoria on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if during this 
time I might have the permission of the members to introduce 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in your gallery we have a large group of visitors. These are 
students who are enrolled at the University of Regina in the 
English as a Second Language institute. These are students who 
have come to us from many parts of the world and who come to 
Regina to learn to speak English better. 
 
I look forward to meeting with these students in a few moments 
and I ask at this time that all of the members join me to show 
these students how welcome they are here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Health Care Funding 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — The motion has been 
amended by the hon. member for Moosomin and seconded by 
the member for Kelvington-Wadena. I find the amendment in 
order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I noticed with interest 
when the member from Moosomin was giving his oration there 
on health care, he blamed several people for the ills of health 
care in Saskatchewan. Unfortunately he omitted the previous 
Conservative government of this province, of which he was a 
member. And they ran up a billion dollars a year every year, of 
debt every year they were in power, Mr. Speaker. It seems odd 
that he would forget them when he was a member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I realize, as does the government, that health is a 
very emotional issue for many people and that we all have a 
story to relate about our experience with the health care system 
or at the Plains or anywhere in the province. 
 
I have an emotional story, Mr. Speaker, myself about the Plains 
hospital. My son-in-law, on a construction site, fell and broke 
his neck. There was somebody trained on the construction site 
that knew not to move him. The ambulance service came, knew 
enough to immobilize his neck. He went to the emergency 
service in Estevan where he was stabilized and transferred to 
the Plains hospital in Regina. He was operated on there and sent 
over to Wascana to recuperate. 
 
And this is all very well, Mr. Speaker. But am I glad that the 
Plains hospital was there? Not in particular. But I am really glad 
that the system was there, right from the training on the work 
site to the Wascana Rehabilitation site. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — And as I said, we realize that these are very 
emotional issues. And for a lot of people, emotion . . . And 
emotion is very easy for the opposition parties to tap into. And 

they can say anything they want because as long as they are in 
opposition they’ll never have to do any of the things that they 
say they’ll do. 
 
And I hear the member yelling, it’s more than emotion; it’s 
about health care. And I’ve heard that at their public meetings, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’ll get up at the public meetings and they’ll 
say, it’s politics, pure and simple. And they’ll say, it’s not about 
politics; it’s about health care. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve only been in this province for about 50 
years. But as long as I have been in this province, emotion and 
health care are politics in Saskatchewan. They’re not burdened 
by the little things like balancing the budget or providing other 
services like education, social programs, highways, paying the 
interest on the debt. Their whole issue is spend more on health 
care. 
 
And where are they going to get the money? Not once have 
they told us where that money’s going to come from. Well 
they’ve made some, they’ve made some suggestions. Their 
leader says he sees the potential to generate large sums of 
money by selling 10- to 15-year development leases to oil and 
gas companies and getting them to pay up front. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that would just about immobilize the oil and 
gas industry in Estevan. Now they may be in favour of that, but 
I’m not. If they want somebody to come to Regina from 
Estevan and purport that kind of rhetoric, I’m not the man that’s 
going to do it because I want the jobs in Estevan. 
 
They have permitted petitions every day in the House, telling us 
to provide adequate funding for the Plains, and this is easy to 
say. But not once have they said where that money is going to 
come from. Maybe they’ll take it out of Education; maybe 
they’ll take it out of Social Services; maybe they’ll take it out of 
Justice or Highways. Or they might reduce the civil service by 
about 500 people, Mr. Speaker. I think they’ve suggested that. 
 
But every day more than 35,000 people make contact with the 
health system in Saskatchewan — 15,000 receive physician 
services; 9,300 receive nursing home care; 6,200 receive home 
care; 4,300 people receive emergency or scheduled care in 
hospitals; 200 emergencies are served by a road ambulance. 
 
Now take that number, Mr. Speaker, 35,000 people. Every 
month that’s roughly a million people. Every person in 
Saskatchewan can be in the hospital, or have in a health system, 
12 days a year paid out of their taxes. The member opposite 
says that they think it’s for nothing. It’s not for nothing. People 
know it comes out of their taxes and they appreciate that. 
 
The member, the Conservative Party probably are promoting 
the same as Alberta; they tend to refer to Alberta a lot. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, in Alberta a family of four at a $50,000 income 
pays $816 premiums in health care. I don’t think the people in 
Saskatchewan want that on top of their fees. 
 
But can we do more? Of course we can; we are doing more. For 
instance in ’96-97 we performed 469 more angioplasties than in 
the ’91-92. That’s a 109 per cent increase. In ’96-97 we 
performed 4,600 more cataract procedures than in ’91-92. 
That’s an 81 per cent increase. In ’96-97 we performed 430 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

more, total hip and knee replacements than we did in ’91-92. 
That’s a 30 per cent increase. 
 
Also the number of MRI scans in the province are increasing. In 
1991 Saskatchewan performed zero scans. We didn’t have a 
MRI scanner. It is projected that this year we will perform 
5,300 MRI scans in this province. Beyond that, a second MRI 
for the province is coming to Regina. 
 
And I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that we are investing in 
quality health services for Saskatchewan — unlike the federal 
Liberals, who have cut the funding from 50 cents on the dollar 
to 13 cents on the dollar — and not only have we back-filled 
that money, Mr. Speaker, but we’ve added another 88 million 
this year and a $40 million increase last year. 
 
The number of surgical procedures that people provide in the 
province each year is staggering. In ’96-97, 87,377 surgeries 
were performed. If you divide that by 365 days a year, that 
means 240 surgeries are done each and every day in this 
province. And they say, Mr. Speaker, that this isn’t good health 
care. 
 
They petition us to increase the funding. Yet when we get up 
and ask them to go and find a better health care system 
anywhere in the world, Mr. Speaker, they come up blank. In 
fact they come up blank fairly often. And where do they get 
their help from, Mr. Speaker? Well the media helps them quite 
a bit. 
 
Because every day that they bring in one out of those 35,000 
people that have a problem in the health care system — we’re 
not saying it’s perfect, that it can’t be better — but they bring in 
one person out of 35,000 that’s having a problem, and the 
media jumps on it as a crisis. 
 
I don’t believe that, Mr. Speaker. I think there are problems 
occasionally; any system has problems occasionally. But then 
you see editorials written in the paper by . . . Well here’s one by 
Bob Hughes, and I think the member from Regina Victoria 
responded to it with a letter the other day. But what they’re 
doing, Mr. Speaker, is putting in-objective reporting and no 
investigative reporting. 
 
He says here, “No vacancy signs out front of the emergency 
entrances to the city’s three hospitals soon to become two.” But 
does he go on and do a little investigative reporting on that and 
find out that yes, there are two emergency rooms going to be 
when the consolidation is done. But that there’ll also be two 
ambulatory care units. 
 
They don’t want to say that because that would essentially be 
saying there are four emergency rooms. Because if you go in 
with a sprained ankle, Mr. Speaker, it’s not an emergency. You 
can go to an ambulatory care unit and be looked after there, 
leaving the emergency room open for heart attacks or car 
crashes or whatever other emergency may arise. 
 
(1515) 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, new medical technologies are constantly 
being developed and as a result, hospital stays have become 
shorter and shorter. This is nothing new. Hospital stays have 

been getting shorter over the last 45 years. Health professionals 
are developing new procedures and are using new technologies 
to decrease recovery time and make treatment easier on the 
patient. 
 
For example, we now have a lithotripter in Saskatoon. It breaks 
up kidney stones with shock waves; you don’t need surgery; the 
recovery time is about one hour. 
 
That’s where the reduction in beds comes in, Mr. Speaker. You 
don’t have to spend three weeks recuperating in the hospital; 
you can be in and out in an hour with a kidney problem. 
Previously, doctors would have to operate; obviously recovery 
time from that type of surgery would take much longer. 
 
Although hospital stays are shorter than ever, there is no 
evidence that patients are being discharged too soon. 
Readmission rates to hospitals, often used to measure whether 
patients are being discharged too soon, have not changed 
significantly in recent years. Provincially, rates of readmission 
within 30 days of discharge have remained steady. In ’91-92, 
before the health reform, 12.47 per cent of patients were 
admitted to hospital again within 30 days of discharge, 
compared to, Mr. Speaker, in ’99 . . . or ’95-96, 11.69 per cent. 
So they’re actually going down and the stays are shorter. 
 
In a recent refinement to monitoring this indicator, the 
department compared rates of readmission within seven days 
for Regina and Saskatoon. These readmission rates were 3.4 per 
cent both in ’91-92 and in ’95-96. The ratio of long-term care 
beds per thousand population in Saskatchewan age 75 and over 
is 133; Manitoba has a ratio of 127; Prince Edward Island has a 
ratio of 89; and Ontario, which we heard about today, Mr. 
Speaker, being the wonderful, compassionate province that it is, 
has a ratio of 95. 
 
Well who is the most compassionate, Mr. Speaker? We have 
more beds per thousand for seniors over 75 than most other 
provinces in this country. 
 
Before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say just a few words 
about the Plains and how that move will affect health care. I 
know that there’s a motion coming up later about this, but I’ll 
save the Assembly some time and do it now. 
 
Many questions and concerns have been raised concerning the 
impending closure of the Plains Health Centre and 
consolidation of health care services in Regina. Many 
individuals, particularly southern Saskatchewan residents, who 
have received excellent care at the Plains — and my family was 
one of them, Mr. Speaker — fear that that same level of care 
will not be available once consolidation is completed. 
 
It is this government’s belief that once consolidation takes 
place, the level of care will be greater than ever before. 
Consolidation means that service will be improved. No hospital 
beds will be lost as a result of the Plains closure. The 153 beds 
now located at the Plains will be relocated to the General 
Hospital and Pasqua hospitals for a total of 675 beds in acute 
care hospitals. There are now, and will continue to be, 675 
acute care beds in Regina. 
 
But on an average day, Mr. Speaker, in Regina only 608 of 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

those beds are filled, leaving almost 70 beds available. That’s 
the average daily census over the year, Mr. Speaker. The space 
available for acute care services will be increased. The 240,000 
square feet of hospital space at the Plains will be replaced by 
400,000 square foot addition at the Regina General Hospital 
and an 80,000 square foot expansion at the Pasqua. 
Consolidation will mean an improvement in services. 
 
After October, the 11 beds spread out in two hospitals allocated 
to patients with heart disease will be translated into 12 beds 
located in one ward of the Regina General, for these are the 
most critical cases of cardiac sciences, Mr. Speaker, and there 
will be new equipment ordered for that and the services will 
improve. We won’t have doctors running back and forth across 
town — because the General is so hard to find, I don’t know 
how these doctors manage. By bringing all these beds together 
in one location, for which the state-of-the-art equipment has 
been ordered . . . and the use of this equipment and precious 
time for the specialist. 
 
When the new addition of the Regina General is opened, it will 
contain a new MRI — a first for southern Saskatchewan — two 
spiral CAT scan machines, and a new cardiac laboratory and 
neurosciences laboratory. Improvements at the Regina General 
and Pasqua hospitals will also improve emergency care, and I 
touched on that earlier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Many people have raised concerns over the parking at the 
Regina General Hospital. Because of the construction, parking 
at the Regina General is in short supply right now, and we 
admit it, Mr. Speaker. With only 648 parking spaces, this is a 
short-term situation. When construction is complete, there will 
be 992 parking spaces, and the visitors’ lot will be right outside 
the main entrance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Together with the city of Regina, the district will address access 
issues to the hospital. There will be new directional signage in 
place to the hospitals. Health care is a priority with this 
government, Mr. Speaker, and is a priority in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d just like to close, Mr. Speaker, by addressing this letter that 
was in the paper from the mayor of Estevan, and he rambled on. 
But I think the most important line is the last line in this letter, 
and he says: 
 

Most importantly, doing what it takes to keep the Plains 
Health Centre open and operating as it did in the early 
1980s. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the mayor may want to go back to the 
1980s; the Conservatives may want to go back to the 1980s, and 
even the Liberals may want to end up in the 1980s, but, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m in the ’90s and I want to stay here with this 
government. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad you 
recognized me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest and read the original 
motion and how it was worded and the members opposite and 
the government trying to pat themselves on the back and 

commend themselves for what a great job in health care they 
have done and how they’ve tried to tie themselves, Mr. Speaker, 
to people like Mr. Tommy Douglas and Mr. Woodrow Lloyd in 
the past, and the CCF. And I see that more and more every day 
in this House. They’re trying to grab on to the straws of the 
past, of people that were committed to a health care system in 
this province that met the needs of all the people in this 
province. 
 
So when I see, Mr. Speaker, a sentence in the motion that says 
“not slip into a two-tiered system,” . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair reminds all hon. 
members that you’ll have the opportunity to put your remarks 
on the record during the debate. I encourage the hon. members 
who have remarks to make to put them on the record rather than 
shouting them across the floor. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
saying, as I read the line that says “and not slip into a two-tiered 
system,” I just wonder where the members opposite have been 
for the last several years and through health reform where 
we’ve gone into a two-tier health system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And a good example of that, of course, is our drug plan, Mr. 
Speaker, that those members opposite have cut since they’ve 
come to power in 1991, to where now people in this province, if 
you can afford to pay the deductible, you pay, you get your 
drugs. And those that can’t, do without. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, that’s verified by many druggists right across 
this province who will tell us that there are people, elderly 
people on fixed incomes, on a daily basis coming into the 
drugstores and rationing themselves on the drugs that the 
doctors have prescribed for them to treat an illness. 
 
And consequently what will happen, Mr. Speaker, at the end of 
the day we’ll end up with a lot of people that will have a much 
more serious illness than they originally would have had or 
might have had, had they been able to afford the drugs and 
necessary treatment to treat that illness, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the focal issues today in Saskatchewan of course is the 
issue of a building that stands out here on the south-east corner 
of Regina. It’s called the Plains Health Centre, Mr. Speaker. It 
was originally built as the Plains hospital to serve the needs of 
people in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
As I said, the focal issue is the Plains itself. However, the issue 
is really all about health care in this province, Mr. Speaker, and 
how it’s continually gone downhill in the last seven years — 
eight years since the NDP have come to power. 
 
The members opposite say, well the services will continue to be 
just the same when the Plains is gone. Well that’s not much 
security for the people of this province when we’ve already 
seen massive waiting-lists, Mr. Speaker — 6,600-plus people 
on waiting-lists in this province and not being able to receive 
service. And we’ve already seen the shortage of beds in the city 
of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So little consolations to the people of southern Saskatchewan 
when the members opposite say, well things will be the same 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

after the Plains is gone because that only means that we will 
still be short of beds, people will be on huge waiting-lists, 
people will be dying en route to the General, and all those sorts 
of detrimental things that people of Saskatchewan don’t have to 
put up with from this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the members opposite continually yap about all the things 
that they’ve done for the people of this province in terms of 
health care, and they talk about fearmongering, they talk about 
the oppositions . . . they continually blame the former 
administration of this province, the Conservative government, 
for all the ill-fated deals that they did and they’re still in court 
today. Then they blame the federal government. 
 
I’ve heard them blame the doctors and nurses in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, for the ill state of our health care. And they just 
pick at straws and they try and blame everyone else. And as I 
said earlier, now they’re trying to grab onto the straws of the 
CCF of the past and people like Tommy Douglas. 
 
But in terms of the people opposite, the members opposite 
talking about whether the state of health care is in a crisis 
situation in this province, Mr. Speaker, and whether it’s 
fearmongering by the opposition parties, whether it’s 
fearmongering, as they say, by the doctors and nurses or the 
people out there, I’d just like to maybe quote a few lines from 
some of the hundreds of letters that I’ve received from my 
constituents in regards to health care and the issue of the Plains 
Health Centre, the Plains hospital. 
 
And then the members opposite can stand up and tell the 
Assembly and tell the people of this province if indeed they 
think that these people are fearmongering and are only doing 
this for publicity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First one I’d like to quote from, Mr. Speaker, if I could, is from 
Terry Martin from Eyebrow, Mr. Speaker, where this person 
writes a note, and it’s addressed to Mr. Premier. And the 
question is, by Terry: why are emergency room nurses 
burdened with finding beds for their patients and having the 
added stress of dealing with the press about it? Now it’s an 
excellent question for the Premier and I hope the Premier’s 
listening, as he should be today, to these questions, and maybe 
he can send a response back to this person in Eyebrow. 
 
It’s an excellent question. Why do emergency room nurses have 
to be burdened with finding beds for their patients? Why should 
they have to be run off their feet sending people back and forth 
between hospitals and trying to decide where they can best be 
treated instead of saying, here’s where they’re going to be 
treated. We know the bed’s going to be here at the General or at 
the Pasqua or at the Plains, and the bed is there. If somebody 
comes in, treat them, and if they need a bed, the bed is there. 
Good question, Mr. Premier. Why is that? 
 
And then the other . . . the second part of the question is having 
the added stress of dealing with the press about it. Of course 
when the media is talking to these people and they’re looking 
for the reasons why there aren’t beds in these emergency rooms, 
unfortunately it’s the front-line workers that have to deal with 
it. The elected members of the district board, or especially the 
appointed member, is nowhere to be found. And when they do 
get talked to by the media they only give the government line 

of, well health care, health services will be much better. 
 
I don’t think Terry Martin from Eyebrow would like to hear the 
members talking like they are today about fearmongering . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . A concerned citizen. 
 
We go along, Mr. Speaker, to another couple from Regina 
Beach, Mr. Speaker. Their question to the Premier is this: how 
long would it take to get into the hospital should we need 
hospital care, or for tests? And at the end of this sentence, Mr. 
Speaker, there are several question marks. I think it’s a 
tongue-in-cheek question and what these people are saying, 
they’re afraid. They’re scared of the health care system; of what 
the NDP, the members opposite, have done to the health care 
system, and they’re asking the Premier to try and rectify the 
situation. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from another letter from a 
gentleman at Regina Beach if I might. And his question for the 
Premier is: recently I had the displeasure of visiting the Pasqua 
Hospital — now that’s quite a way to start out a sentence, Mr. 
Speaker. The lack of confidence that the people of this province 
have in the health system is enormous. However I’ll continue: 
 

Recently I had the displeasure of visiting the Pasqua 
Hospital for a period of one week.  
 

Now this next quote, Mr. Speaker, is well worth . . . everyone, 
even the members opposite, should listen and take note of this. 
And this gentleman says: 
 

I observed patients sick, dying, and in great pain lining the 
halls of emergency. 

 
Now is that what our health system is all about, Mr. Speaker? 
People sitting in the emergency room in the ward, with other 
people watching why they can’t get treatment because there’s 
no one there to care for them because of the massive cuts and an 
ill-fated health reform that this government has initiated some 
several years ago. 
 
So I could continue from the quote from the gentleman from 
Regina Beach: 
 

Also I observed the staff being run off their feet and unable 
to answer all calls for help immediately. 
 

Now we have people indeed sitting in emergency wards at this 
hospital, Mr. Speaker, one of the hospitals that the Premier 
keeps saying is going to be the saviour of medicare in Regina. 
And this type of thing is happening, Mr. Speaker. Small 
consolation to the folks and especially to a gentleman like this 
who had to sit in this emergency ward and look at what was 
happening to people around him. 
 
This gentleman goes on to make a suggestion I guess, to the 
Premier of this province in that: 
 

We need much improvement in the health care system and 
more money. 
 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

A suggestion to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, by a constituent. He 
rounds out his comments with a statement: 
 

Closing the Plains is ridiculous. 
 
Now that’s a member of . . . a resident of Regina Beach. His 
comments about closing the Plains being ridiculous are 
comments that are made right across this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Not only in Regina, not only in southern 
Saskatchewan, but right across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
now beginning to receive letters from much farther North in the 
province about the closure of the Plains and how people are 
being affected by the lack of health services in this province. 
 
As I said in my opening comment, that the Plains had just been 
a focal point on health care but the real issue in this whole 
exercise, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that people are scared of the 
lack of services that we have in Saskatchewan in the health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could quote from another couple of 
constituents of mine from the community of Riverhurst. And if 
the members opposite would like to take issue with these 
people, I’m sure that they’d be happy to receive a phone call 
from them if they think that they are just fearmongering and 
aren’t on the mark of what they’re saying. 
 
These people go on to say that there is a shortage of beds and 
operating rooms. Now the Premier can say that there isn’t and 
the Premier can say that everything will be fine after he closes 
the Plains in October, if indeed he does continue on that track, 
and we can only hope that he will change his mind. 
 
There is a shortage of beds and operating rooms. For people 
like us that don’t know Regina, there was such easy access to 
get to the Plains. Now one of the main advantages of course of 
the Plains hospital in its location is the fact that it has easy 
access to the people of the province, in particular . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Northwest on his feet? 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry to interrupt the 
member at this present time but I would ask leave to introduce 
guests that have arrived. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
the member of Arm River to allow me to do this introduction. 
 
I’m doing an introduction today of a school, the Holy Family 
School from Saskatoon, on behalf of the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland who is ill today. 
 
We have a number of students that are in your gallery today, 
Mr. Speaker. We have 42 grade 7 and 8 students that are here 
today sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. Their teachers today are 
Mr. Gerry Klein and Ms. Carol Gerspacher. And the chaperon 
is Debbie Lim. 
 

So I want to welcome these students here today, and welcome 
to Regina. And I will be meeting them after for a photo. So 
again I would like all the members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Health Care Funding 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, if I 
could go back to this couple from Riverhurst on the banks of 
Lake Diefenbaker in my constituency where they’re asking the 
. . . or telling the Premier I guess, Mr. Speaker, that there is a 
shortage of beds and operating rooms. 
 
For people like us that don’t know Regina, there was such easy 
access to get to the Plains. Of course that’s been one of the 
main issues, Mr. Speaker, on the Plains hospital itself, is the 
accessibility of that hospital to people in southern, especially 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now as our population in Saskatchewan, as we know, Mr. 
Speaker, is ageing, we will continue to see that phenomenon 
over the next several decades. We will have more and more of 
our senior citizens needing access to health care. And certainly 
one of the main advantages of the Plains hospital was the fact 
that irregardless of the area of the province that people are 
coming from, there are seniors coming from all over. And 
they’re much more comfortable driving in an open area where 
there’s less traffic as there is at the Plains hospital. 
 
Certainly people are continually telling us that they could drive 
their spouse, mom or dad, to the Plains for whatever reason it 
might be — for tests, for treatment, for operations. But one of 
the things that they have said, clear and plain, is that if they’re 
in an emergency situation, the seniors of our province would 
have much more difficulty driving downtown in Regina than 
they will driving to the Plains. In fact, many people have said 
that there’s no way that they would be able to drive to 
downtown Regina to access the services that they need where 
they could at the Plains. So accessibility is clearly an issue at 
the Plains. 
 
This couple also goes on to ask the Premier that, please don’t 
close the Plains. That’s pretty straightforward, Mr. Speaker. I 
think even the Premier can understand that and I’m sure maybe 
even the back-benchers over there might be able to understand 
that statement. 
 
Then they go on to say, and the last statement is a pretty tough 
one and it’s one that I see on many of these forms, these letters 
that I get back, where this couple goes on to say, “The NDP 
government are trying to kill us off.” 
 
Now that’s a pretty terrible attitude for people in this province 
to have regarding health care and regarding a government that 
was elected by the people to serve the people, and one of the 
areas of service should be ensuring that their health needs are 
met. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last letter that I’ll quote from is from a 
gentleman in Central Butte who goes on to address the Premier, 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

and states this: 
 

There are too many beds being closed and too long 
waiting-lists for most services. To close the Plains hospital 
and turn it into any different type of facility is sheer 
stupidity and stubbornness on the government. 

 
You don’t have to be . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’m just having trouble reading the writing here: 
 

You don’t have to be very smart to realize that the cost of 
removing insulation, the asbestos issue, will be near the 
same regardless of what the use of the building is and not 
used. 

 
And then they wind up, they wind up his statements with: 
 

Wake up and smell the roses. 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I want to bring to the 
attention of the hon. member for Arm River that the subject of 
the motion before us is, although broad, is a different subject 
from the subject of the motion which immediately follows it on 
the order papers for debate in the Assembly today. And that in 
— Order! — and that in order for debate to be relevant, it must 
be relevant to the subject which is before the Assembly. Order. 
 
And I have been listening for some time and have been 
recognizing that the subject matter of the hon. member’s debate 
is really — Order! — and that the subject matter for the hon. 
member’s debate is most appropriate for the next item on the 
blues on the agenda before the House. 
 
I know the hon. member will want to bring his remarks in the 
context of the motion which is being debated on the floor at this 
moment. And I’ll ask the hon. member to conduct his debate 
accordingly. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be happy to. 
And unfortunately I thought I was addressing the amendment to 
the motion which says that . . . condemns the provincial 
government for its continued mismanagement of the health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do believe, and so do the people of 
Saskatchewan, that the Plains is part of the mismanagement of 
this government. And that’s why I like to bring in some of the 
comments from these people regarding health care. And I hope 
that, Mr. Speaker, that you allow us that latitude. 
 
The issue, Mr. Speaker, the issue of health care in this province 
is one that I think will —as the health meetings that we’re 
holding around this province will indicate, that with the 
numbers of people that are turning out for those meetings, that 
there is grave concern about health care and the health care 
system in this province and particularly the mismanagement of 
that health care system by the present government and its 
former members who started the health care reform model back 
in 1991, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As these people from my constituency are talking about too 
many beds being closed, the waiting-lists are too long — that’s 

mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. That when you allow a system to 
get into the situation that it is into now is a total example of 
mismanagement, that a government would allow those types of 
things to happen. And it’s because when the government 
embarked on the wellness model, Mr. Speaker, there was no 
plan. 
 
That’s the underlying flaw with the wellness model — there 
was no plan, Mr. Speaker. A group of bureaucrats and the new 
government hoping to . . . a bunch of people hoping to become 
government met in the basement of a room here in Regina one 
evening and thought that kind of a catchy phrase to get elected 
was wellness model. And certainly in times of budget restraints, 
the issue caught on because people were wanting to balance the 
budgets at all levels of government. And so the government 
based their re-election . . . or their election campaign in 1991 on 
that. 
 
Unfortunately since that time we have seen nothing but a lack 
of plan . . . a lack of a plan, total mismanagement. We’ve seen, 
as I’ve been talking about, the closure of one of the newest and 
most accessible hospitals in Saskatchewan being slated for 
closure. We’ve seen the lay-offs of some 600 nurses, Mr. 
Speaker, the very people that we need in this province to ensure 
that the health needs of our constituents are being met. 
 
We now see of course, some of the districts starting to 
recognize the mistake that this government made; in that of the 
Saskatoon district, in trying to hire on more nurses. And of 
course being told that well, there’s now a shortage of nurses in 
this province and if we wanted to hire them, we can’t get them. 
Well I don’t believe that for a minute, Mr. Speaker. I don't think 
that all those 600 nurses that were laid off over the last number 
of years have picked up and left Saskatchewan. 
 
A lot of people have left Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, over the 
last seven or eight years, but I don’t think all the nurses have, 
because many of those nurses, many of those nurses are married 
to farmers like myself; many of those nurses are married to 
small-business people in the community. Many of those nurses 
are married to school teachers. Many of those nurses still have 
to make a living here, even if they can’t practise the trade that 
they were trained to do. 
 
We’ve seen the creation of a two-tier system, Mr. Speaker, as I 
mentioned, in the drug plan of course, and the gutting of that 
drug plan since the NDP came to power. And I know if you 
polled a lot of the back-benchers over there, a lot of those 
people, they would too tell you that that was the wrong thing to 
do, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve talked to many of them, and many of 
them, if they had the courage to stand up, Mr. Speaker, and say 
yes, we don’t think that is where we should have gone, they 
would be happy to change their view on that. 
 
I talked, Mr. Speaker, about the huge waiting-lists of course, 
and the people that are suffering and dying as a result of not 
being able to get the necessary treatments and procedures that 
they need. So, Mr. Speaker, I think, as opposed to a government 
that is committed to the people of this province in ensuring that 
all their needs are met — especially their health care needs — 
that this province has certainly a huge failing grade with the 
health care system in this province. 
 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that because of many of these letters 
that are coming in, dozens and dozens of them daily, Mr. 
Speaker, the people are sending a message loud and clear to the 
Premier that they’re not very happy with health care in this 
province. Thank you. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to speak 
of the challenges of health care, in particular the gist of my 
presentation will be the northern perspective. 
 
And first of all, Mr. Speaker, I find it very odd that the 
amendment by my hon. colleagues to the right talks about 
mismanagement. And I want to say first of all, I think the 
greatest injustice to the health care system in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, has been the Tory mismanagement of the 1980s 
and which we are now continuing to pay a heavy price, not only 
in health care, Mr. Speaker, but also in education and municipal 
funding and highways. And the list goes on and on and on. 
 
Many of my constituents, Mr. Speaker, they say, they stand up 
and they say, I find it absolutely amazing and astonishing to see 
. . . (inaudible) . . . about the challenges of Saskatchewan and 
especially the challenge as it related to health care system, when 
they’re the ones that put us in this particular mess in the first 
place. 
 
I’m so glad, Mr. Speaker, that we have young children watching 
the Assembly today, and obviously they’re going to be talking 
and listening and hearing the debate about health care, what’s 
the future of health care in Saskatchewan, what are some of the 
challenges of northern Saskatchewan health care. And 
apparently, Mr. Speaker, it takes a lot of effort, not only by the 
people of northern Saskatchewan but by the professionals, by 
the bus drivers, by the tax drivers, by the airplane pilots, all the 
people out there — they could talk about the challenges of 
health care in northern Saskatchewan for hours on end. 
 
And I want to say one thing very clear, Mr. Speaker, when 
every time that the Saskatchewan Party gets up or puts a motion 
forward talking about the mismanagement of any department, 
especially health care, I want them to also stand up and take 
responsibility for the mismanagement of this entire province 
that has taken place, time and time again, in 1990s and well 
beyond the year 2000; that we will be cleaning up the mess that 
they left behind. 
 
So the people of northern Saskatchewan, loud and clear, are 
saying, stop standing up here talking about mismanagement of 
health care or mismanagement in any capacity, because you are 
the ones that mismanaged this province. Stand up and take 
responsibility for that action. 
 
And stand up and for once speak the truth — no more politics. 
Mismanagement of this province is primarily and totally 
because of the huge debt that we are paying as provincial 
taxpayers as a result of their mismanagement of the finances of 
this particular process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 1980s was a dark time for the history of 
Saskatchewan. In northern Saskatchewan, once again, Mr. 
Speaker, once again we have seen evidence that oh, it was not 

us that mismanaged health care or highways, it was not us that 
mismanaged the finances of Saskatchewan. We’re a new party. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of northern Saskatchewan do not 
for one instant believe that they have care, compassion, and not 
for one instant believe that they want to manage health care in 
the right place. Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan knows the 
truth; northern Saskatchewan is going to find out the truth and 
they’re going to continue hammering home that message. 
 
Eight hundred and fifty million dollars each year we paid as low 
as two or three years ago in interests alone, Mr. Speaker. What 
can $850 million do? Or $15 billion in debt, Mr. Speaker. To 
me that is the most prime and absolute flagship of 
mismanagement when it comes to health care — $15 billion, 
Mr. Speaker. What did we do with that? 
 
Well that’s why I want to point out today —I’m standing up 
talking about the health care challenges on behalf of northern 
Saskatchewan — and I want to point out we’re going to point 
out the challenges. And we’re going to point out the mistakes of 
the past Conservative government. And now the new 
Saskatchewan Party believes that they’ve got this new, fresh 
approach. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of northern 
Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan in general will 
never forget. 
 
And I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that when you talk 
about management of health care, health care is a holistic 
approach as people have spoken about time and time again. We 
would like things like: decent roads; even employment 
opportunities adds to the health of an individual; a decent 
education; decent health care; and above all else, Mr. Speaker, a 
decent home. If you have those four or five ingredients, then the 
health of the Saskatchewan people will most certainly take an 
upwards swing. 
 
Right now in northern Saskatchewan health care is not a 
priority. In the last three years we have spoken about the 
challenge of health care in the North and we’ll continue 
hammering home some of these challenges. 
 
I found it very difficult, Mr. Speaker, to stand up to talk about 
the amendment. In particular the reason why, because the 
Saskatchewan Party in their new effort of trying to appear to be 
fiscally responsible and a social conscience level that’s 
deserving of parties such as the Liberal Party, they’re trying to 
capitalize on that whole process. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I must say it is a very feeble effort — very 
feeble. If people out there believe that that motion is going to all 
of sudden . . . it’s a magic wand, all of a sudden they’re the 
most fiscally responsible, they’re going to protect health care, 
well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the people of Saskatchewan on 
behalf of the northern people that look at how they managed our 
fiscal situation, look at how they managed the province, look 
how they gutted health care and sold equipment to Alberta for 
highways. 
 
Look at all that record. And is that the kind of party you want 
protecting health care? I say to you, northern Saskatchewan 
says no, and they will say no for ever. 
 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I want to particularly point the 
attention of my presentation now to the challenges and the 
shortcomings of the medical system in northern Saskatchewan, 
right from Uranium City to Beauval to Pinehouse, and the list 
goes on. In particular, the transportation problems the people of 
the North have to suffer through. 
 
You look at the isolation. Uranium City once was a very 
glorious community and at one time they boasted a population 
of 3,500 people. And now, Mr. Speaker, there’s probably 250. 
And the people of Uranium City are now going to lose their 
hospital. The hospital is going to be moved over to Stony 
Rapids; there’s going to be a brand-new facility built there for 
the people of the Athabasca Basin. 
 
Now what’s going to happen to the health care needs of the 
people of Uranium City, Mr. Speaker? Has anybody got a clear 
answer? Is there a clear definition of a plan of how they’re 
going to serve these people long after the hospital is gone? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, isolation is the biggest challenge of health 
care in northern Saskatchewan. And you look at the amount of 
people that are in desperate need of health services in the North 
and then you turn around and you say to yourself, how can I, as 
a MLA, how can I help these people out? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when we’re given the opportunity such as 
this to blast not only the Saskatchewan Party for pretending to 
be caring about health care, but I also wanted to send a notice to 
the governing NDP Party, that they have got to pay attention to 
the challenges of northern health and the challenge that people 
face in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
At the start of my presentation, I want to talk about the seniors 
first of all, Mr. Speaker. And I got a lady out of Beauval, who 
was very gracious, to do a study for me amongst the senior 
citizens. And I told her to take about 20 senior citizens and visit 
them and see what they thought about health care and some of 
the challenges that they had. So I even referred to the survey as 
the McCallum survey, because that was the lady’s last name 
that done the survey. 
 
And the questions that I asked her to go and ask the elderly 
related to health care. It said, number one, what changes have 
you encountered over the past several years when it comes to 
health services in the community. Okay? And number four, do 
you feel that there are certain services that are needed and not 
provided to our elderly people. And of course, this last one was 
number seven, what are some of the pressing issues that you 
face today? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll share with any member of the House, 
any member, government or non-government, the results of 
those surveys. And every single one of the senior citizens in this 
survey, the McCallum survey of Beauval, talk about the 
challenges of health care for senior citizens. 
 
They talk about the fixed income that many elderly people live 
on. They talk about the travel that many elderly people have to 
endure — the travel from Saskatoon to Ile-a-la-Crosse, which is 
five hours. They talk about the coverage, some of the costs of 

medication. 
 
And this is the exact problem that we have when it comes to the 
shortcomings of health care, Mr. Speaker, is that people aren’t 
taking the time to listen to those people most impacted and most 
affected by some of the politics of Saskatchewan — everything 
from the mismanagement of the Tory government to the 
uncaring ways of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been constant complaints from some of the 
elderly people throughout the constituency of mine that talk 
about Y coverage. Y coverage, for those people who don’t 
know, is the card that’s issued by Social Services that helps 
some of the senior citizens, or those that live on fixed income, 
with the cost of travel and sometimes in the event, the costs of 
some of the medication. 
 
And the problem that we have, Mr. Speaker, is that when you 
assess an individual or a senior citizen on what their needs are 
for health care, many times they don’t take into consideration 
first of all their fixed income. How much they truly get each 
month. That’s kind of entered in box A. But where the other 
expenses don’t come into place is repairs to the homes that 
many senior citizens own on their own and they take care of 
some of the repairs. They also have the high cost of living in 
northern Saskatchewan and there’s all these other costs 
associated with being a senior citizen. 
 
So when the time comes to do an assessment, many of these 
costs aren’t taken into consideration. So as a result, it shows 
that these senior citizens are living well beyond their means . . . 
and well within their means; therefore Y coverage is not an 
option. 
 
And who picks up that slack, Mr. Speaker? The family 
members of these senior citizens go through a lot of costs, a 
tremendous amount of costs, to transport their elderly aunt or 
mother or father and take them to Saskatoon, feed them, put 
them up in a hotel, and also look after some of their medicines. 
 
So the families of some of these senior citizens are the true 
people that are committing to health care, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
making every effort to make sure that their senior citizen or 
their elderly relative has access to health care and has some 
opportunity to really try and get some help for some of their 
ailments. 
 
And I really wanted to take the time to share some of the 
individual stories of some of these senior citizens because some 
of them are very heart-wrenching. And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, because of the time constraints, this will certainly 
allow us to . . . time will in essence give us the opportunity to 
rise again to speak on some of the particular challenges of some 
of the senior citizens. 
 
And now I wish to talk about the taxi operators in northern 
Saskatchewan. I rose up in the Assembly again and spoke about 
some of the heart-wrenching stories of some of the people that 
had accidents on the highway that are being transported from 
location A to a location B, and I spoke about some of the 
challenges, Mr. Speaker, of the people in the North that need 
medical transportation. 
 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

And what we find out is, after all these years, that there was 
very little commitment towards establishment of a road 
ambulance service and that taxi operators and taxis were used to 
help transport critically ill or critically injured patients. 
 
Now where in this day and age, 1998, would you find in the 
country of Canada where you’re transporting critically ill or 
critically injured patients in a taxi-cab? Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s 
look north. Let’s look to the Athabasca and the Cumberland 
districts and see that’s exactly where it is happening. 
 
And in fact on one incident, Mr. Speaker, the taxi operator and I 
were talking about a gentleman that she lost in her taxi-cab and 
she was feeling quite depressed. And when I talked to her she 
said: you know, what I almost wish that we should have done is 
they should have given the taxi operators training to respond to 
emergencies such as this. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that’s probably the . . . that’s the 
most accommodating effort that I’ve ever seen in terms of 
northern Saskatchewan, when you talk about road ambulances, 
when the taxi operators are saying, we should get trained to 
respond to emergencies such as this. 
 
It was an effort of her part to try and deal with the situation, but 
what she didn’t understand, Mr. Speaker, is that she wasn’t 
trained and she wasn’t equipped to deal with that situation 
because she wasn’t an ambulance driver and she wasn’t an 
emergency medical technician. She was a taxi driver driving a 
taxi. 
 
(1600) 
 
So in essence, I urge this particular government to help 
establish a road ambulance service to complement the air 
ambulance service in northern Saskatchewan to transport as 
quickly, as safely, and as efficiently as possible, critically ill or 
injured patients from northern Saskatchewan to the Saskatoon 
hospital, or to whatever hospital that the doctors wish to send 
these patients to. It’s very, very important, Mr. Speaker, that 
some of these issues be raised. 
 
And as well we need to also look at . . . This afternoon I got a 
call from a gentleman from the far North. He’s working at one 
of the mines, and his wife apparently has come down with 
cancer and she’s got several trips to make to the South; very 
expensive. And they also have some children they have to take 
care of. 
 
So as a result, this gentleman had no choice but to take a leave 
of absence from his job to care for his children and to transport 
his wife back and forth. And of course all this is a tremendous 
cost to the family. So at wit’s end, he just called in and asked 
me: is there any way that we can get help in this situation. In the 
event that we have this huge challenge in front of us by getting 
from the far North to the Saskatoon hospital — it cost me a lot 
of money — where can I get some help? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is what we mean by compassion. Here’s 
a man that had no choice but to quit his job . . . or take a leave 
of absence from his job to do two things: to care for his family, 
his young children, and to also transport his wife to and from 
appointments at the Saskatoon hospital. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s got to be something that we can do 
to address the transportation problems in northern 
Saskatchewan, especially from the far northern communities — 
Fond-du-Lac, Uranium City, Black Lake, Stony Rapids, 
Camsell Portage. All of these people live way up there, 75 miles 
from the Northwest Territories border — 75 miles. That’s a 
tremendous difference. So what happens when we say we can’t 
afford to cover those transportation costs, or we will not cover 
them. Who covers them, Mr. Speaker? The families, that’s who 
covers them. 
 
So it’s high time we begin to recognize that northern 
Saskatchewan has unique health care problems. It has an 
incredible challenge of having to transport people to and from 
our centres for medical attention. And what’s not going to help 
the management of the health care system, Mr. Speaker, is the 
Saskatchewan Party’s new-found fiscal responsibility. They’re 
saying, oh that was then; we’re a new party now. People don’t 
buy that — don’t play that politics with us. Those politics do 
not work. People are not that silly. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, is you need some real, true 
commitment from this governing party to address some of these 
needs. Senior citizens living on fixed incomes can’t afford some 
of the medicines; Y coverage a lot of times is not given to them. 
Now some of the people that live in isolated communities have 
trouble getting their people to certain appointments. And their 
list for getting patients on Y coverage or help for transportation, 
and the criteria, is getting more and more difficult. 
 
So in the meantime, where does that show up. Where does the 
problem show up, Mr. Speaker. It shows up in missed 
appointments. It shows up in tremendous costs to the families. 
It shows up in health care really not being a priority for a lot of 
people that are in dire need of it. And I myself, Mr. Speaker, 
have seen many instances of that happening in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I urge people out there to appreciate and respect what 
northern Saskatchewan people have to go through. They’ve got 
a tremendous challenge. And I stand in this Assembly and I can 
hear some members saying, well now my constituents got to go 
50 miles to go to a hospital. Well, Mr. Speaker, a huge part of 
my constituency has to travel 5, 600 miles to a hospital. So 
learn to respect that, learn to appreciate that, and learn to 
commit to that process that ensures that every Saskatchewan 
resident, no matter where they’re born, has access to health care 
that’s affordable and certainly is able to address some of their 
health concerns. 
 
And I point out, Mr. Speaker, the problem with the medical 
transportation, that there is no road ambulance to deal with the 
situation of accidents on highways or people being transported 
between communities. That has to be addressed as well. 
 
And I also talk about the incredible challenge that northern 
Saskatchewan people face when you talk about the holistic 
problems of health care — everything from social development 
to infrastructure needs to economic development and to basic 
needs such as access to water and sewer, housing, and the list 
goes on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to kind of wind up my thrust of . . . my 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

presentation today, I want to make it very clear that northern 
Saskatchewan believes that health care has to be a priority. 
They believe that they elect government to do one thing — it’s 
to provide us with responsible, good governance. Governance 
that gives us the basics of health care, of education, of decent 
roads, of a job, of an opportunity to own a home. These are 
some of the things that people want in northern Saskatchewan, 
and I believe the rest of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the thing that we always say, Mr. Speaker, is for crying out 
loud, listen to our concerns, help us to work to a solution that 
addresses some of these concerns. And if you want to put your 
money where your mouth is, that’s the only way that you would 
show commitment to addressing some of the challenges of 
northern Saskatchewan communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one last plug in terms of the challenges when 
I talk about infrastructure, is the access to homes . . . And also 
in Stony Rapids in 1998 we still have not got water and sewer 
— a right and a service that you and I always take for granted, 
Mr. Speaker. Turn on the taps and flush the toilets, or turn on 
the taps to wash dishes. Well, Mr. Speaker, in Stony Rapids in 
this day and age — which is a health-related problem — they 
still have not got water and sewer. 
 
So no matter how you look at it — La Loche hospital, Stony 
Rapids water and sewer, no road ambulance services, senior 
citizens having a tough time getting Y coverage, the families 
having to cover an incredible cost for transporting their families 
back and forth — these are the real and true challenges of 
northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I say it’s time that this government — if they say they’re 
committed to health care, if they say they’re committed to 
health care — they need to promise us two things. Number one, 
is that they won’t point to the federal Liberal government, 
because what’s the value of having a provincial government if 
all of their problems you simply point to somebody else. People 
don’t buy that. We have a provincial government that can make 
decisions and is capable of making decisions; so make those 
decisions that reflect your commitment to health care. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, is don’t pretend to try and help 
people because people will know right off the top that this is not 
the way to go. This is not what we expect of our government. 
And so therefore they will judge you accordingly and that could 
in the end certainly spell a lot of trouble for you. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in closing, I want to thank the Assembly 
members for listening for a few moments here. And I do want 
to say, when all is said and done, the buck stops here. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate this 
opportunity to get into the debate that we’re having today on 
health care because I think it’s important to put things back in 
perspective. Having listened to the debate all afternoon, I’ll tell 
you there are some very different agendas at work, particularly 
on the opposite side of the House here. 
 
What we have being laid out in front of us by both opposition 

parties is a not so subtle attempt to destroy medicare. This is a 
not so subtle attempt to cause fear in the system. It’s a not so 
subtle attempt to cause unrest and unease about the future of 
publicly funded medicare. 
 
That’s the agenda of the opposition. It’s not saving the Plains. 
It’s not attempting to save medicare. It’s not attempting to save 
a publicly funded system. What we have is a not so subtle 
attempt to bring about the kind of an environment that’ll allow 
them to introduce a two-tiered medical system into 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Let’s just recognize it for what it is. And I 
think it’s unfortunate, I think it’s unfortunate that the group 
they’re attempting to do this with are the elderly in 
Saskatchewan. I think it is shameful that they are attempting to 
scare people into believing that health care is not going to be 
there. 
 
I think it’s shameful the way that they’re using health care 
professionals to go around and cause fear in the system. That’s 
what the Liberals are up to. At least the Saskatchewan Party is 
straightforward about it. At least they’re straightforward about 
saying, we are going to deinsure some services. But the Liberals 
are coy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am wanting to spend some time today talking 
about where the system is going and what exactly is happening 
today in Saskatchewan in the politics around this issue. I’ve 
been out now to three different health care rallies — the save 
the Liberals meetings. And let me tell you at each of them I 
have been disgusted, absolutely disgusted with the approach 
taken by the people at the head table. 
 
And I will tell you right now there is something very seriously 
wrong in the way that they are managing this. And you can see 
it, you can see it in terms of the response they’re getting from 
the audience. They are . . . the people who are coming out are 
certainly concerned about health care. There’s no doubt about 
that. 
 
They’re concerned about whether the service is going to be 
there when they need them. They’re concerned about the horror 
stories they’re hearing that are dragged out every single day by 
the opposition. 
 
That’s why they’re coming out to these meetings. And you 
know what they’re getting? More scare tactics. 
 
Weyburn, last week, there we are down in Weyburn. About, I 
don’t know — let’s be generous and say about 500 people 
showed up to listen to what was happening. They heard a 
presentation from Darlene Sterling, an emergency room nurse, a 
former member of the Regina Health Board. 
 
And do you know what her big argument was, Mr. Speaker, as 
to why the Plains should be saved? Because it has private 
bathrooms. And why was that important? Because people might 
get AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) from the 
toilet seats at the General. That’s coming from a health care 
professional. Can you believe it? 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

And can you imagine a health care professional today standing 
up in Saskatchewan and saying, well do you want to share your 
room and share your bathroom with someone who might have 
AIDS? Give me a break. People know that you cannot get 
AIDS from a toilet seat. But that’s what Nurse Sterling is out 
there in rural Saskatchewan telling people. That’s what they’re 
telling people. 
 
They’re telling people the most far-fetched stories, and yet is 
there anything corrected by the member for Wood River? No, 
not a thing. Is there anything from any of the members who 
have chaired it? No, nothing. They’re simply interested in 
stirring it up again. 
 
This is nothing but a campaign of fear that is being driven by 
the Liberal Party. And I think it’s unfortunate that they have 
decided to use the seniors of this province as their target 
audience and to try and cause fear. 
 
I got a letter yesterday from a constituent of mine who was 
fairly . . . I thought it was a very nice letter actually, outlining 
his concerns, and that of his wife, about the current situation in 
terms of health care. But he says point-blank in the letter — and 
I didn’t bring it with me today, otherwise I’d quote directly 
from it — but he says that the decision to close the Plains 
hospital is causing fear among the elderly. It’s causing fear 
among the elderly. 
 
And I thought, you know, I think he’s probably right about that. 
But it’s not the decision that’s causing fear; it’s the 
fearmongering by the opposition. That is what is causing the 
angst and anxiety among the elderly. This is the problem — this 
view that somehow health care services aren’t going to be there, 
the fact that you’re not going to be able to easily find the 
General. I don’t know how you could not find the General. It’s 
simply down Broad Street and turn right. It’s not that difficult 
to find. 
 
We get into these debates out there in the public about health 
care and you know what? Most of the arguments that we listen 
to aren’t at all about health care. The arguments are about the 
number of bathrooms in the hospitals and the argument is about 
the number of parking spaces. That’s what the debate is about 
out there. 
 
I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, it’s nice for the opposition to be able to 
come into this House and say people are scared about health 
care. But we know for the most part what they’re concerned 
about are secondary issues surrounded and stirred up by the 
opposition. That’s what the problem is here and I think that we 
should recognize that. 
 
Parking is the issue that they identify, not health care — 
parking. What has parking got to do with this? I’m listening at 
the rally in Indian Head the other night and a woman comes up 
to me and says, well, what if you are having a heart attack and 
you’ve got to go and find the General Hospital? 
 
And I’m thinking: if you’re having a heart attack in Indian 
Head, why aren’t you going to the hospital in Indian Head. Why 
would you drive an hour into Regina with chest pains? Why 
would you do that? 
 

An Hon. Member: — Not in Indian Head. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Not in Indian Head. The member says we 
closed it down. Not in Indian Head. 
 
Why would you do that? And then says, well how would you 
like to drive around trying to find a parking space with chest 
pains. Well I’ll tell you: if I’m having chest pains I’m not 
driving around looking for a parking space, I’ll be right up at 
the front door. That is the kind of issues we’re dealing with. 
 
And what does the opposition say? Do they say no, no, don’t 
worry; if you’re having chest pains, go to your local hospital, 
whether it’s Weyburn, whether it’s Indian Head, go to your 
local hospital. But no, no, that’s not what they’re saying. 
They’re saying oh yes, this is terrible. It’s awful. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Going to die. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Exactly — they say you’re going to die. 
That’s what this debate has come down to, and I think it is 
pathetic the way that the Liberals are using the elderly as a 
target to try and cause fear in the system. 
 
The member for Arm River today spoke at some length about 
the Plains hospital. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that this is certainly an important issue all across 
southern Saskatchewan. There’s no doubt about it. It is 
probably an issue which has quieted down some in Regina but 
has certainly taken on a life of its own in some of the rural 
communities. 
 
(1615) 
 
People are concerned about what type of access they are going 
to have and what the services are partly because the Liberals, 
the members opposite, have put forward this view that we’re 
shutting down 153 beds. That’s the argument they put forward 
— we’re going to shut down the Plains hospital. 
 
Well let’s just make this very clear. The Plains hospital will be 
closed. The beds will be moved to the General. The beds are 
going to be moved — they’re not going to be closed — they’re 
just going to be moved. They’re going to be moved over to a 
new and improved General Hospital. 
 
And you want to know why the General Hospital’s being 
expanded? It’s being expanded because that’s where the health 
care professionals want to work. 
 
Easier access to the Pasqua. If you’re in an emergency situation 
coming in from rural Saskatchewan for one reason or another, 
why would you not go to the Pasqua, right off the Lewvan. 
Same kind of a freeway as we have on Ring Road. 
 
I listened to the member for Arm River talk about his 
constituents from Riverhurst. Why on earth would you come 
down the Lewvan, drive past the Pasqua Hospital, all the way to 
the Plains. Why would they do that? Well they wouldn’t. 
 
The only one that thinks they would do that is the member for 
Arm River. And why does he think that? Because he wants to 
make a political point. He doesn’t want to worry about health 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

care. You would not drive from Riverhurst, down the Lewvan, 
past the Pasqua Hospital, all the way over to the Plains. I just 
don’t believe that that’s what a rational person would do. 
 
I don’t know why we are causing . . . having the Liberals cause 
such fear in the system . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . My 
friend from Carrot River Valley makes a point that the debate 
that we’re seeing today is very much like the one in 1962. I 
have to say I wasn’t around in 1962 and I’m sure the member 
for Carrot River Valley wasn’t around in 1962 either, but — 
well at least not on the steps of the legislature — but the debate, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it sounds the same. It was that same kind 
of scare tactic that the members were bringing in back then. 
Back then they called it the Keep our Doctors committee and 
they would rally and say, oh if the single-payer system comes 
in, you’ll never get health care, you’ll never get access to your 
doctors, it won’t happen. No one will practise in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well guess what? The Liberals were wrong in 1962, they are 
wrong today, and no matter how they will try and sell it in the 
future, they’ll be wrong about it then too. Because as long as 
there is a NDP government on this side of the House and in this 
province, medicare will be protected, medicare will be 
enhanced, and we will maintain a universal, publicly funded 
system, much to their chagrin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I hate to leave the 
Saskatchewan Party out of it because I think we should 
probably make a couple of comments about where they’re 
headed. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party under their new leader has made it 
very clear. They think the way to solve the so-called crisis in 
the system — and I want to return to that in a second — but the 
way they think to solve the so-called crisis in the system is to 
de-insure services. 
 
Now what does that mean — de-insuring services? 
De-insuring’s a pretty fancy word. You know what it means? 
 
It means that you will no longer have that covered by medicare. 
That’s what that means, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It doesn’t mean 
anything other than that. It means that what you have is that 
when you need your knee fixed, you’ll pay for it directly. It 
means that if your mother needs her hip fixed, you’ll pay for it 
directly because the state and the province will not cover that 
any more. That’s all de-insuring means. It means the start of a 
crumbling and the destruction of our medicare system. 
 
People talk about two-tiered systems. And I think the member 
for Estevan spoke at some length about that today. And you 
know what? He was right, because a lot of people don’t 
understand . . . Perhaps it was . . . actually I guess it was the 
member for Battleford saying, talking about how a lot of people 
don’t know what a two-tiered system is — sorry it was the 
member for Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
A two-tiered system is simply that. It’s a system where you 
de-insure services so that the wealthy can get them. You’ve got 
one list if you’ve got a cheque-book and you’ve got another list 
of people if you’re dependent on the state. That’s what 

de-insuring means. It’s very simple. 
 
Right now we don’t have that. The member for Moosomin 
would like us to think that we have that. We do not have that. 
People do not get bumped to the front of the line. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, you bump. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — They do not get bumped to the front of the 
line if they’ve got money. It doesn’t work that way. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not true. Because you’re doing it 
to your friends all the time. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Now this is an interesting one. The member 
for Wood River, I’m glad he brought this up. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the member for Wood River says . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. Order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the 
exchange back and forth just before you interrupted . . . or took 
control — sorry, before you took control of the House, I’m 
sorry. Actually it was a good intervention, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I just wanted to put it on the record. What the member for 
Wood River was saying is that people do in fact front jump to 
the front of the line. His accusation is that MLAs move to the 
front of the waiting-lists their own friends and supporters. 
 
Well I’ve heard this before. This is being said out at those Save 
the Liberal rallies around rural Saskatchewan; it’s being said by 
Darlene Sterling. And I say to the member today, the member 
for Wood River who yells from his seat, I say to him if you 
know that that happens, you stand in your place today and you 
tell us who did it. You tell us which one of the MLAs on that 
side of the House are bumping their folks to the front of the list 
because I can tell you nobody on this side is doing that. 
 
The waiting-lists are controlled by the doctors — not controlled 
by the Department of Health, not controlled by the government, 
certainly not controlled by the MLAs. They’re controlled by the 
doctors. So this is simply not true. Not true. 
 
And I would like to see the members opposite take 
responsibility for once and provide some facts for some of the 
accusations that they’re making, because they’re scaring people. 
They’re causing fear in the system and they are totally, totally 
misrepresenting what is going on. 
 
There is not a single case of any member who has bumped 
anybody to the front of the line . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
He says yes there is. Stand in your place and tell us who it is, 
Mr. Member for Wood River. That’s what I say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. He should tell us who it is, because there’s nobody. 
This is a pure and simple case of put up or shut up. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Now it is obvious 
that a number of members wish to enter this debate. A number 
— order — a number of MLAs have already entered the debate; 
it’s obvious that a number are yet wanting to get into the debate. 
For the moment the member, the hon. member from Regina 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

South, has the floor. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to address this issue because it is in 
fact a very important issue. Let me talk a little bit about the 
so-called crisis in the system that the members every day 
attempt to spin into a big issue here in this Assembly. 
 
Let me tell you first off that I find it somewhat disconcerting, 
the approach that they are taking in terms of dragging people 
and their illnesses into this Assembly. I’ve preferred always that 
we take a more rational . . . And perhaps, perhaps it’s too 
intellectual an approach to the debate in here, but I would rather 
that we have the discussion about the numbers and the impact 
it’s having on people’s lives without making a spectacle of 
them. 
 
And I think that the members opposite have a tendency to do 
that. And I think it’s unfortunate because I think it is a cause of 
some concern about how we treat people’s privacy issues and 
how we respect them and how we deal with the health care 
system generally. 
 
It is certainly, obviously in the case of the Liberals, not an issue 
they’re worried about. They’re prepared to play politics with 
elderly people; they’re prepared to play politics with their 
friends like Darlene Sterling. They’re prepared to play politics 
with people’s lives as they drag them into the gallery and make 
a spectacle of their suffering. I think that is, personally — and 
I’m not speaking for anybody else in my caucus — except that I 
have to tell you I find that somewhat disconcerting and 
somewhat shameful that this is the approach being taken. I just 
think it’s very unfortunate that it’s resorted to that. 
 
From a governmental standpoint I have to tell you it is difficult 
for us to refute these cases because we have to respect the 
privacy, confidentiality of these patients. For instance it is not 
simply acceptable for us to stand up and question or refute what 
has happened in a case, and the Howard Johnson case I think is 
an excellent example. I know one of the questions that pops to 
my mind immediately is, well who discharged the individual 
that had to get checked into the . . . decided they couldn’t go 
home and decided to stay overnight in the Howard Johnson? 
 
I mean I guess we could use our parliamentary privilege in here 
and simply say it anyway but I never really believed that that’s 
the way this institution should work. And I think the members 
opposite know that. They have the luxury of not being called in 
terms of . . . I think they know they have the luxury of being 
able to hide behind the privilege in here. And they have the 
luxury of knowing that we will have to abide by the 
confidentialities. 
 
That’s, I think, what is happening here and I think it’s 
unfortunate the way that the Liberals, and in particular the 
Liberals, are using it. But we’ve seen in terms of the 
Saskatchewan Party, attempt the same thing to the point in this 
particular case on social services where they were making such 
a case out of Ms. Montgomery’s funeral expenses to the point 
that the member for North Battleford had to stand up on behalf 
of the family and ask them to cease and desist in the question. 
 
I think it’s time that what we do here on this debate, and I think 

generally in debates of this nature, is to raise the level of it a 
little bit. I don’t mean raise the heat. I mean raise the level of 
the debate back to what is appropriate and acceptable for the 
legislature of Saskatchewan. Let’s not make a spectacle of 
people’s lives. Let’s not create a crisis that doesn’t exist. Let’s 
simply debate the issues in front of us. 
 
I have no problem with us getting into a debate about whether 
or not there’s enough beds in the system. I don’t think that 
that’s a big problem at all. But unfortunately question period’s 
becoming more and more, as the member for Lloydminster 
says, like an episode of Jerry Springer. I mean it’s becoming 
this kind of talk show sensationalism, and I think it’s 
unfortunate. Because what there are out there are some very real 
concerns. I think there are some very real issues that we should 
be addressing and we should be talking about. 
 
Let me speak very specifically to the bed issue number here in 
Regina, and the question of specialists, which is one of the 
things I hear out and about as we’re . . . both in my constituency 
and out in other ones at these various rallies. The question is, 
are there enough beds in Regina today? Now the answer I guess 
is yes, if the beds in Weyburn and Estevan and other southern 
Saskatchewan communities are being utilized as they were 
envisioned to be. The answer is no, if people are coming into 
the city for services that they could otherwise have in their 
home districts. 
 
That’s a very simple answer to it and I think that’s a fairly 
truthful one — 675 beds should be sufficient. 
 
Now the question may be posed, should we then simply move 
the beds where people want to use them? If people want to 
come into the city and use the beds here because they have 
family here or because it’s easier for access or whatever the 
various reasons are, should we simply make sure the beds are 
available and move that funding with it? We could do that. 
 
But I think we need to understand that what that causes is a 
secondary debate in the smaller rural communities and the rural 
service centres about what is available in the rural health care 
centres, in terms of what is available to them. And it becomes 
very quickly an issue about the jobs in these communities. I 
think that’s what we need to talk about. That’s a good debate 
for the legislature to have because I think it’s something we 
need to really come to grips with. 
 
But we need to understand the consequences of that. I believe 
that the 675 beds we have in the system today are sufficient to 
deal with the needs of the system today. We have not seen 
anybody turned away. Let’s make that very clear. Nobody has 
been turned away from any of our hospitals. 
 
(1630) 
 
An Hon. Member: — That is not true. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — That is absolutely true. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not true. I can show you several 
letters in here . . . 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Now the member for Wood River stands up 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

and says that he’s got more facts. Yes, well, he yells from his 
chair and says, yes we’ve got more facts. Yet again refuses to 
table anything to prove it. Yet again refuses to provide any facts 
to back up his arguments. 
 
This is typical of what this member was like, both when he was 
in this caucus and certainly since he’s moved over to the 
Liberals. If the facts don’t support his arguments, well don’t let 
them get in the way of it. 
 
I think what we should remember though is that there are a 
series of questions we need to address in terms of utilization, in 
terms of specialists. But we need to get away from this 
parochial attitude that somehow medicare is based around the 
health care facilities that they designed. It’s not. 
 
When I listen to these people in various centres stand up and 
tell their stories of how they were healed at the health care 
centre — the Plains health care centre — you know what I 
hear? I hear them saying, medicare works. Medicare works. The 
doctors and the nurses in the medicare system that are stationed 
at the Plains hospital did what they were supposed to do; that 
the system was funded appropriately so that they were looked 
after. 
 
That’s what they’re saying. The fact that we’ve allowed it to be 
built around some sort of parochial view about what these 
buildings are is just . . . it is an unfortunate, absolutely 
unfortunate case for us to . . . situation for us to deal with. 
Because they are still going to have the same care. They are 
going to have the same practitioners when the facilities move 
over. 
 
The fact is the system doesn’t need 1,200 beds in Regina. It 
doesn’t. It does not need the 1,200 beds in the system. It was 
designed for that when we had . . . that was why we have three 
hospitals. And whether that number should be 675 or whether it 
should be 740 or whether it should be eight, the fact is, is that it 
still is better usage of health care dollars to run that out of two 
facilities. Everyone agrees on that, except probably the Liberals. 
 
But that’s what people believe; people understand that. Now the 
question is, did the health board make the right decision about 
which facility to shut down? I don’t know. I mean this is 
something that the health board has debated, this is something 
that the practitioners have debated, and this is something that 
now the community is debating. 
 
I can tell you it is certainly not the popular decision. I can tell 
you that the decision to close the Plains has certainly not had 
good explanation done outside of Regina. I would argue that the 
explanation as to why it is being consolidated have not been 
explained well here in Regina. 
 
However to take what is an issue of concern to people and blow 
it into a supposed crisis, I think is completely inappropriate on 
the part of the Liberals. Because the fact is, is that the medical 
care is going to occur and it is going to be safe and it is going to 
be protected and is going to be available at the General Hospital 
and at the Pasqua Hospital. 
 
This argument about, you know, and I just talked about this 
earlier, is we get into some of these arguments that well, you 

know, people are concerned about access because they don’t 
want to drive into the middle of Regina. Every single hospital in 
Saskatoon is inside the city. They don’t have a single hospital 
on the perimeter. Royal University isn’t; St. Paul’s isn’t; City 
Hospital isn’t — all three are basically on a line in the middle of 
the city. And you know what? People find them. 
 
People in Saskatchewan can find the hospitals. I don’t believe 
that people are so dumb that they can’t find the hospitals. But 
that’s what the Liberals would have us believe. They’d have us 
believe that it’s too hard to drive up Broad Street or drive up the 
Lewvan and find a hospital. How is that possible? They do it in 
Saskatoon, why can’t they do it here in Regina? 
 
What is so different about southern Saskatchewan that people 
can’t follow the grid road system and find these hospitals? You 
know what? They can. And you know what? They do. Because 
the fact is, is that people in southern Saskatchewan are already 
going to the General Hospital. They’re already going to the 
Pasqua Hospital. And do you know why they’re going to those 
hospitals? Because that’s where the services are offered. 
 
This is not a really big secret as to how you find your way to the 
General Hospital. People find it now . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . This is exactly true. My colleague from Regina says that the 
people, cancer patients, drive in and find Allan Blair memorial 
clinic. No difficulty. That’s the place where cancer treatment is. 
And you know what? It’s in the city centre. People can find it. 
Emergency care, the ambulance drivers know where the 
hospitals are; they’re going to them now. 
 
What frustrates me about this debate, listening to some of these 
folks out there who sit at the Liberals’ head table pretending 
they’re not political, you know, and yet launching into very 
political attacks. I understand there was quite an interesting one 
last night in Whitewood. That as they get into this they say, 
well, you know people don’t know how to find these hospitals. 
Well they do. They say, people don’t know where they’re going 
to park. Well there’s parking available. What you’re doing is 
you’re taking a situation of uncertainty and you’re causing fear. 
And that is wrong. Pure and simple, it’s wrong. 
 
And I think the members know it. And they sit and they chortle 
and they giggle. And they sit and they giggle about it. Because 
they know that what they’re doing here is playing politics. Well 
that’s fine, that’s fine. I mean you know, I enjoy politics too, 
and we can play politics. But let’s not play politics with 
something where people are concerned and where people are 
worried, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let’s not do that. 
 
Let’s have a debate about health care. Let’s not have a debate 
about the number of beds, let’s have a debate about services. 
I’m proud of the fact that in this district, that we will soon have 
an MRI. There’ll be a great benefit to southern Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m proud of the advances we’ve seen in our medical system. 
I’m proud of fact that we’re going to have new CT scanners; 
I’m proud of the fact that we’re going to go from three 
emergency wards to essentially four, with this move over to two 
ERs (emergency room) and two ambulatory care centres. That’s 
going to be very positive. That’s going to be a big improvement 
in our system. 
 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

I’m proud of the fact that in outlying areas that we’re providing 
greater care. That you can get dialysis outside of Regina and 
Saskatoon now. That we’ve got a CT scanner going into P.A. 
(Prince Albert). Those are the advantages of the system when 
it’s well managed. It’s not simply having 1,200 beds. It’s not 
even necessarily having 800 beds in Regina. It’s making sure 
the beds are available and they’re well managed. 
 
And let me say this about the other argument put forward by the 
members opposite, when they say that emergency room nurses 
shouldn’t be looking for beds. That’s what the utilization people 
do in the hospital, not the nurses. Utilization people look after 
where the beds are. This idea, as we hear out there all the time, 
and Darlene Sterling stands up and, you know, looks all scared 
and worried about how the system’s in crisis. And she says, we 
almost had a crisis. There were almost not enough beds. 
 
Well guess what? There wasn’t a crisis. There were enough 
beds and there have been enough beds and there will be enough 
beds. That is the fact. It’s not the hysteria but it’s the fact. And 
it’s nice to be able to say we almost did. Nearly happened. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me say in terms of the way we look at 
the health care system, we need to look at it as a coordinated 
unit. There are beds available elsewhere. A constituent of mine 
phoned the other day. Her mother-in-law, I guess it was, had 
been in a car accident and it was quite a severe one. But 
fortunately she escaped without major injury although she did 
have very badly bruised ribs. 
 
This occurred near Lang, and what happened was they decided 
to bring her into Regina, into the General Hospital. Why they 
were driving to Regina, why the ambulance drivers would 
decide, particularly when there were no cuts, to bring her into 
Regina rather than to Weyburn, which was closer, I don’t 
completely understand. This is one of those things that we need 
to work out because there were beds available in Weyburn. 
 
Now of course this happened on a Easter long weekend, and 
that causes some problems, but we need to make sure that these 
things get worked out. We need to make sure we start looking at 
it that way. 
 
There’s an attachment. This emotional attachment I understand 
very definitely. I’ve had family members treated in the Plains 
too. I understand that. But I think we need to recognize that 
there are in fact . . . that there’s one, essentially one hospital 
presently at three sites in Regina and the beds are coordinated 
among them. 
 
That’s the way the system works and that’s the way that we 
need to start to look at it and understand it to work, because that 
is in fact the way it’s designed. There’s no longer this system 
where you’re just attached to one hospital. Services are 
coordinated throughout them and they will continue to be as we 
move to two hospitals, just as we coordinate with the outlying 
centres in terms of the care that they receive. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question may very well come up, well 
why are the Liberals doing this? Why are they causing this fear 
in the system? Why are they going around the province with 
these public meetings? 
 

I have to tell you that I’m not completely opposed to the, I have 
to tell you I’m not completely opposed to the idea of doing 
public meetings. In fact it was one of the things I really thought 
that the district health boards should have done more 
thoroughly between 1993 and 1996. I think that they should 
have gone out and explained this more thoroughly in terms of 
what the changes were going to mean to people. And I think 
that this is a fairly important thing; so it’s good to be able to get 
the chance to go out and explain what’s going on. 
 
Let me address . . . The members opposite are yelling across, 
saying well you know, what’s my position on the Plains 
hospital? Let me make this fairly clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
1993 the decision had been made, at the time of the closure of 
the 52 hospitals, that the Plains Health Centre should be shut 
down, its services should be consolidated with the other two 
facilities, and they should be upgraded. 
 
One of the reasons for that was because contrary to what the 
members opposite are saying about there only being $11 million 
worth of renovations needed at the Plains — which isn’t true — 
there are about $30 million worth of renovations that are needed 
to bring the Plains up to standard. That’s actually what needed 
to happen but they don’t talk about that of course any more. 
 
The decision was it made more sense to consolidate into two 
hospitals, do the upgrade at the other two hospitals, and make 
sure that we’ve got the services provided. That was what was 
going on. 
 
Now there was certainly public concern about it. There’s 
absolutely no doubt. People were concerned about what was 
going on at the Plains. We see that today. They still are not sure 
that they understand it. 
 
It’s no secret I have not been a particular fan of the decision to 
close the Plains. Because it was bad for health care? No. The 
decision to do the consolidation is good for health care. The 
reasons is, is because it didn’t have public confidence. And 
unfortunately, while our solution to that as New Democrats, as 
a government, as the folks who manage the system, our solution 
is to try and restore the confidence by explaining what the 
services are that are available, the opposition however, the 
Liberal opposition however, decides that what they’re going to 
do is they are going to go out and take advantage of the 
situation and campaign and cause fear. They’re going to do that. 
They’re going to cause fear in the system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
That’s what they saw as a solution. There’s no solution here. 
 
I’ve yet to hear them say that if they form government in June 
of 1999 that they will re-open the Plains hospital. They haven’t 
said it. They haven’t said it. They have not said that. And do 
you know why they have not said that? They have not said it 
because they aren’t going to do it. They aren’t going to do it. 
 
Their leader, Dr. Melenchuk, will still be chained to the door 
of the Plains Health Centre in June of 1999 but he’ll unchain 
himself only to come to the legislature, because he’s not 
going to unchain it to re-open it. Let’s be honest about that. 
And let’s listen to some of the others that they’ve got dragged 
along at their head table. 
 
Darlene Sterling, saint of the Save the Plains Committee. 



May 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

What did Darlene Sterling do when she had the chance to 
vote against it? She did nothing. She supported closing it. 
The head of the Save the Plains Committee voted to close the 
Plains Health Centre. So did Dr. Borden Bachynski, so did 
Liberal Party president Anita Bergman, former member of 
this Assembly — Liberal member may I point out. So did Pat 
Edenoste, a former Liberal MLA. 
 
This was the core of the Save the Plains Committee, and 
when they were given the option, what do they do? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Now I want to . . . I’ve 
been listening carefully . . . Order. I’ve been listening 
carefully to the remarks of the hon. member and the debate 
and the motion before us, and I do want to remind the hon. 
member for Regina South that it is . . . Order, order. Order. I 
do want to remind the hon. member for Regina South that it 
is important that your remarks be relevant to the debate 
which is before the House and that it may be much more 
appropriate that his remarks are directed to the next item on 
the agenda which immediately follows the motion that is 
before the House at the moment. 
 
And I’m sure that he’ll want to guide his debate in such a 
way that he directs it in the context of the motion and the 
amendment which are before the House, and to avoid finding 
himself where his debate is not relevant to the motion that is 
before the House at the moment. 
 
Having said that, I will ask for the cooperation of all hon. 
members as well to permit the debate to be heard in a 
reasonable kind of way. And that the House, I’m sure, will be 
happy to hear all hon. members put their remarks on the record 
without having to shout them across the floor. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that 
redirection. I think the point, much like the member for Arm 
River was attempting to make earlier, I was simply trying to use 
as an example. Obviously I’ve overstated the specific and I’ll 
go back to the motion at hand. 
 
The question is, is what is the services that are going to be 
available throughout the system? The question is, how are we 
protecting health care? And let me address that very 
specifically. The consolidation will maintain all the services, all 
the beds that are currently in the Regina system. The members 
opposite know that. The Liberal members opposite know that 
full well. 
 
But they won’t say it. They won’t say it to the public when they 
go to meet them. They’re simply campaigning on a campaign of 
fear. It’s something reminiscent of Dick Collver, you know. 
Wasn’t it old tricky Dick Collver who was on the mediscare 
campaign? I mean we knew what they were doing. It was the 
same debate back then. Because it was an attempt to destabilize 
medicare in order to bring in a two-tier system through the back 
door. 
 
As I say, the Saskatchewan Party, you know, is very upfront 
about this. And I think that that’s good. We can get into that 
debate — should we de-insure services; should we make you 

pay for your own hip and knee replacements? They’re yet to 
give us a list as to what they’ll de-insure, but we know it’s 
coming. We at least know, philosophically, they believe in that 
and we know that that’s what they will be doing. 
 
The Liberals though are going to do exactly the same thing. We 
know it. Because what they’re attempting to do is destabilize 
the publicly funded medicare system so that Dr. Melenchuk and 
the folks can bring in a two-tiered system of medicine. We’ve 
seen it. The member for Arm River’s talked about it. He’s 
talked about the need for a two-tiered system. 
 
We know that this is the case. So why not just be upfront, like 
the Saskatchewan Party has been? Why not just be upfront and 
say it? Why not just say, in order to reduce the pressure in the 
system, what they’re going to do is they’re going to de-insure 
services? 
 
Create one list for folks who can pay; create another list for 
those who rely on the system. Why not just be upfront about it? 
And you know what the worst part of this is, and I think this 
addresses very specifically the original motion, is that in a lot of 
provinces that is becoming a very real option because of the 
way the federal government has cut back their funding for 
health care. 
 
In Saskatchewan it has been a fight for us to be able to maintain 
medicare at the rate that we have because we’ve had to come up 
with the new dollars. We have had to come up with the new 
dollars. Health care hasn’t been cut. We’re spending a record 
amount on medicare, a record amount — $1.72 billion; $88 
million more this year — $88 million. 
 
They stand up today and the opposition is lobbying the 
Government of Ontario for putting $100 million into the 
system. That’s the province of Ontario. This is Saskatchewan 
and we’ve put in almost that much more, almost $100 million 
— $88 million new into the system this year. 
 
Record spending almost all funded by Saskatchewan. Why? 
Because what has happened is that the federal government has 
removed itself from wanting to play a role in health care. They 
still want to, you know, tinker around and set the rules but they 
don’t want to fund it. And I think that that is absolutely 
disgraceful. 
 
You know when the Tories opposite stand up and say that we’re 
not paying attention to Tommy Douglas, I’ll tell you they’re not 
paying attention to Diefenbaker. They’re not paying attention to 
Emmett Hall. They’re not paying attention to Douglas. They’re 
not paying attention to Blakeney. They’re not paying attention 
to any of the folks that set up this system. And the Liberals have 
fallen right into it. 
 
This used to be a 50/50 system. This used to be a system that 
we shared responsibility for. Now it’s one that the Liberals have 
abandoned. It’s gone. No longer 50 cent dollars, 13 cents out of 
every medicare dollar comes from Ottawa — 13 cents. What is 
that? Thirteen cents. The member for Melfort always says, well 
that’s, you know, he talks about half of that and another quarter 
gets you half a cup of coffee or something, some goofy analogy 
that he always uses. I don’t even know if it’ll get you that. It 
certainly won’t get you that in Regina. 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1998 

But what exactly are the Liberals doing? Nothing. And you 
know what? They won’t even make a presentation to Ottawa. 
They won’t even say, you know, maybe you should take some 
pressure off the system. Maybe what you should do is reduce 
some of the pressure that the provinces are feeling. Why aren’t 
they saying that? You know why? Because they don’t want to. 
 
The member for Arm River, the member for Wood River . . . I 
don’t know what the member for Thunder Creek is up to, but I 
suspect it’s the same thing. They want to tear down the system 
and allow us to move to a two-tiered medical care system. 
That’s what they want. 
 
And you know what? They’re getting their way. It’s moving 
that way. It’s not going to start here. It’s not going to start here 
in Saskatchewan. But it’s starting next door in Alberta. It’s on 
the verge of happening in Ontario. That’s what’s happening, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s unfortunate that the members opposite aren’t 
talking about that. At least be upfront, Liberals. At least be 
upfront. Don’t run and hide behind your federal party and say, 
oh we’re defending the Canada Health Act when in fact you’re 
not. What you’re doing is, by underfunding the system, you’re 
leading to its very demise. That’s what’s going on. 
 
I listen to the member for Wood River yell from his seat and 
say let’s tell the truth. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the member 
for Wood River should stand and tell the truth because he has 
not been able to do that on these examples yet. All I say is 
present the facts to us to back up the arguments that he’s 
making, and I haven’t seen those. 
 
When he tries to say MLAs jump the line. Not true. When he 
says that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now . . . Order. I think all 
hon. members will want to pay one another the accord and 
respect of listening to remarks in the House and permitting the 
House to be able to hear. And again I’ll encourage all hon. 
members to put their remarks on the record and to allow the 
member who’s speaking to be heard. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying 
earlier, I think one of the things that we need to do with this 
health care debate is move it away from the hysteria the 
Liberals try to bring forward. I think we need to move it away 
from the spectacle that they’re attempting to create. 
 
Let’s get back to the issue of what the system should be doing, 
how we find the funds to do it, and what the solutions are. 
Because I haven’t heard the solutions from the members 
opposite. Well, except the Saskatchewan Party, who will 
de-insure services. We know that. 
 
Let’s hear the Liberal solution. They stand up and they scare 
people at these rallies. They have the nurses stand up and say 
you can get AIDS from toilet seats. 
 
We’ve seen this before. We’ve seen this scare tactic before. 
And we saw it in 1962 with Ross Thatcher attempting to kick 
down the doors of this Assembly. And you know what? It was 
the wrong approach to take then; it is the wrong approach to 

take now. And the Liberals know it. They know it. They know 
it. Listen to them yelling. They know that this is exactly what is 
going on. 
 
I’ll tell you I wish we could bring Tommy back from the dead if 
only so he could fight whatever body Ross Thatcher has 
invaded across the way. That’s all I wish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the debate I’m afraid is wandering, and it is . . . I 
suspect that anybody who’s been listening to the members 
opposite simply wants to run from it. Because it is that kind of a 
scare tactic they’re putting out there. 
 
And I just wanted to say that I think it is absolutely shameful 
and disgusting, the approach you are taking on this. 
 
I don’t mind us having the political debate and I don’t mind us 
having some political joking back and forth. But let’s not do . . . 
let’s not drag into this a group of seniors. Let’s not drag into 
this the elderly. Let’s not drag into this the sick in the way that 
they’re doing it. 
 
Represent the concerns, present them, let’s have the debate. But 
stop dragging out these scare tactics that we’re seeing at these 
rural road shows that are on the go right now. It is just 
absolutely unbelievable. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I notice it is nearing 5 and what I’ll do at 
this point is simply move to adjourn this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:53 p.m. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................945 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................945 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................945 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................945 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................945 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................945 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................945 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................945 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................945 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................946 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................946 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................946 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................946 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................946 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................946 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................960 
  Whitmore...................................................................................................................................................................................964 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Casino Profits Fund Cultural Organizations 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................946 
 Musical to Benefit Children in Brazil 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................947 
 Canada Employment Centre for Students 
  Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................947 
 Request for Apology from Premier 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................947 
 Annual Multi-faith Fair 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................947 
 Volunteer Recognized 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................947 
 National Forest Week 
  Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................948 
 Saskatchewan Party and Health Issues 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................948 
 Women of Distinction Awards 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................948 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................949 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................949 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................949 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................949 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................950 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................950 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................950 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................951 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................951 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................951 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................952 
 Chair of Crown Corporations Committee 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................952 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................952 
 Possible Sale of Crown Life 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................953 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................953 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 45  The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................953 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 3 — Health Care Funding 
  Murrell.......................................................................................................................................................................................953 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................956 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................957 
  Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................960 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................962 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................966 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................969 
 
 
 
 


