





























































Hansard: May 26, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1375 
 May 26, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents of 
the community of Arborfield. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitions humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate actions to ensure the survival of the Carrot 
River Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I am also pleased to present petitions 
today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of service 
in radiology is maintained in the North Central Health 
District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come entirely from the Melfort community, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well to present petitions in 
regards to further hospital closures, and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure the survival of the Carrot River 
Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions are signed by individuals from 
Arborfield and Carrot River. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure the survival of the Carrot River 
Hospital. 
 
As is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The community of Arborfield, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are 
from. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

a petition signed by people from Carrot River and from 
Nipawin. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate actions to ensure the survival of the Carrot 
River Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the provision of radiology services in 
the north-east. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort and also of Gronlid in the north-east. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today from people that are concerned about the 
radiology in the North Central Health District. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Star City, 
Melfort, Kinistino, and Fairy Glen. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have a petition 
to present to the Assembly this afternoon — a recent petition 
renewing the call, however, for Jack Messer to give back the 
severance payment that he was so generously provided with. 
The petitioners on this petition come from the Rose Valley area 
of Saskatchewan and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to present 
a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has signatures on from the 
communities of Assiniboia, Lafleche, and the community of 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

Mossbank. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 
primarily from Yorkton, and I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Springside; also a number from the city of 
Yorkton. It looks like it includes some of the . . . a member 
from Yorkton’s constituency campaign . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now the hon. member will recognize 
of course that he won’t want to engage in debate in the 
presentation of petitions. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with petitions 
this afternoon from citizens concerned about the confusing and 
dangerous highway entrance to the city of North Battleford, and 
the prayer for relief reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to relocate Highway 40 to east of the 
David Laird Campground in order to alleviate the 
congestion at the entrance to the city of North Battleford. 

 
Your petitioners this afternoon come from Richard, Battleford, 
Cochin, and North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon to 
present a petition with respect to the interim custody of Steven 
and Kimberly Walchuk. The prayer of relief reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may take the required action to allow the 
children named to remain in the custody of the maternal 
grandparents and that appropriate amendments be made to 
the justice system. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And the signatures on these petitions are all from Outlook and 
Macrorie. Thank you. I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who 
are asking for fair and just action for the many workers injured 
permanently through work-related accidents that are not being 
covered by workmen’s compensation. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to acknowledge the concerns of 
the taxpaying citizens by causing the Government of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that absolute fairness and equitable 
treatment be given to those injured and disabled people and 
their families and be diligent in this most urgent matter. 
 

And the petitioners on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
White City and Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these folks come from the community of Maple 
Creek and Golden Prairie and I’m happy to present them today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider the rigid requirements to qualify for Betaseron 
and Copaxone coverage; to ensure that equitable treatment 
be given to those insured and disabled through 
work-related accidents; to fund the twinning of 
Trans-Canada Highway; to call an independent public 
inquiry surrounding Channel Lake; to put an immediate 
halt to all investments in foreign countries by 
Saskatchewan Crown corporations; to relocate Highway 40 
to alleviate congestion at the entrance to North Battleford; 
and to take action in health, education, jobs, homes, and 
roads to allow the North to join the rest of Saskatchewan. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 58 ask the government the following question: 
 

Regarding the federal review of the financial services 
industry now being headed by Regina resident Harold 
MacKay: (1) has the government made any submission on 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

behalf of the consumers of Saskatchewan to Mr. MacKay’s 
review regarding the financial services industry; (2) if any 
submission has been made, why has it not been released to 
the public or tabled in this House; (3) what steps has the 
government taken to gather the views of Saskatchewan 
residents regarding the banks for the purposes of 
presenting them to the federal review of the financial 
services industry; and, (4) what steps has the government 
made to directly convey those views to the federal minister 
responsible. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
this House, in the east gallery, 42 students from Valley Manor 
School, grade 5 students, and that’s in Martensville. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers Jim Golding and Bill 
Zaretsky, and their chaperons, Tracey, Marla, Marj, Dawn, and 
Theresa. I look forward to meeting with them afterwards and 
answering some of the questions that they will have after 
watching us here in the House. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the Assembly, on behalf of the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland, 49 students in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, from Sutherland School, accompanied by their 
teachers, Mr. Ross and Ms. Amos, and the chaperons Mrs. 
Salter, and Mr. Anderson. 
 
These students are in grade 7 and 8 of Sutherland School, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’d ask all my colleagues to give them a warm 
welcome to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and to my colleagues someone in your 
gallery, my mother. She’s in from Calgary to visit and to see the 
legislature. A very special person to me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you’re aware, it 
is the job of the Sergeant-at-Arms to keep us in line. I’m very 
pleased to tell members today that finally we have some support 
on our side, as in your gallery is the Sergeant-at-Arms’s 
mother-in-law who I’m sure will help keep him in line today. 
Accompanying . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — She and her husband Harry Betts, Harry and 
Anne Betts are here from Penticton, visiting us. And also 
joining them is the Sergeant-at-Arms’s daughter Shannon. So if 
you would join with me in welcoming them. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m so happy to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 36 grade 7 
students from Lashburn School. It isn’t often that we get 
visitors from the north-west and I’m so happy to have them here 
today. Accompanying them are Val Shockey and Tracy 
Doering, two teachers that I taught with in the Battle River 
School Division, and 12 chaperons. 
 
And I’ll be meeting with them later on to discuss some of the 
proceedings and give them explanations as to what is going on. 
And I hope all of you behave. And please welcome the students 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Passing of Dr. Hjertaas 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
On Saturday Saskatchewan lost truly a national hero, one of our 
leading citizens of this province. Dr. Orville Hjertaas of Prince 
Albert passed away at the age of 80. And I know that all 
members will join his widow, Millie, and his family in 
mourning his passing. 
 
I also know that every Canadian will join me in celebrating his 
life, his vision, and his contribution to our most profoundly 
Canadian institution, medicare. 
 
Dr. Hjertaas’s medical career was defined by the struggle of 
Saskatchewan people to achieve a health care system which, in 
his own words, quote, “Placed the emphasis on the patient’s 
state of well-being, not his or her state of finances.” 
 
The successful creation of that system belongs to him and a few 
other courageous doctors, just as it belongs to T.C. Douglas, 
Woodrow Lloyd, and a few other courageous parliamentarians. 
 
After finishing medical school he worked with Tommy in 
creating the province’s first two health regions in Swift Current 
and Weyburn. He was named vice-president of the commission 
to bring in medicare. 
 
And in response to the doctors’ strike of 1962, which he refused 
to join, he started the first community clinic in Saskatchewan 
thereby launching another Saskatchewan innovation in health 
care. 
 
Last February Dr. Hjertaas was named to the Order of Canada 
in recognition of his life of service to his profession, his 
community, and his country as well as being named Order of 
Merit, Saskatchewan, 1993. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was proud to know Dr. Orville Hjertaas, or Dr. 
Medicare as we called him, and I’m sure I speak for all of us 
when I say that what he and others founded, we will preserve 
and strengthen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to join with the Premier 
and express on behalf of my colleagues our sympathies to the 
Dr. Hjertaas family as well. 
 
It’s only been a few short weeks since we recognized the 
accomplishments of Dr. Hjertaas right here in this Assembly, 
having received the Order of Canada and also, as the Premier 
has noted, the Saskatchewan Order of Merit many years ago. 
 
For a person of his accomplishments to be involved actively in 
the profession for 36 years . . . and in fact he also remained 
active in his retirement, stressing the needs for home care and 
the needs of the disabled throughout his lifetime . . . he was a 
man dedicated to this province and to his community, and for 
that everyone should note the passing of this remarkable person. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I want to express our 
sympathies and kind thoughts to Dr. Hjertaas’s family and also 
to his friends of which I know he had many. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Leads Country in Youth Employment 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month 
a Calgary-based consulting firm reported that Saskatchewan 
had the fastest growing youth employment rate in Canada. It 
also reported that we lead the country in terms of youth 
employment in 1997, that we did lead them. 
 
Yesterday myself and the Minister of Post-Secondary Education 
had the pleasure of attending a luncheon sponsored by the 
Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board that honoured 
several employers for the work that they were doing in terms of 
encouraging retraining, new training, and employment — 
particularly of young people. 
 
And I’d like to recognize some of the good work that they are 
doing in partnership — business community, labour unions, and 
the community at large. In particular three Regina companies 
were recognized yesterday. Minds Eye Pictures, SaskEnergy, 
and Crown Life were all recognized along with Luther College 
for the good work that they were doing in terms of promoting 
employment growth in our province. 
 
Additionally the Sask Abilities Council and Cameco, in the 
Rabbit Lake operations, were also recognized for the work 
they’re doing in bringing peoples’ skills up. Each of the 
speakers yesterday talked about the important role a 
government played in working with them to encourage greater 
employment. And I would be remiss not to mention the 
programs that they particularly singled out, programs like 
Future Skills, New Careers, and the tax credits the government 
had been giving to industry to spur on new growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each of these companies has played an important 
role in terms of providing youth employment. I want to 
congratulate them. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Carrot River Hospital Closure 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A delegation from 
the community of Carrot River sent a message to their local 
health board yesterday. They will not sit by and allow the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government to close their hospital. 
 
The source of their biggest frustration is the fact that their MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly), the member for Carrot 
River Valley, chooses to duck the issue. He tries instead to pin 
this one on the board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the delegation from Arm River presented a 
number of reasons why their hospital must not be closed. And 
you know what? They made sense, and their arguments made 
sense, Mr. Speaker. We all know how much that is worth with 
this government. 
 
The people of Carrot River left the board with no option but to 
take their case to the Minister of Health in the coming days. The 
minister promised this spring that there would be no more cuts 
to the health care system, and the people of Carrot River are 
watching and waiting for the minister to live up to that 
commitment and prevent their hospital from closing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Aboriginal Employment Opportunities 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One significant 
way where people in my constituency and in all of Prince 
Albert lead is in aboriginal employment. Exciting things are 
happening and jobs — good jobs, Mr. Speaker — are being 
filled by aboriginal people. 
 
One case in point is the agreement between the Prince Albert 
Health District and the Department of Intergovernmental and 
Aboriginal Affairs. This agreement is designed to increase 
aboriginal employment in the health care field. 
 
By this agreement the employer agrees to work in 
communication with the aboriginal community to identify 
workplace opportunities for aboriginals, to advertise it amongst 
their community, and freely compete with others. It also, in the 
agreement, is to identify spots where training will help qualify 
aboriginals for job competition and to identify business 
opportunities where people may apply for contracts for goods 
and services to the Prince Albert Health District. 
 
The results are, Mr. Speaker, in 1998 there were 35 aboriginal 
people on staff at the health board. Since the partnership, there 
have been 53 additional positions added, for a total of 87. As 
the Minister of Social Services often says, the best social policy 
is a job, Mr. Speaker, and I am proud that the Prince Albert 
Health District in my area is actively seeking to create 
employment which reflects our population. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Eastview Candidates 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the by-election in Saskatoon Eastview is barely 24-hours-old 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

and already it appears that the Liberal Party is raising the white 
flag. In an interview yesterday with the CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation), the Liberal candidate stated that he 
thought that a close second-place finish would be good enough 
for his party. I wonder if the Liberal colleagues agree with him? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the earliest concession speech I have ever 
heard coming a month before the ballots are actually cast. In 
contrast the Saskatchewan Party candidate, Francis Krieser, is 
conceding nothing and will knock on every door and talk to 
every constituent before June 24. And he knows the 
neighbourhood well, Mr. Speaker, as he ran as the Liberal 
candidate in 1995 election before the party fell apart under Jim 
Melenchuk’s leadership. 
 
Melenchuk’s leadership is clearly on the line with the 
pretenders from the Battlefords and from Melville rubbing their 
hands and licking their chops with glee. Francis is also much 
better acquainted with the constituency than either of the 
opponents since he actually lives in Saskatoon Eastview. He is 
not being parachuted in unlike either Mr. Melenchuk or Ms. 
Junor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the Liberal candidate, Francis Krieser is in 
this race to win and we look forward to him joining our caucus 
within a month. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ohio Residents Envy Canadian Health Care 
 

Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the Assembly is 
aware the members from Kindersley, Melville, and myself 
recently returned from a legislative conference in Ohio. I briefly 
want to relate a true story that happened one day outside the 
state legislature in Columbus. 
 
I stepped outside of the House for a break and I happened to be 
wearing my Canadian legislature name tag which a couple of 
window washers noticed. The very first thing that they said to 
me was something to the effect of you come from that country 
with the wonderful health care, don’t you. I said yes I did, and 
proceeded to have an insightful conversation with them. What 
the conversation made clear to me is that the universal medicare 
offered in Saskatchewan is the envy of many. 
 
What made this point even stronger in my mind was an article a 
staff worker showed me when I got back home. In the May 18 
issue of Maclean’s magazine is a rather interesting story and a 
letter from a Paul Shinkle of Seven Hills, Ohio. Mr. Shinkle 
writes, “If we could trade our decent military pay for your 
decent health-care system, would you all consider adding Ohio 
as the next province?” 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 18 hospitals, 4,000 doctors with a 
population of about 640,000 people in Columbus, Ohio, but 
those buildings and doctors don’t mean much to the many 
unfortunate people who can’t afford them. Health care simply is 
not just about the number of buildings, beds, and doctors you 
have — just ask a window washer in the mid-west. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Eastview Candidates 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I had not planned on rising this 
afternoon but the outrageous and ill-founded comments of the 
member for Cannington cannot go unchallenged. I will not 
participate in debate except to remind the Speaker that we have 
just celebrated Victoria Day and I wish to leave the members 
with a quote from the old Queen: “There is no talk of defeat in 
this household; the possibility does not exist.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Tax Credits for Political Contributions 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Labour, the minister responsible for The 
Election Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, some provincial parties continue to play fast and 
loose with political donation laws by laundering their provincial 
contributions through the federal wings of the party in order to 
hand out tax credits. I have a copy of Jim Melenchuk’s 
fund-raising letter for the Saskatoon Eastview by-election. It 
instructs contributors to make their cheques out to the Eastview 
by-election campaign and they will receive a $75 tax credit for 
a hundred-dollar donation. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you know there are no provincial tax credits. 
The Eastview Liberal association is in no position to legally 
give out tax credits. This money is being laundered through 
their federal Liberal Party even though there is no mention of 
that in the letter. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are federal tax dollars being used to finance 
Jim Melenchuk’s election campaign? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I have a little trouble, Mr. Speaker, with 
the . . . I have a little trouble, Mr. Speaker, with the term 
“laundering” considering that we’re referring to a system of tax 
credits that’s been in effect all across this country for two or 
three decades and is well-known and well-acknowledged. I 
think the term “laundering” is a bit excessive and probably 
unnecessary. 
 
So I can appreciate that the members are concerned about the 
fact that they have severed themselves from any kind of 
national collection and therefore put themselves right outside 
the laws relating to income tax deductions for political 
contributions. 
 
And that’s a problem that I think they should probably think 
about and see if they can’t re-establish their connections with 
the federal Conservative Party and probably get back in a 
position where they can take advantage of the laws that have 
been in effect in this country for about 20 or 30 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
minister: we enjoy being independent. But I can understand 
why the minister isn’t doing anything about it. It’s because the 



1380 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

NDP are doing exactly the same thing. 
 
There are two parties, the Liberal and NDP, whose by-election 
campaigns are being funded by the taxpayers. There is one 
party, the Saskatchewan Party, whose campaign is entirely 
funded by its members. 
 
While the Liberals and the NDP hand out tax credits by 
laundering their money through Ottawa, the Saskatchewan 
Party does not access tax credits because we have no federal 
party. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you change The Election Act to put all the 
parties on a level playing-field? Will you close the loophole that 
allows the NDP and the Liberals to issue federal tax receipts for 
provincial contributions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think I understand where the 
member’s coming from now. They would like to launder their 
money, and I can appreciate that. 
 
We have no present plan to change the Act. The member will 
know, the member will know — if they’ll permit me to answer, 
Mr. Speaker — the members will know that we passed a 
provision in the last amendments to The Election Act and that 
we did that on the basis that it was our understanding that the 
federal government was giving some consideration to 
abandoning the tax credit system — abandoning the federal tax 
system. 
 
Now as far as I know, they have not abandoned it. As far as I 
know, it is still in place. And as far as I know, Mr. Speaker, 
every one of the members of the official opposition took 
advantage of those same tax credit provisions in the last 
provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Crown Life to Canada Life 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation). Mr. Minister, Crown Life has now 
been sold in spite of all your denials over the past few weeks. 
And now we understand why you didn’t really want to talk 
about it. As many as 400 jobs could be lost over the next couple 
of years, as Canada Life is only guaranteeing 900 jobs in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Minister, as one of the major stakeholders, is the loss of 
400 jobs in Regina acceptable to you? What are you doing to 
ensure that no jobs are lost as a result of this take-over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
member’s question and I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, and 
to other members, that in quoting the president of the Regina 
chamber, Leith McKay, I think his comments probably capture 
better than anyone else the circumstances, and I quote, and 
Leith said: 
 

There is going to be a net 700 jobs here rather than a net 

none. And from that point of view I think that it is a biggie. 
 
Meaning the announcement today by Canada and Crown Life. 
 
I say to the member opposite and to him and his caucus and to 
some of the members who were around when this deal was 
formulated back in the early ’90s, I think it’s fair to say that the 
mayor of Regina, who was very positive about the arrangement 
that has been made by Canada Life and Crown Life . . . that is, 
to secure the future of the employees here in Regina and in 
Saskatchewan, in face of huge competition across Canada, 
mergers going on in the institution era of banks, financial 
institutions, as well as insurance companies, that this is a 
win-win situation for the province. And I might say as well that 
you are the first voice of negative . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to correct 
the member. The first voice of negativity were you people when 
you first criticized this very idea in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CIC has loaned HARO over $350 million over the 
years to finance its ownership of Crown Life. CIC is still owed 
almost $100 million interest on these loans. Are these loans 
going to be paid back in full as a result of the deal with Canada 
Life and will the accrued interest on these loans also be paid 
back or are Saskatchewan taxpayers ever going to see any of the 
interest returned on these loans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite . . . and I want to refer as well to the mayor of Regina 
who this morning commented on the arrangement that was 
arrived at by Crown Life and Canada Life, and Mr. Archer said, 
and I quote: 
 

It will solidify the employment levels here in the city of 
Regina and I understand there may be some opportunities 
for expansion, depending on the development of the life 
insurance business. 
 

I say to the member opposite that I know he’s been around in 
opposition for a long time and it tends to become a very 
negative way of life and you have a difficult time ever 
expressing anything positive. But the fact of the matter is that 
today is an important day about securing jobs for the people 
here who work now in Canada Life. 
 
I say to the member opposite that we intend to get back all of 
the dollars — those that were invested by your party, the 
Conservative Party, in the early ’90s. Remember this was a deal 
done by the Devine government. We intend to get back every 
dollar that was invested, maintain the building as an operating 
facility, and 700 jobs here in the city of Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Free Vote on Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, for four weeks 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

the Saskatchewan Party has been calling for a free vote on the 
future of the Plains hospital. And for four weeks the NDP has 
blocked our efforts. You have prevented the issue from coming 
to the floor; you have cut off debate. You have done everything 
in your power to keep your MLAs from voting on this issue. 
 
Mr. Premier, today is private members’ day and we are calling 
for a free vote on the Plains hospital again today. Will you 
allow this important debate to take place? Will you take the 
muzzle off your members and allow them to represent their 
constituents and vote to keep the Plains hospital open? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, over the last several weeks 
I’ve had the opportunity to answer this question on a number of 
occasions and from that member opposite, from Canora. 
 
And what I’ve said to the member opposite, that this has been a 
very long debate on the issue of the Plains Health Centre which 
began not four weeks ago, but really began in 1993 when a 
decision was made by this administration and district health 
boards across the province that there in fact would be a 
consolidation of health care services in this province. 
 
And in this district the Regina District Health Board said in 
1993 that they would be consolidating their services from three 
major health facilities to two, of which the Plains Health Centre 
would be the one where all of their services would be moved 
from. And I say to the member opposite that decision was made 
in 1993. 
 
And in 1995 in this province every person had a vote. Every 
individual in this province had a vote. They had a free vote in 
the 1995 election and their choice was to have the New 
Democratic Party govern Saskatchewan and continue to make 
sure that we have the best health care services anywhere in the 
world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, and 
Mr. Premier, if that decision was such a sound decision why 
don’t you let your members stand in their place and vote? Let 
the member for Weyburn vote to close the Plains hospital; let 
the member for Estevan vote to close the Plains hospital; let the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone vote to close the Plains 
hospital and then watch what happens to them in the next 
election. 
 
That’s what you’re really afraid of, Mr. Premier. They can’t 
vote to save the Plains because you would never forgive them, 
and they can’t vote to close the Plains because their constituents 
would never forgive them. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you are so confident of your decision to close 
the Plains hospital, will you allow a free vote and will you 
allow that vote to take place today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to just reiterate one 
more time that the decision in 1993 was that the Plains Health 
Centre in this community would close and their services would 
be consolidated into the other two facilities. 
 
But I’m extremely interested in the sincere interest that the 

member opposite has in the democratic process — sincerely 
interested in it — because the member opposite from Canora as 
I know it, was elected in 1995 as a Liberal. Was elected as a 
Liberal and served his constituents on the conscience that they 
would elect him as a Liberal. That through the democratic 
process of which he didn’t allow to exercise, he decides, Mr. 
Speaker, that he would change parties, and that he would 
change parties without the participation of a democratic vote — 
without the participation. 
 
If you believe in the democratic process you should have left 
your name and your constituency. You should have resigned, 
sat as an independent, because that’s what democracy is truly 
about. And if you believe it, that’s what you should have done 
for yourself, Mr. Member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding of Saskatchewan Party from Tory Funds 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier. Last year because of scandal, charges of fraud, and a 
legacy of fiscal incompetence, the Tories told the people of 
Saskatchewan that the party had imposed on itself a ban from 
participating in provincial politics. 
 
Former Tory executive director, Tom Lukiwski, who 
coincidentally is now the executive director of the 
Saskatchewan Party, told the Leader-Post that the Tory 
executive party received a hundred and eighty-five thousand 
dollars from the secret slush fund. Thirty to forty thousand 
dollars of that was received after the Tories announced their 
self-imposed exile from politics. 
 
This fund is hidden from the lights of scrutiny and openness, 
Mr. Speaker. It reeks of shadowy fund-raising and of a time 
when cigar-chomping big-business men thought they owned the 
province. 
 
On behalf of the House, will the Premier ask the Acting Chief 
Electoral Officer to review the secret Tory slush fund and ask 
her to demand the Tories report every donation, corporate or 
individual, that the Regina PC (Progressive Conservative) 
metro slush fund has received. It’s time the Tories were brought 
into the ’90s, even if it is kicking and screaming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
requirements with respect to filing returns with the Chief 
Electoral Officer were laid down in this House about a year ago. 
And this filing that took place just recently, is the first filing 
under that Act. 
 
The Chief Electoral Officer, as I understand it, is working with 
the parties to ensure that the intention of the Act is being fully 
complied with. I think those are ongoing. The matter would 
appear to be looked after or being looked into by the Acting 
Chief Electoral Officer, and we’re content to let that process 
play out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, last month I wrote a letter to 
Saskatchewan Party leader Mr. Hermanson. I asked him to 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

assure the people of Saskatchewan that he and his party would 
not receive any money directly or indirectly, meaning goods or 
services, from the Tory slush fund. I received a response from 
Mr. Hermanson and he assured me no money was coming 
directly from the Tory slush fund. 
 
However he did not reassure the people of Saskatchewan that 
goods or services were not being received indirectly from the 
Tory’s secret slush fund. If the party is dormant, then in the 
familiar words of the member from Rosthern, what do they 
have to hide or what are they afraid of if they have nothing to 
hide. 
 
Will the Premier request a full and public report on the source 
and expenditures of the hundred and eighty-five thousand 
dollars drawn from the secret slush fund. Mr. Premier, what 
assurances do the people of Saskatchewan have that none of 
that money will go from the secret Tory slush fund to any other 
Saskatchewan party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the member 
will agree that we now have on the books in Saskatchewan 
about the tightest election expenditure law that exists in the 
country. As I said in my previous answer, Mr. Speaker, this is 
the first filing that parties have been required to do under that 
law. And I think it natural, I think it natural that there would be 
some difference of opinion as to what is required and what is 
not required. 
 
As I also said in my previous answer, this matter is in the hands 
of the Acting Chief Electoral Officer and she will be working 
with the parties to ensure that the intent of the Act is complied 
with. Beyond that I simply don’t want to make any comment on 
the matters raised by the hon. member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding of District Health Boards 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A delegation from 
the community of Carrot River sent a clear message to their 
local health board yesterday. They told the board in no 
uncertain terms, they will not sit by and allow this NDP 
government to close their hospital. 
 
Their biggest source of frustration is their own MLA. And 
quoting from a gentleman at the meeting, Mr. Speaker, who 
stood up and said that our MLA tells us that it’s only the district 
board’s fault; it’s not government’s fault. 
 
Mr. Minister, when is your government going to begin 
accepting responsibility for the continual gutting of our health 
care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first and foremost I 
want to just allude to the comment that was made a couple of 
days ago by the Leader of the Third Party, Mr. Melenchuk, who 
said in his acceptance speech that in this province if he were 
leader, that he would reduce the number of boards maybe to 10 

— maybe to 10. 
 
And what he said when he was first elected in 1996, or first 
elected as the leader, he said that he would have no boards in 
Saskatchewan. No boards. He would have populations of 
100,000. And today you stand up in the House and you talk 
about the value of boards in this province or the lack of value of 
boards in this province. 
 
And I say to you that it’s hypocritical for you to stand up and 
make analysis of how boards are going to provide services in 
this province because you don’t first of all believe in it, nor do 
you have any respect for them, and nor do you have any respect 
for the process. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Member, the representative from Carrot 
River who sits on this side of the House has always and 
continues to work very closely with his community and this 
government. And the people who serve on those district health 
boards today represent those communities in the fashion in 
which is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question, next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 
Carrot River Valley was not in attendance at yesterday’s 
meeting and the people there were wondering, if he’s working 
so closely with them, why he wasn’t there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the delegation from Carrot River presented a 
number of reasons to demonstrate why their hospital shouldn’t 
close. They all made sense. They want to work with the district 
board so that they can maintain the health services in their 
community. 
 
They talked about a health care system that is based on the 
need, not on finances in which the district boards’ hands are 
tied by this government. 
 
The people of Carrot River left the board with no option but to 
work with them, and they are coming to Regina, Mr. Minister. 
The whole works of them are coming down here to see you. 
 
Mr. Minister, the buck stops with you. You promised this spring 
that there would be no more cuts to health care — there’d be no 
more bed closures, there’d be no more lay-offs, there’d be no 
more facilities closed. Will you tell the people of Carrot River 
that you plan on living up to that commitment, and that their 
hospital will not be closing and that they will not be losing 
those services in the community of Carrot River? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I say to the member opposite a couple of 
things. First and foremost is that I am very much informed of 
what’s happening in the district of North East and with the 
people who are working on the district health board in respect 
of their plan. And I’ve heard that from the member from 
Nipawin who has raised that with me on a regular basis. I’ve 
also heard it . . . and will be meeting with the people from 
Nipawin on Sunday for the second time. 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

And I say to the member opposite that the decisions that are 
being made in that district are made by the district health board, 
by men and men who have been elected and appointed to serve 
and represent their constituents in the best fashion that they 
know how. 
 
And I say to you, yesterday you and your party were in my 
constituency — not you, I’m sorry, not you. Only one member 
of your party was there. Everybody else from your party has 
abandoned the process. So you send the poor member from 
Melville to a meeting of which only 30 people show up, where 
the rest of you have now decided, where the rest of you have 
now decided that this issue you can’t continue to sustain. 
 
So what you do is you take your show now, in the Liberal Party, 
and you move it to Nipawin, Saskatchewan, and try to get some 
activity and some interest going there because the Liberal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Next question. 
 

Forest Fire Hazard in Northern Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The only road 
leading to the northern community of Turnor Lake is now cut 
off because of forest fires. Cabins around Ile-a-la-Crosse have 
been evacuated and fires just west of the town are still burning. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Environment. What is being 
done to ensure the protection of people at Turnor Lake and 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, and can you assure this House that every 
available person is given the opportunity to fight these fires? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
hon. member for the very timely question. Unfortunately we’ve 
had over 300 fires in northern Saskatchewan this year, 
compared to an average of 100 fires at this time of the year. 
 
We are very pleased to say that only three fires are burning out 
of control at this time, and the hon. member did raise a very 
important concern about the people living in the North. 
 
We will work with the communities, we’ll work with Northern 
Affairs and everyone else to pool our resources and expertise to 
make sure the supplies get into these communities and that very 
little if any damage to private property does occur. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Property Tax Reassessment on Farm Land 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, on May 6, 
1998, Rev. Marvin Wojda, a constituent of mine, wrote to you 
for the second time stating his concern regarding the dramatic 
increases in property taxes that he had faced over the last few 
years, and particularly excessive increases due to property 
reassessment. 
 
His situation is of such. Between 1994 and 1999 his property 
taxes will have escalated from $2,000 to $3,641. Now, Mr. 
Premier, that is a total increase of 82 per cent over five years, an 
average annual increase of 16.4 per cent. And Mr. Wojda’s 

income hasn’t increased anywhere near 16 per cent annually. 
He states that he simply cannot cope. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you think his situation and in effect the 
situation of many farmers in this province, do you think that his 
82 per cent increase in property taxes is reasonable, and how do 
you suggest that he could cope with this exorbitant rise without 
a commensurate rise in his own income? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for that question. It’s difficult to comment on specific 
cases from this vantage point. But the member will know that 
the property tax bill is arrived at by the results of two factors — 
the assessment of the property, with the local mill rate applied. 
 
And so I am not able to comment on what the mill rate and the 
tax policies of the municipality that the property is located in 
might be. But if there is a negative comparison when that 
property assessment and taxes is compared to the similar 
neighbouring property, then the property owner has the right to 
appeal. So there are a number of avenues available. 
 
On the other hand, after a 30-year lag, Mr. Speaker, with the 
reassessment neglected since 1965, there are bound to be shifts. 
However if a taxpayer sees unfairness, there is recourse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, in the late 1980s many 
Saskatchewan farm families underwent foreclosure and 
bankruptcy as you well know. And sadly the stress of high debt 
loads, low grain prices, caused many to take their own lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, numerous farmers are now once again faced with 
high input costs, lower grain prices, high transportation costs, 
and they are struggling under the burden of Saskatchewan’s 
excessive taxation — taxation with the highest levels in 
Canada. And now sky-rocketing property taxes due to 
government reassessment are threatening to force farm property 
owners and their families to leave their homes and their land 
once again. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you realize that in effect your government is 
contributing to the demise of farm families due to the 
unbearable tax burdens, much of which has come as a result of 
property reassessment? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, being a member of a 
farm family and a rural resident myself, I’m certainly well 
aware of the pressures on rural residents all over Canada today, 
and certainly tax changes in the property tax regime might be 
one of them. But as I have outlined, Mr. Speaker, we did a 
reassessment to try to make the system more fair. 
 
And I acknowledge that our property tax system is one of the 
least progressive taxes that exist in that it’s based on the ad 
valorem system, pegged to the value, the market value of what 
an individual owns if it were sold. Of course if their 
circumstances change and they become sick or unemployed, or 
other factors change respecting their income, that’s not 
recognized in the property tax system under the ad valorem 
principle. 
 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

And if we need to look at something else, then we’d be 
prepared to look at that. But it’s a fundamental principle 
throughout North America that’s recognized today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Sale of Crown Life 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it was announced 
earlier today that Canada Life has purchased most of the 
insurance business of Crown Life and has an option to purchase 
the common shares of Crown Life at a later date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to provide members with some 
information about this transaction as well as the reasons our 
government believes it is in the best interest of the employees, 
the policy holders of Crown Life, and the city of Regina and the 
people of Saskatchewan for this to take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members will know that Crown Life was brought 
to Regina through a commitment of $272 million in public 
funds by the Devine government. A further 149.5 million in 
loans was provided in 1995 to protect the province’s substantial 
investment in Crown Life. CIC Industrial Interests owns 94 per 
cent of HARO Financial Corporation which owns 64 per cent of 
the common shares of Crown Life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the company has provided good job opportunities 
for Saskatchewan people, improved its financial position since 
coming to Regina, and proved a good and worthy corporate 
citizen. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, like all companies and financial service 
industries, Crown Life has been forced to consider its size and 
strength in the market-place and its future viability in the face 
of rapid consolidation. They have concluded that the best way 
to secure the future is to join its insurance business with the 
much larger entity, Canada Life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by comparison, Canada Life has about $43 billion 
in assets under administration compared to 5.4 billion, or nine 
times difference in assets that will be added from the Crown 
Life purchase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deal that was announced by the two life 
insurance companies this morning is a complex one which has 
been explained by Crown and Canada Life in some detail earlier 
today. However, I do want to give some of the highlights and 
outline measures the government has taken to safeguard the 
interests of the majority shareholders which are in fact the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, Canada Life purchased the Crown Life 
building here in Regina and is establishing the western Canada 
office here with many senior positions and key functions of the 
company located right here in the capital, Regina. Regina will 
also continue to be the head office of Crown Life, which will 
manage the remaining assets not purchased by Canada Life. 
 
Canada Life has guaranteed at least as many jobs in the Regina 

office as Crown Life would have had maintained if no sale had 
taken place. It is important to note that the 700 jobs that the two 
companies will pledge to maintain is a minimum, not a target, 
and that many more jobs could be created through Canada 
Life’s plan to expand its business in western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third point is that the 149.5 million that was 
loaned to Crown Life by CIC through HARO in 1995 will be 
repaid when the deal is closed. This money will be used to 
further reduce Saskatchewan’s debt and annual interest 
payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another point: the balance of the province’s 
investment in Crown Life will be recovered over a period of 
several years through management of the approximate 1.5 
billion in mortgage and real estate assets that Canada Life has 
indicated it will not be purchasing from Crown Life. The details 
of how these assets will be managed will be worked out by way 
of the shareholders of HARO and Crown Life over the next 18 
months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, Canada Life will carry on with the 
community support practised by Crown Life in areas such as 
charitable donations, education, training support, and 
purchasing goods and services here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Crown Life investment corporation has negotiated 
a memorandum of understanding with Canada Life which sets 
out these commitments to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been much speculation in recent months 
about the future of the relatively small insurance companies like 
Crown Life in the financial service industry where companies 
are rapidly becoming fewer and much bigger. Most analysts in 
the industry saw it as inevitable that our Regina-based company 
would become part of a much larger company. We can be proud 
that we are making this transition on our terms in a way that 
will have long-term benefits for Saskatchewan. 
 
There have been many interesting comments made about 
insurance industries by analysts and the possible sale of Crown 
Life; and I want to quote one made by David Havens, 
vice-president of UBS Securities in New York, on CBC radio 
on May 7. Mr. Havens said, and I quote: 
 

I guess that any eastern Canadian company looking to buy 
into Crown would probably find it attractive to set up more 
employees in the province because of its lower cost of 
doing business. (And that is a very shrewd analysis.) I am 
sure that Canada Life will very quickly become aware of 
the lower costs of doing business in Saskatchewan just as 
Crown Life did when it moved to the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as always with a change of this magnitude, there 
will be those who would rather just leave things the way they 
are and ignore what is going on in the world around them. 
 
When considering the future of Saskatchewan’s operation of 
Crown Life, I would urge members to recall the hue and cry 
that was raised by some when Wascana Energy was sold to 
CanOxy. They claimed the sale . . . 
 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The minister’s statement 
has already been extremely lengthy for the time normally 
allotted in the House, and I’ll ask the minister to wrap up his 
remarks quickly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, and I just wanted 
to say in light of the fact that this is a $421 million transaction, I 
would just ask for a couple of minutes to complete my 
comments. And if I need leave of the Assembly, I would ask for 
leave to do that. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As always with a change 
of this magnitude, there are always those who would rather just 
leave things as they are and ignore what is going on in the rest 
of the industry. 
 
When considering the future of Saskatchewan’s operation of 
Canada Life, I would urge members to recall the hue and cry 
that was raised by some when Wascana Energy was sold to 
CanOxy. They claimed the sale meant the end of the office in 
Regina and loss of jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that there are now 364 Wascana 
Energy employees working in Saskatchewan compared to 350 
before the sale, and more hiring in the province is planned by 
Wascana for this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I provide that example so that we can illustrate 
that the last time one of our companies joined forces with a 
larger company it turned out to be an opportunity for 
Saskatchewan and young people to work in the province. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I urge all members in the Assembly to 
join with Mayor Archer, the mayor of Regina, the 
Saskatchewan and Regina Chamber of Commerce, the Regina 
Economic Development Authority, the business people in our 
province, in welcoming Canada Life to Regina and 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We look forward to a long and fruitful relationship as one of the 
top five companies in the industry builds on the Crown Life 
experience and foundation and uses Regina, our capital city, as 
a base to expand its western Canadian business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to briefly 
comment today on the announcement by the minister in regard 
to the Crown Life sale. Certainly, certainly there are aspects to 
the announcement that are very positive. 
 
In a world that is seeing mergers of financial and life insurance 
companies occurring on an unprecedented rate, I think that it 
makes good sense that we see a merger of a company that has 
assets in the magnitude of $43 billion to join . . . and have the 
5.4 approximately billion dollar assets of Crown Life join with 
that and as a result make a stronger company competing in an 
ever changing world more effectively. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that that aspect of this announcement is very positive 
indeed. 
 
However there are some concerns that we have and I would like 
to certainly point to one, and I hope it is only a Freudian slip 

and no other intent, but in the copy of the minister’s statement 
that I received, when he read the statement there was a part that 
he neglected and I suspect that it was an oversight. But I’d like 
to read it into the record because I think it is important. It says, 
and I quote: 
 

The Crown Life-Canada Life transaction will be reported 
to the Crown Corporations Committee under the 
significant transaction guidelines. 
 

That was in the text but I do not believe the minister stated it in 
his statement, so I want to assume at least that that was still the 
intention, that this be done in that nature. And so I’m pleased to 
see the minister agreeing that that is indeed important. 
 
The other thing that seems passing strange is that I do vaguely 
recall when Crown Life was first proposed to come to 
Saskatchewan, that that same minister stood up very vigorously 
and said it was a dumb idea and a bad idea. And now this same 
minister is standing up and somehow saying that the conversion 
of 1,100 jobs to 700 jobs is another good idea. 
 
I guess it’s a good idea for the 700 people that still have jobs, 
but I’m not too sure that the 400 that are potentially going to 
lose them are quite as enthusiastic about this announcement as 
the minister is. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also of interest that Crown Life has 
indicated that it’s going to remain holding the assets that 
Canada Life particularly did not want in the real estate and 
mortgage business, some $1.5 billion of assets. And we 
sincerely hope that the management of those assets are going to 
result in a positive outcome because the province is still into 
this company for some $271 million. And it’s going to require a 
positive outlook on Crown Life being able to manage those 
assets in order to have this happen. 
 
The details on how this is all going to arrive at is going to be 
worked out, I think, over the next 18 months. I hope that that’s 
a long enough period of time for the minister and the officials 
responsible at CIC to at least read all the contracts so that we 
don’t get ourselves into another typical fiasco that seems to be 
happening so much lately. 
 
Crown Life has been an excellent corporate citizen in Regina 
and in Saskatchewan. And many of their philanthropic kind of 
activities and charitable works, both on local charities and 
provincial things, are well-known. 
 
And on behalf of the official opposition, we certainly wish them 
every success and join in welcoming Canada Life to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
one phrase in the minister’s statement jumps out at me and I 
will read it into the record. And it reads: “The deal that was 
announced by the two life insurance companies this morning is 
a complex one.” 
 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, I greatly fear that this government does not excel 
in the reading of very complex agreements. And dare we to 
hope, dare we to hope that this very complex agreement was in 
fact carefully read. Well that being said, the benefits of joining 
with a company the size of Canada Life are obvious. And it is 
our hope that by joining with a company of the size of Canada 
Life, that the operations in Regina have been strengthened. 
 
We do of course have a number of questions. What about the 
potential 300 to 400 displaced workers. Will they be fairly 
treated? What provision is there for them? Will the company 
remain in Regina? I understand there is a five-year guarantee. 
What’s going to happen after that time? 
 
However if those questions are answered, if the 272 million is 
repaid with interest, then I say this agreement is good news for 
the people of Saskatchewan and something for us all to 
celebrate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of months ago the Premier said at a news 
conference that governments should be out of business; 
government doesn’t do well in business. Well we are not 
quarrelling with that statement. And I think that if that is what 
we’re doing, that we are getting government out of the business, 
we are recouping our investment and we are going to have a 
strong business in this province, then it is something for us all 
to celebrate, and on behalf of the Liberal opposition I too wish 
to say to the management and staff of Canada Life, welcome to 
Saskatchewan and we look forward to what we hope will be a 
long and prosperous business relationship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 215  The Saskatchewan Property Rights Act 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of Bill No. 215, The Saskatchewan Property Rights 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 751 — The Big Game Hunt Farming 
Regulation Ministerial Responsibility Act 

 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 751, The Big Game Hunt Farming 
Regulation Ministerial Responsibility Act be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Community Development for Northern Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
speak on a very interesting challenge that the province faces in 

Saskatchewan as a whole and I look forward to some of the 
other comments of different MLAs across the floor, and 
certainly to my extreme right, in terms of some of their 
aspirations, some of their views, and some of their policies 
when we talk about how we deal with northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the seventy-five 
minute debate . . . just for clarity’s sake, for those that may be 
watching the television screens back in Ile-a-la-Crosse and 
Buffalo Narrows, La Loche, and I believe Pinehouse may be on 
the air as well, as well as other areas in the Cumberland 
constituency, perhaps La Ronge, and so on and so forth, I think 
the key point I’m trying to make here, Mr. Speaker, is after the 
15 minutes I’m allotted, the other individual MLAs will have 
the opportunity to speak as well and of course hopefully this 
whole debate will come to a vote. 
 
And if it doesn’t come to a vote obviously members opposite, in 
particular the member from Cumberland, may not want to show 
his true stripes and stand to vote aye or nay on the whole 
resolution I have proposed for today. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, back in . . . I quote from an article of May 16, 
1984, when the former member of Cumberland, the NDP MLA 
Lawrence Yew . . . I follow in his footsteps, Mr. Speaker, 
roughly 15 years later talking about a similar resolution, and I 
quote from the article of May 16: 
 

Yew introduced a resolution to condemn what he saw as 
government inaction. However the 75 minutes allotted for 
the debate expired without members having a chance to 
vote. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I hope that doesn’t happen today, because as 
in Mr. Yew’s spirit we often speak about the tremendous 
amount of work that he done when he was a member of 
opposition facing the then PC (Progressive Conservative) 
government of Grant Devine. And certainly Mr. Yew spoke 
eloquently and spoke from the heart and certainly spoke about 
the knowledge of the issues of people of northern 
Saskatchewan, the issues that they face over many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s five crucial areas that we need to look at 
when we talk about the whole basis of my resolution. The first 
point is I want to thank my Liberal colleagues for highlighting 
the item and certainly giving us this forum and this opportunity 
to speak about northern issues above and beyond theirs. I think 
that certainly shows leadership and certainly shows team 
cooperation — so certainly I want to thank the Liberal caucus 
for giving me this opportunity. 
 
They believe that northern Saskatchewan should be part of the 
province and they certainly want to give some of the challenges 
and some of the problems that the North has experienced over 
the years an opportunity to be heard here in the Assembly. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated throughout the House that in 
following Mr. Yew’s spirit, I certainly know and appreciate the 
fact that his family is quite aware that we often use his words 
and often use some of his quotes to continue on the battle that 
he started back in 1984. And I quote from an article again from 
May 16: 
 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

Residents of the North don’t want jobs some day, Yew 
said. They want jobs now. The economy of the North has 
virtually ground to a halt ( he added). 
 

Mr. Speaker, Lawrence talked about the stuff that I want to 
speak about today very briefly, approximately 15 years ago. 
And once again we see that inaction is the end result of the that 
lack of direction that northern Saskatchewan communities have 
to look forward to. 
 
And I quote again, Mr. Speaker, from a number of other 
individuals. And I want to pay particular attention to a quote, 
again of December 10, 1986. And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

With the record high unemployment rates of 80, 90 per 
cent in certain communities, there has to be a tremendous 
amount of perseverance. The other thing that I have 
learned was the importance of standing up for your rights. 
You could not back down on your rights, you had to stand 
up for them. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that quote is December 10, 1986, as I mentioned, 
and was a quote made famous by the now sitting NDP MLA, 
the hon. member from Cumberland. And I want to point out that 
this is exactly what the 75-minute debate is, Mr. Speaker. It is 
to talk about standing up and fighting for northern 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Throughout time, Mr. Speaker, throughout the PC 
administration of the ’80s, the NDP administration of the ’70s, 
and now the NDP of the ’90s, we have continued suffering the 
indignation of poor highways, of poor housing, and generally a 
lack of direction to deal with the northern Saskatchewan 
problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for years we have talked about what options there 
were available to government, and for years northern 
Saskatchewan people have not been heard. At this point in time 
the entire northern part of Saskatchewan, we account for 3 per 
cent of the provincial population — not 5, not 10, not 15, but 3 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. And if my calculations serve me correct, 
that’s roughly 80 to 90 square kilometres for every man, 
woman, and child. 
 
And I think if you look at that scenario, the question you would 
ask is, why would we have these continual economic and social 
problems with the vast amount of land which has the vast 
amount of opportunity available to us, why have we continued 
suffering through some of these problems? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the point that I want to make here is that 
there was never an intention to empower the northern 
Saskatchewan communities to make a difference in their own 
lives. 
 
Community development — that’s the basis of our argument 
here, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking and asking the government to 
work hand in hand — not dictate — but to work hand in hand 
with the northern Saskatchewan people to finally put together a 
plan and put together some financial commitment so that we 
may one day see economic and social justice for northern 
Saskatchewan people. 
 

Throughout my travels, Mr. Speaker, I have been to certain 
communities that don’t have water and sewer in 1998 and that 
of course is Stony Rapids. And I’ve been to certain houses that 
don’t have water and sewer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know when you walk into a house and see the 
overcrowded conditions, you begin to wonder whether you’re in 
a third world country or whether you’re in northern 
Saskatchewan. There is no excuse for any of those type of 
housing to exist in the North at this point and at this day and 
age primarily because, Mr. Speaker, we have put a tremendous 
amount of money over the past 20, 30 years back into the 
provincial coffers. 
 
Now again we’ve asked time and time again that this whole 
argument that we have today about social and economic justice, 
a comprehensive development plan for the North, hand in hand 
with the leadership, is that we don’t want to look at this thing 
from the political perspective. This is not about politics, Mr. 
Speaker. This, as I mentioned before, is about how we treat and 
how we view northern Saskatchewan people. I believe it’s very, 
very important that we get that out into the forefront at this 
point in time. 
 
And that’s my second point is that we, above all else, simply 
want to be consulted. We want to be part of the economy of 
northern Saskatchewan and we certainly want to be a 
contributing partner of this great province. 
 
(1445) 
 
And again I point out to the statement that Mr. Yew made and a 
quote, it’s now a famous quote: “Northerners want to be part of 
the solution, not part of the problem.” 
 
And the other matter I want to raise is that there is a lot of 
tremendous pride in these communities. Everywhere I go 
people are proud that they have clean yards, they got 
communities that are growing, and they do all that they can, Mr. 
Speaker, with their two hands. And that shows the incredible 
pride that they have in themselves, and in their families, and 
their communities, and again it really qualifies what Mr. Yew 
had said when he says we want to be part of the solution, not 
part of the problem. 
 
So I think it’s high time that governments, senior and . . . well 
the provincial and federal governments, to recognize the 
incredible Saskatchewan spirit that exists in northern 
Saskatchewan. And people out there are saying we need a 
three-pronged approach which is my third point. 
 
We need economic development so we can create jobs for 
people. We need social development so we can also learn to 
appreciate the social fabric of our community and the social 
challenges associated with our community. And we also need to 
develop our infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are only 3 per cent of the provincial 
population living in the North and is it not possible that we can 
take some revenues in the North to create an economy, a 
self-sustaining economy that people themselves build, and that 
people themselves can be proud of. That’s the challenge that we 
have and that’s exactly what we want to do. 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

And the other point that I wish to make, Mr. Speaker, as kind of 
my fifth and final point is that when you talk about 
empowerment of people, politics should not be about control 
and power. Politics should be about empowerment of people, 
communities, and ideas. And that’s exactly what the northern 
Saskatchewan people would like to see. They’d like to see an 
opportunity for themselves to start doing things on their own 
and to start looking at options that they feel are the only way to 
go in the future development of northern communities. 
 
At this point in time we live under a system of disincentives, 
Mr. Speaker. Everything from the social services system to the 
policies of the housing program to the high cost of living in 
northern Saskatchewan to the lack of infrastructure. All those 
add to the challenge of developing an economy in northern 
Saskatchewan, and it’s very important that people understand 
that this is not an issue of trying to pick ourselves up by the 
bootstraps. This is really an issue — give us some boots in 
which we can pull ourselves up with. That’s the bottom line. 
 
And I think the system of disincentives when you look at the 
working people, that if you have a social housing program 
that’s designed to house those families that cannot afford to 
build their own, in a sense that’s a good program for those 
people. However how about if you have a couple that are trying 
to work, and there’s thousands of examples of that, of trying to 
work breaking away from the social services system, for every 
dollar that they make their rent increases. And all of a sudden 
they can’t afford to live in this house any more. 
 
So some of the policies that we talk about when we talk about 
solutions — we identified some of those solutions a couple of 
days ago. We said where possible all the working people that 
currently live in government houses try and roll those houses 
into a mortgage that is reflective of the market rates of northern 
Saskatchewan, and that is similar to the remote housing 
program principles. 
 
And I think what you’ll see, Mr. Speaker, is you’ll see people 
quite frankly breaking free of the shackles of social services and 
finally beginning to seek independence of government. And 
certainly that’s a great benefit to all of northern Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And you would expect that, Mr. Speaker, from a socialist 
government, because socialism I believe is all about 
empowerment. And to me I believe that it’s incumbent, it’s 
incumbent upon a government that’s suppose to be for the small 
people to try and make those people as independent as quickly 
as possible. 
 
So that, heaven forbid, we have an extreme right-wing party 
that comes along and says, that’s it, we’re cutting off the North, 
we’re cutting off the aboriginal community. Well they can do 
all they want but the people will be independent, they’ll be 
strong, and above all else they will have control of their lives, 
and not government. 
 
And that’s the key point they’re trying to make. If you’re truly, 
if you are truly committed to empowerment of people and ideas, 
then this is the first step. It’s to get rid of the disincentives, 
work with these northern communities to address the economic 
and social development plans, as well as meeting the 

infrastructure needs. Poor housing, poor highways, 
unemployment levels — all these factors add to the challenge of 
northern communities. 
 
But you wouldn’t expect to see that, Mr. Speaker, when you 
travel to Buffalo Narrows or through Beauval or through Green 
Lake. You see a lot of optimism. Some of the work they’re 
doing is incredible. But, Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, there is 
certainly a lot of challenges that they have to overcome and 
certainly they want to be part of the province; so they’re putting 
effort into it. 
 
And some of the ideas and some of the meetings and some of 
the trips that these guys take on behalf of their communities is 
tremendous. Green Lake, you have three or four councillors 
working very hard to develop their forestry industry. And the 
whole objectives of northern Saskatchewan is we’re trying to 
get southern Saskatchewan to recognize that we are not a 
welfare state of the province, that we are a proud, true people 
that wish to seek independence. 
 
And how we do that, Mr. Speaker, like everywhere else you 
seek government support. And so far, Mr. Speaker, we have not 
seen evidence of that particular government support in northern 
Saskatchewan, in spite of the millions of dollars they dig out in 
royalties from forestry and mining, in spite of the millions of 
dollars they dig out from the hydro development and tourism 
and on and on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re asking the government, we’re suggesting to 
the government today, that they develop a community 
development Act in which they direct-finance social 
development agencies at the local level, they direct-finance 
community development corporations, and that they 
direct-finance local infrastructure needs. And that they make 
this whole process politics free, in which they say, okay we as a 
province are going to take leadership, we as a province are 
going to do this, and we are prepared and committed to stand up 
for northern Saskatchewan people. 
 
And that I think is the gist of my presentation this afternoon, 
Mr. Speaker, is to try and get the government to wake up, to 
recognize that. Because people in the North have been saying, if 
you guys have been so great to us, if you have been so good to 
us, why are we still having these particular challenges, why are 
we still living under a system of disincentives, why is it there at 
times seems to be little hope of our young people waking up 
and taking part and parcel of what the vision of the future of the 
North . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member’s time has expired 
and without further comment he must now directly move the 
motion. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from North Battleford: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to put in place a 
comprehensive strategy for community development for 
northern Saskatchewan, such a strategy to include: (1) in 
meeting the basic infrastructure needs of northern 
communities such as adequate housing, roads, recreational 
facilities, water and sewer installations, and health centres; 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

(2) providing competitive training and employment 
opportunities for northern people; (3) providing business 
opportunities for entrepreneurs in northern communities; 
(4) putting into place an agenda for the social development 
of northern communities; (5) providing for the true 
empowerment of northern people over the major decisions 
which affect their lives. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now hon. members will have 
opportunity to put their remarks on the record and I’ll 
encourage them to do that. On the record one at a time. Order. 
Can I have order please. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I want to 
say that not only do I think the North is an incredible asset to 
our province, I believe that the member for Athabasca has been 
an incredible asset to our caucus and to this House, and through 
this House to the larger province, in that he has been a 
tremendous resource in making us all aware of the challenges 
and needs of the North and what the North has to offer us as the 
larger people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I certainly personally consider the North to be one of the most 
beautiful parts of our province and a rich resource to us all. It is 
also of course, Mr. Speaker, ironically the oldest part of our 
province. We find it somewhat strange in view of the fact that it 
is still in some respects new and opening up and developing, 
but the oldest community in Saskatchewan is of course 
Cumberland House. The oldest existing structure in 
Saskatchewan is Holy Trinity Church at Stanley Mission. And 
the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse celebrated its 200th 
anniversary five years ago. 
 
So . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, I’m sorry. I stand 
corrected. They celebrated their 200th anniversary the same 
year as our American friends celebrated the 200th anniversary 
of the Declaration of Independence. Most of the communities 
which we come from in the South are now gearing up to 
celebrate their 100th anniversary, and here the member for 
Ile-a-la-Crosse comes from a community now well over 200 
years old. 
 
Well we also know that projections are that at least 35 per cent 
of our population will be aboriginal within the next few 
decades. We are also told that the majority of our school-aged 
children will be aboriginal by the year 2011. 
 
We have seen these statistics on many occasions. The question 
is, how do we choose to address them. Do we see these 
statistics as a problem? Do we see them as a challenge? Or do 
we see them as an opportunity? 
 
Certainly it has to be said that unless the levels of education, job 
training, and economic activity are raised from their present, 
admittedly unsatisfactory levels, then it is a problem. 
 
But if we can empower our northern and aboriginal peoples, if 
we can provide them with the tools of education and job 
training that they can fully enter the economy of our province, 
then these figures are an opportunity and not a problem to our 
future. 

I like what the member for Athabasca says about empowerment 
and independence. I think we, as the non-aboriginal population, 
freely concede that for too many years we have tried to “do for 
our northern and native people.” And I think we all 
acknowledge that our policies of doing things for northern and 
native peoples have met with very limited success, if not 
downright failure. 
 
So it is time to turn the reins over to them, to empower them, 
and I am sure they will surprise us with what they are capable 
of doing and that they will in the next generation enter fully into 
the economic life of this province. 
 
I do however have to say that as always, with rights come 
responsibilities. The issue of taxation will have to be addressed. 
Hopefully it can be addressed with mutual respect and that we 
can approach each other in a new sense of partnership and 
comradeship. 
 
But I think it has to be acknowledged that if the projections we 
see are correct — that between a third and a half of our 
population will be aboriginal by the middle of the next century 
— then it becomes obvious that we as a province simply will 
not be able to afford the roads, the schools, and the hospitals 
that we all want and we all need without the taxation issue 
being addressed. 
 
But I say, let us address it in a sense not of confrontation, not in 
a sense of attack, not in a sense of trying to foment racial 
disunity, but let us address these issues in a sense of friendship 
and common citizenship. 
 
That being said, I am pleased and proud to support my 
colleague from Athabasca in bringing this resolution before us, 
in saying the North needs the infrastructure, needs the personal 
development and empowerment in order to fully take its place 
as an active, prosperous, growing part of our province. 
 
(1500) 
 
And in conclusion, I would like to quote from the member for 
Athabasca in his graduation wishes to the people of La Loche, 
which is one of the few Dene communities in our province, Mr. 
Speaker. And I wish to quote now: 
 

The measure of our people, of all people, is the manner in 
which we appreciate our children. We must afford them 
confidence and peace, for these are the greatest gifts any 
nation can bestow upon its children. For all of us there is 
no time for anything but challenging life in every arena it 
has to offer, whether the challenge be in sports, business, 
arts, or politics. Our greatest challenge is to develop our 
children and our nation to become independent, 
compassionate, and free to dream. 

 
I support this motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving an 
amendment on the motion after some comments. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the member from 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

Athabasca for quoting Lawrence Yew. I know that it’s very, 
very difficult to find Liberals to quote from and that indeed 
when you’re looking at quotations it’s always very important to 
look at people who have been involved in the development of 
northern Saskatchewan at such a great extent as Lawrence Yew 
and who happened to be a great also NDPer. And so I thank the 
member for cutting across party lines, you know, accepting the 
fact that NDP MLAs were a great asset to this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to address the situation of the North 
in a very positive fashion. Contrary to some of the more doom 
and gloom type statements that have been made in the past by 
the member, I would like to offer a more positive way of life in 
the North. A more . . . a greater sense of hope and determination 
that I feel from the people as I travel throughout the North. 
 
The first thing I would like to mention in regards to the motion 
itself is that it deals with various aspects of economic, social 
development. I would like to say this, that on May 20 this year 
we had an historic meeting in La Ronge with the Premier, the 
Minister of Energy and Mines, the Minister of SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management), and 
also the first nations people from northern Saskatchewan as 
well as the province, as well as Metis people, and very 
importantly the northern elected representatives — the 
municipalities from the North — and in there as well were the 
top-level civil servants in the federal government. 
 
So here we had a situation where all levels of government were 
meeting in northern Saskatchewan. And so therefore it was 
historic in this sense, that we had a unified view of what we 
needed to do in regards to northern development. We came out 
of that place, Mr. Speaker, with an historic agreement. It was 
historic in regards to the vision of the North. It was historic in 
regards to the goals of economic development, of jobs. 
 
People knew the $150 million worth of contracts in mining. 
People knew we had progressed to over 1,000 jobs in mining 
alone. We have hundreds of jobs in forestry. We’re developing 
an opportunities conference in forestry this year and we’re 
moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re also looking at the northern development fund this year 
from this government. We didn’t stop after last year’s meeting 
and not do anything. We moved from 2 million to $5 million 
worth in regards to the northern development fund. It was a 
direct response to people of the North; we were listening to 
people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we have moved in the area of education. 
There’s now over 1,600 people in post-secondary education in 
northern Saskatchewan. In NORTEP (northern teacher 
education program) teacher education alone we’ve had over 200 
grads, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we are moving in the area not only in teacher education, but 
also in the health sciences. We’ve got a northern professional 
access program. We’re now talking about moving into the area 
of engineering, and so on, Mr. Speaker. So we’re moving at 
higher levels of development in education. 
 
Also in the area of infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
say this. Historically it’s been the NDP mainly who has built 

the roads in the North. Whether we look at the ’70s, there was a 
stop of course when the Tories were around, now represented 
by the Saskatchewan Party. But we now see the development — 
the Cumberland bridge has gone up, the Grandmother’s Bay 
road, the Athabasca road going. 
 
In his own constituency there was $5 million worth in the 
Canoe Narrows area put in, $5 million worth of road 
construction in regards to the area in around the Pinehouse, and 
about 1.2 million in Turnor Lake which he mentioned today. 
 
And I think that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve done well in regards to the 
response and listening to the people. The other thing is that we 
have moved from approximately overall in the road 
construction . . . we added another 9 million this year, to make 
it a total of 35 million. 
 
When the member talks about revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, 
and he narrows it down to resource revenue sharing, the total 
amount of revenue we get from uranium is 35 million. It was 
about 25 million over the past 10 years. It wouldn’t even pay 
for the roads. 
 
We need money shared on the whole provincial Consolidated 
Fund, Mr. Speaker. We have about 600 million from the oil, 
potash, and . . . (inaudible) . . . over the years. And the policy of 
the government is to have a fair share of the revenues on the 
Consolidated Fund, General Revenue Fund, with the northern 
benefits in education, health, economic development, and so on. 
 
And that’s the strategy of this government, not simply revenue 
sharing, resource revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, because that 
wouldn’t be enough. The highest amount of income and 
revenue we get is from uranium royalties and that’s about . . . 
going to be about 40 million this year. So, Mr. Speaker, it 
would hardly even pay for the roads. 
 
So when we look at it, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at housing, 
we’ve got 8 million on that over three years. We’re hoping that 
the federal government will match those funds. One of the key 
issues that came out was that we needed some money in the 
social development areas — health, we put 14 million on the La 
Ronge facility, another 10 million in Stony Rapids in the 
member’s own constituency, as well as in La Loche. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the things have happened from 
educational control, municipal control, now health control in 
the North, with the health boards. So we agree on the northern 
control angle. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, overall we agreed at that meeting — that we 
would address the federal government head on. We would like 
money from the federal government to cost share the 
development and economic and social development, to cost 
share the roads, to cost share the whole development in the 
North — to be part of the economic strategy of the North. 
 
And as such we had a new agreement over here where we have 
a northern development board. We agreed on that. We also 
agreed to oversee development. We also agreed that indeed we 
have a . . . (inaudible) . . . northern Saskatchewan agreement to 
do cost sharing on it, and also to have a strategic type of 
assessment in the North so we knew exactly where we need to 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

go in areas of economic development. Also, Mr. Speaker, there 
is the whole aspect of looking after the environment. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the following 
amendment. After the words “This Assembly” I would have to 
replace the following words: “urge the government to put,” and 
I would like to replace that with the following. I would like to: 

 
commend the government for signing the historic 
memorandum of understanding on May 20, 1998 in La 
Ronge. This memorandum of understanding puts (Mr. 
Speaker) in place a comprehensive strategy for community 
development in northern Saskatchewan . . . 
 

And I include the words “which includes”. And as we go to the 
different one, two, three, four, and five, I’m also adding, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

6) sustainable development and protection of the 
environment. 

 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I put across that amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — If the minister would like to identify the 
seconder for the motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Seconded by the member from 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Not having had previous notice of the 
amendment, the Chair would like to take a moment to reflect on 
its admissibility. 
 
The amendment is in order and the question before the House is 
the motion moved by the hon. member for Athabasca, seconded 
by the hon. member for North Battleford; and at the same time 
the amendment moved by the Minister for Northern Affairs, 
seconded by the hon. member for Shellbrook-Spiritwood. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
75-minute-debate, the resolution that’s before us and the motion 
that’s before us as it was previously divided into six categories, 
indicated that the communities of the North were being limited 
in the amount of development and that which was taking place 
in it. And I’d like to just comment on a few items to indicate 
that that’s not the case. 
 
In the six years from 1991 through till the end of 1996 there 
was something in the neighbourhood of $15 million in 
expenditures made in sewer and water in the northern 
communities in the northern administrative district in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that amounts to something in the neighbourhood 
of $200 per capita for people in that particular area which I 
would find is a larger expenditure than you’d find anywhere 
else in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And following that, in the following year there was an 
additional 6 million of provincial and Canada/Saskatchewan 
infrastructure funding was committed to sewer and water 

projects for the North in the year just ended March 31, ’98. 
 
The federal government . . . this motion, resolution, comes from 
the member of Athabasca. And I’d like to indicate, Mr. 
Speaker, that the federal government, Liberal cousin to the 
Liberal Party here in the province of Saskatchewan, withdrew 
from providing . . . participating in the construction of homes, 
new homes in the northern part of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And the province of Saskatchewan announced at 
that particular time a three-year program where we would spend 
$8 million in the construction of new homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the northern part of the province of Saskatchewan 
under this administration has not been abandoned as the 
member from Athabasca is indicating in his motion, but rather 
there have been a large number of expenditures made in that 
area. 
 
You will find that in looking at highway expenditures in 
northern Saskatchewan, that there are three major arteries that 
are being spent on. One of them up the west side of the 
province, ends up at Cluff Lake. One of them goes almost up 
the centre of the province that ends at Key Lake. And the third 
route, which is under construction now with another $6 million 
expenditure both federal and provincial funding, that will end at 
Black Lake and today has reached the points north. 
 
(1515) 
 
And I can tell the members opposite that I’ve driven on that 
particular route all the way from Prince Albert right to points 
north. And although I would not consider it a number one 
high-class highway, given the nature of the economic activity 
that’s along that particular road and the amount of flow of 
traffic, it meets the same standards that you’d find in rural 
Saskatchewan to deliver services out into areas with the same 
amount of activity or less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that the northern development fund 
provides $3 million in loans and grants to support northern 
entrepreneurs in the year ’97-98. And in recognition of success 
of this program which is overseen by a review board, a northern 
review board, the budget has been doubled for this coming year 
to something in the neighbourhood of $6 million. 
 
So you can look at the five items that were there. Item number 
one, the infrastructure, the major parts of infrastructure are 
being expanded in northern Saskatchewan. Roads, water and 
sewage, and health facilities, infrastructure type of facilities. 
Two, the training and that which Northerners are receiving are 
expanding and will provide results for the future in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s a multi-party training plan that’s supported both by the 
federal and provincial governments, and the mining industry, so 
you have a tripartite approach. And this program will provide 
$10 million in training geared specifically to northern 
employment in the private sector, mainly in mining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has contributed more than a thousand 
Northerners to mine sites. They’ve gone through this program, 
85 per cent of whom are of aboriginal ancestry. A new and 
expanded multi-party training plan is currently being developed 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

and I expect that if this comes into place it will have more 
agreements or more areas that the training will take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of the training strategy of the provincial 
government is to expand the opportunities for Northerners and 
allow them to participate in the industries that are already there, 
as well with other organizations, and to develop some industries 
that are not already covered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last week or so a number of cabinet 
ministers have spent some time in La Ronge and have been 
negotiating changes to different agreements so that this can 
proceed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the $9 million increase in the Highways and 
Transportation northern expenditures for the year 1988 bring 
the total expenditures to 35 million. Mr. Speaker, this is in my 
mind, looking after the requirements of the North in a number 
of different ways. Because if you look at what took place in the 
southern half of the province of Saskatchewan, it was the rail 
lines that came in that expanded the development throughout 
the southern part of the province. And the three main routes that 
I’ve already talked about are some of the things related to 
expansion of industry in the northern part of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the involvement of northern people in setting 
priorities for highway and transport planning through their . . . 
with transportation planning committees have led to the 
construction of roads — extension of roads like the one from 
. . . just north of Missinipe into Grandmother Bay, a community 
that has existed for something in excess of probably 75 years 
and has not had the opportunity of any transportation route out 
— is now connected to the highway that goes from points north 
to La Ronge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look at the initiatives that have been carried 
out just recently, there are now two health districts in the 
northern part of the province of Saskatchewan. And these two 
districts, I believe over the next number of years, will be 
providing very effective health care services to the people in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to close my remarks in 
saying that I move . . . support the amendment and voting on 
that. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments in regards to the motion presented before 
us and the amendment. As I look at the amendment, I look at 
the motion that’s being presented, in many ways the motion 
basically just compliments . . . or the amendment compliments 
the motion in talking about infrastructure. 
 
I think the member, the Minister for Intergovernmental Affairs, 
the member from Cumberland talked about a memorandum of 
understanding. This memorandum of understanding, if I 
understand the motion that’s . . . or the amendment that’s been 
brought forward, talks about meeting infrastructure needs. And 
I think that’s what the member from Athabasca was talking 
about. It talks about training and it talks about business 
opportunities. 

I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at northern Saskatchewan, 
we look at individuals living in northern communities in this 
province. At the end of the day I have a feeling that a lot of 
members of northern Saskatchewan are tired as well of just 
living off government and would like to have an opportunity to 
really provide for themselves. And it’s something that I think 
we need to talk about a lot more. 
 
We need to sit down with our aboriginal friends and talk about 
ways in which we can give them the ability then to enhance 
opportunities for themselves rather than looking to someone 
else to provide for them. 
 
Because certainly northern Saskatchewan has so much to offer. 
There are so many opportunities for businesses and job 
opportunities and certainly industry to build in the province of 
Saskatchewan and to add to the employment opportunities for 
Northerners that would give them then the ability to provide for 
themselves — whether it’s adequate housing or whether it’s just 
providing educational opportunities and tools, or providing for 
the needs of their family members. 
 
And certainly one of the areas that we talk about, when we talk 
about northern Saskatchewan as well, is the area of health care 
and providing quality health care and health availability and 
access to health care in northern Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when we talk about the availability of health care for 
northern communities, I think we need to look at it on a basis of 
the provincial needs and the health care in general in regards to 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think when we look at the motion presented 
before us, we’re also mindful of the very serious debate that is 
taking place in the province of Saskatchewan right now. And a 
debate that I believe is calling upon members to stand up and 
represent their constituents and certainly speak out on behalf of 
their constituents. A debate that is calling for a real review of 
the health care system. A debate that is calling for this 
government to take a look at what it has done in regards to the 
Plains hospital and other hospitals across the province of 
Saskatchewan. A debate that as well is asking members to 
exercise their responsibility to represent their constituents 
through a free vote. 
 
And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a 
motion, seconded by my colleague, the member from Saltcoats: 
 

That the Assembly do now proceed to item 4 under private 
members’ public Bills and orders, adjourned debates, in the 
orders of the day. 
 

I so move. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:25 p.m. until 3:34 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 8 
 

Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Draude Gantefoer Heppner 
D’Autremont Julé  
 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

Nays — 29 
 

Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 
Ms. MacKinnon Tchorzewski Johnson 
Whitmore Goulet Kowalsky 
Trew Renaud Ms. Lorje 
Scott Nilson Ms. Hamilton 
Ms. Stanger Jess Wall 
Kasperski Ward Ms. Murray 
Langford Ms. Murrell Thomson 
Osika Hillson Aldridge 
Belanger McLane  
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the attitude just portrayed by 
the movers of the motion previous, that is the members of the 
Saskatchewan Party, many of them who used to be the Tories, 
are reflecting exactly what was happening with respect to the 
North in 1983. The members opposite from the old Tories here 
didn’t want to deal with any northern issues at the time, and 
what they’ve just said is they don’t want to deal with it now as 
well. 
 
Did you remember, Mr. Speaker, the 1983 highways map on 
which the Tory minister at that time identified in full print that 
the North is full of beautiful lakes and rivers but no people, Mr. 
Speaker — no people. 
 
It’s not any wonder at all, Mr. Speaker, that when the party 
opposite, the Saskatchewan Party, called a meeting — had a 
meeting, a political rally — in La Ronge, that all of four people 
turned up, Mr. Speaker. After them declaring that there was no 
people in the North. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, fortunately, fortunately when the New 
Democrats were elected, people came back to northern 
Saskatchewan. And we know that there’s a lot of good activity 
going on in northern Saskatchewan right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so for that I actually want to thank the member from the 
Liberal Party for raising this issue. Perhaps a little misguided in 
the way he raised the issue that there . . . saying that there was a 
lack of activity and that he wanted . . . but in the spirit in which 
he raised it — to emphasize that there should be a debate about 
northern issues in this House. 
 
And secondly, identifying the direction in which we should be 
moving with respect to employment and other opportunities in 
the North. 
 
Coming from Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, I have the 
opportunity to rub shoulders with northern neighbours — 
people coming through Prince Albert, people who live in Prince 
Albert and have lived in the North, or vice versa. And I have 
had the pleasure of dealing with and talking with northern 
leaders, both Metis leaders and leaders from first nations. 
 
And as a result of all of the dialogue that’s happened between 
government and amongst leadership from northern 
Saskatchewan, I have to say that when I look back to 1967 
when I first moved to Prince Albert and was in touch with some 
of the northern communities then, there has been a world of 
difference of what’s happening now compared to what was 
happening then. 

Because really it was . . . access by roads for one thing was 
very, very poor at the time. And that means . . . it meant that the 
access to other things, like schools, health facilities, social 
services were all very hard to come by. And now when you 
drive into any of these communities, you see that there’s a 
purpose, people are active, their communities are involved in 
supporting the institutions which they themselves have had a 
tremendous part in building. 
 
And I guess there’s not much else that gives me greater hope 
than to see the progress, particularly in the last few years, with 
respect to employment. We’ve had members . . . and I know a 
former member from Athabasca often used to rise in this House 
along with Lawrence Yew and talk about 90 per cent and 95 per 
cent and in some cases a hundred per cent unemployment in 
some of the northern communities. A dent has been made in 
that, Mr. Speaker, and it took years to do it, but a dent has been 
made in it. 
 
And for example, I have before me a little briefing note here 
about northern employment figures at northern mining sites. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s heartening to know that the figure which we 
now use is that there are 1,095 Northerners which are employed 
in northern Saskatchewan in mining sites as of September 30, 
1997. And, Mr. Speaker, that 85 per cent of these people, or 935 
of these people, are of aboriginal ancestry. 
 
Now this figure is something that compares with this figure of 
1,095 — compares with 1,092 as of just June of the same year 
before that, and for 1996 it was a 1,017. But if you go back to 
1992, the quarterly average was 529 people working in mine 
sites. Mr. Speaker, these are good jobs. These are jobs on which 
you can raise a family, you can send a family to school . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The time for the 65-minute debate has 
now expired and the Assembly will now proceed to a maximum 
of 10 minutes of questions and comments by members. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 
for the Minister of Northern Affairs, the hon. member from 
Cumberland. The reason why we stress community 
development in every sense, Mr. Speaker, is because the 
challenge of northern communities include limited skills of a lot 
of people; a young population; no migration of people; the 
isolation factor; the lack of a comprehensive plan; the system of 
disincentive with housing and health care, etc.; no community 
development scenario. 
 
My question to the minister is how do people perceive that lack 
of action besides taking the position that this government is 
intent on depopulating northern Saskatchewan and seeing the 
North become practically a ghost town in that sense. Can I ask 
the minister what his opinion on that particular issue is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, the member mentions quite 
a few points. I’ll deal with a couple of points. 
 
One is when he says a lack of a comprehensive plan. We just 
announced with the Premier and three ministers, along with first 
nations, Metis leaders, also the northern community leaders — 
and also representatives from the federal government were there 
— we announced a comprehensive strategy, Mr. Speaker. From 
the economic level to the social development level, also to the 



1394 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

environmental level. That was done on May 20. 
 
It’s probably the first of its kind anywhere in Canada, and it was 
a unified view by everybody. And one of the major points, the 
second point that I make, is we needed to have the federal 
government onside in regard to the partnerships. We need the 
federal government to provide resources and revenues in the 
North for development. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member 
from Athabasca. I’m wondering if he approves of the 
partnership between governments and private sector on many of 
the projects which I am going to list: the Athabasca road, the 
Cumberland House bridge, Grandmother’s Bay road, and the 
partnership agreement with Cameco, COGEMA, and Cigar 
Lake Mining to upgrade highways 102 and 905. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no question, I can 
certainly support those initiatives. I think the key point I’m 
trying to make here is that it must have development of the 
North be sustainable, community based, and the people in 
charge of that development of that particular economy. 
 
The problem with the partnership that you speak about is these 
partnerships are limited. There’s very little control at the local 
level. And secondly, they’re not sustainable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about a 50-prong approach. Don’t just 
look at a temporary job creation objective. Let’s look at a 
long-term, sustainable plan in which people can develop 
tourism opportunities, manufacturing opportunities, agricultural 
opportunities, develop the service sector and develop the 
service industry for all the people of northern Saskatchewan, 
and the list goes on. 
 
So yes, I support those initiatives in general. They are a good 
start, but they’re not sustainable and they’re not community 
driven. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — I’ve listened to the member from Athabasca. 
I’m sure he’s aware that the provincial government is spending 
something like $35.325 million on roads in the North in the 
1998-99 budget year. And I’m wondering if he could tell me 
how much his federal brothers in Ottawa are spending in 
northern Saskatchewan on roads, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want to get 
into detail, the exact details of what the federal government is 
putting into the roads, but I will share with you one road, the 
Athabasca road . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order, order. Now all 
members will be well aware of rule 28 which requires that the 
comments and questions and answers be provided through the 
Chair. And I’m sure the hon. member for Athabasca will want 
to guide himself accordingly. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize. I just 
want to make the point that in one particular road, the Black 
Lake road, as in the Cumberland House bridge and the 
Grandmother Bay road that the minister always talks about, a 

big chunk of those dollars did come from the federal 
government. However I am not here to apologize nor am I here 
to defend the federal government. 
 
What I want to say though is that the majority of those dollars 
that we speak about here — 35 million, that’s the figure that’s 
pulled out of the air — the huge majority of that money is going 
into roads that take out all the resources of northern 
Saskatchewan. Highway 155, we talk about it, from Green Lake 
that serves all the west-side communities, that highway takes 
$180,000 a year to . . . per year to maintain, while all the roads 
that take all the resources, be it forestry and so on, they get the 
big chunk of that dollar. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a question 
to the member from Cumberland, to the minister. Mr. Minister, 
in your . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now we’re private member’s 
day, and I know it’s a little different format than question 
period and I’m sure the hon. member will want to direct his 
questions and comments through the Chair, as per rule 28. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I recognized the Speaker 
originally, but, Mr. Speaker, a question to the member from 
Cumberland. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You got that right now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Okay, we’ll get there yet. Mr. Speaker, I’m not 
exactly sure if the Speaker really wants to respond to the 
question; but, Mr. Speaker, through you to the member from 
Cumberland, I want to raise the question of the fact this 
memorandum of understanding that you have signed with . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Now just to be clear, rule 
28 requires that comments be directed to the Chair not directly 
to another member of the House. May refer of course to another 
member of the House in the third person and we follow that rule 
strictly in private member’s day. And I’ll ask the hon. member 
to conduct himself accordingly. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, to the member from Cumberland. 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Cumberland has talked about a 
memorandum of understanding. And the member from 
Cumberland has also talked, in this memorandum of 
understanding, talked about doing a number of studies in 
regards to a number of issues related to northern Saskatchewan, 
issues that I think are imperative that we certainly look into. 
The issue of training, the issue of business opportunities, the 
issue of allowing northern people to really take charge of their 
affairs and giving them an opportunity to become real 
participants in job opportunities in the North. 
 
Well I guess the question to the member from Cumberland is 
such. To the member from Cumberland, the question I have: is 
this memorandum of understanding going to really mean 
something positive at the end of the day or is this another study 
that’s just going to become dusty on another shelf? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, the memorandum of 
understanding is not a study. It is an agreement by the leaders of 
the North in regards to economic development, social 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

development, and in relation to the environment. 
 
In regards to the idea of taking charge of the affairs of the 
North, it has been an NDP government, Mr. Speaker, who’ve 
moved in from the area of developing control on education, 
control on municipalities, and control on health. 
 
We’re now moving in the area of control on economic 
development. We have moved from $20 million worth of 
contracts in mining alone to $150 million this past year, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the type of control, the partnership of northern 
people with the rest of the province and internationally. And I 
think that is the way of the future as we approach the next 
century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member 
for North Battleford. I know that the member for North 
Battleford is particularly interested in the North, at least in 
North Battleford. I’m not sure he has any experience much 
beyond that. And certainly flying over the North — we’ve 
heard about that — and particularly camping and fishing up 
there. 
 
My question is, what particular programs does the member for 
North Battleford support in terms of the economic and social 
development of northern people? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I had hoped I’d made it clear in 
my remarks. Perhaps I did not. Of course there are some 
members who may need it repeated and don’t maybe grasp it 
the first time. I’ll be happy to do so. 
 
We have for too long as non-aboriginals embarked on policies 
in which we decided what was best for our northern and native 
people. Those days are now over. Northern and native peoples 
must be empowered to make decisions about their own future. 
 
I think we can assist in the process but we are no longer going 
to be able to make the decisions as to what is best for them. 
They will make their own decisions as to how to build their 
communities, how to train and educate their young people, how 
to develop the infrastructure and the industries that will give the 
North the future we all want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to ask 
the Minister of Northern Affairs a question. Will he stand up in 
the House today and admit that the vast majority of those 
dollars he’s talking about is being spent on roads that service 
the mining sector, that service the forestry sector, and not those 
roads such as Highway 155 between Green Lake and Beauval 
and Patuanak that serve people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, those roads serve the people 
of northern Saskatchewan. Many of the contracts that have been 
had in many areas in mining, forestry, and even as we go in is 
now moving even to northern contractors. And Athabasca 
Road, we had Dene people in addition with our joint partners be 
part of a contractual system of getting the contracts on the 
highways. 

So, Mr. Speaker, indeed we’re seeing direct benefits to northern 
people in the many areas including highways. 
 
The Speaker: — The time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would request, with leave of 
the Assembly, that we proceed directly to private members’ 
motions, Mr. Aldridge’s motion, in view of the fact that one of 
the members is not here. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 6 — Hospital Waiting-lists 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The issue of 
waiting-lists is one which represents a great concern to many 
people in this province. 
 
Recently I wrote to my constituents on the whole aspect of 
health care surrounding the Plains hospital closure as well. And 
these mail-outs proved so popular that residents of other 
constituencies, particularly those in Moose Jaw, 
Souris-Cannington, and a number of Regina seats, through 
word of mouth, through friends and family, heard of them and 
came asking for them as well. 
 
To date I’ve received over 1,500 responses. And of those who 
responded and offered their comments, it was close to 20 per 
cent of them, Mr. Speaker, who mentioned waiting-lists as one 
of their major concerns. So certainly this whole issue is a 
worrisome one indeed. 
 
Presently in the province there is over 6,000 people — over 
6,000 people — waiting for health services. That number is 
three times higher than what the Blakeney NDP government 
had considered acceptable, yet it’s acceptable for this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Back in the ’70s Blakeney suggested he’d fire his minister of 
Health if those waiting-lists were not reduced to below 2,000 
people. Well today, Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand a list of all 
of the individuals who wrote me and said they had concerns 
about waiting-lists, and this list represents the failures of this 
government. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, often relies upon its past 
accomplishments to try and see its way through the future. Past 
accomplishments, while they might sound glorious and they 
tend to grow over time, they’re no consolation for the people 
who now have to wait for these essential procedures, those 
some 6,000 or 6,600 or more, that are on waiting-lists. They’re 
no consolation for a person that’s waiting for a test, wondering 
whether or not they have a major illness. 
 
I know I’ve heard instances from parents in my riding that are 
in that very predicament. They have to go on working and 
taking care of their children, and with a considerable amount of 
agony for months on end, just because they can’t get a 
procedure or an operation on a timely basis or get in for some 
tests. In the past couple of months I’ve heard of too many of 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

these personal horror stories from constituents and from people 
all over the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, enough is enough. People should not have 
to suffer and wait for months to receive the assistance that they 
require. Mr. Speaker, while the government might sit back . . . 
or, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the government might sit back 
and rest upon its laurels, they’re failing to recognize what is the 
real problem. 
 
And the real problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that members in 
the government benches too often have their priorities all 
wrong. I’m looking at an article from the Leader-Post dated 
May 23 as a example of that very thing. Headline: “Gov’t 
mailout on health care cost $600,000.” 
 
Now within this article they go on to talk about a 12-page 
brochure called a Guide to Health Services in Saskatchewan 
which, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be distributed to households 
across the province. I guess we’re to take it to be coincidentally 
that it starts out distribution in Saskatoon. 
 
Now this particular document, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m told 
winds up . . . the final three pages of it are actively promoting 
the health policies contained in the recent NDP’s budget, and 
try to talk about improvements that they’ve made in the health 
system since they’ve assumed office, so it becomes rather a 
political document for themselves. 
 
In fact I don’t know if this was a Freudian slip or not, but one 
health department spokesperson had said, and I quote: 
 

The cost of printing and mailing the brochure was 185,000. 
Newspaper advertising promoting the arrival of the 
brochure, and ad agency fees drove up the total cost of the 
campaign to 600 . . . 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on 
her feet? 
 
Ms. Murrell: — To introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, and I apologize for interrupting. 
For the members who have had the opportunity to attend the 
Midwestern Legislative Conference I’m sure they will all 
recognize the lady in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Please 
welcome to Saskatchewan Miss Ilene Grossman, assistant 
director of the Midwestern Conference. Ilene is responsible for 
organizing and does a fine job of it. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 6 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With 

respect to the health department spokesperson as I was quoting: 
 

The cost of printing and mailing the brochure was 
$185,000. Newspaper advertising promoting the arrival of 
the brochure, and ad agency fees drove up the total cost of 
the . . . 
 

And for the member from Regina South who was chirping 
earlier, this is where the Freudian slip comes in, because the 
spokesperson says the agency fees and advertising: 
 

. . . drove up the total cost of the campaign to $600,000. 
Campbell acknowledged some might argue that the money 
should be spent to hire more nurses. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some might argue that it should be 
also used to reduce some waiting-lists in the province, and I 
guess all of these things go hand in hand. You close the Plains 
hospital, you don’t have enough beds available, you don’t have 
enough nurses available, one aspect of health care depends on 
the other. 
 
All too often, Mr. Deputy Speaker, health care to this 
government is a matter of financial, strictly financial statements 
ahead of human need. We shouldn’t be surprised by this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We shouldn’t be surprised because the 
government has placed foreign gambles in the Crowns ahead of 
health care and also ahead of the highways at home. It’s placed 
tax breaks for billionaires ahead of the real suffering which 
people are now enduring on these waiting-lists, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This government can evoke Tommy Douglas whenever it likes, 
but it will do nothing to change the fact that they have their 
priorities all wrong — nothing to do anything about that at all, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The question we all want to know is when 
is the government going to once again start caring about the 
needs of Saskatchewan people? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, while far too many people languish on 
waiting-lists in this province, the provincial government intends 
to close yet more hospitals and more hospital beds. If the 
government can remain indifferent to the calls of Saskatchewan 
people and close the Plains hospital, a valuable chance to ease 
the bed shortage in this province will in fact be lost, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Minister of Health and the Premier have repeatedly tried to 
assure people that there’ll be the same number of beds in 
Regina after the Plains closes. Well even if this is true, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this would do nothing to ease what is currently 
the shameful number of people having to be on waiting-lists 
due to bed shortages as they exist right now, and thanks to no 
one else but this NDP government. 
 
If the hospital closes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and is converted to a 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) campus it’ll not be available for use for a hospital 
again. 
 
And I recall a question that came from the floor at a meeting we 
conducted in the city of Moose Jaw — not a question I suppose, 
more properly referred to as a comment — where it was said, 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that converting the Plains hospital to a 
hospital won’t save any . . . or converting it to a SIAST campus 
won’t save any lives, but keeping it as the Plains hospital will. 
And I think that pretty much sums it up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well I know the members opposite are again talking about 
Darlene Sterling, and they do like to attack Darlene Sterling’s 
character because basically they can’t undermine what she’s 
saying. I’d like to raise a point that she repeatedly made at Save 
the Plains meetings. Darlene stated that we needed a renovated 
General and renovated Pasqua Hospital. That being the case, 
she made the point that we also need the Plains hospital too. 
With bed shortages and waiting-lists we risk facing much 
greater costs if we close that hospital. 
 
When this government comes to its senses, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and realizes that there are too few beds available in the 
province already, let’s hope it’s before the Plains hospital closes 
and not after. If it’s after the government realizes that it needs 
more beds, then what will they do at that point in time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They’ll have to either simply let everyone 
suffer or it will have to start constructing more buildings at a 
much higher cost. 
 
Now that’s exactly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, exactly what Mike 
Harris and his Ontario Tories are finding themselves having to 
do now. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s somewhat ironic — well quite ironic 
I’d say — that a government which so frequently likes to appeal 
to its glorious past on medicare is more or less following a 
Tory, right-wing, pro-big-business approach to health care. It’s 
a shameful legacy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not one I think that 
the members opposite would like to bequeath to their 
successors. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, waiting-lists are a major concern in the 
province. Not only will closing the Plains not help that, but 
neither will some of the other closures that we’re now facing in 
Saskatchewan. In my own riding the threat still exists that 10 
long-term beds could be cut. We have too many people on 
waiting-lists for these beds already. But yet the government is 
not providing enough funding to keep all 49 open. 
 
In Swift Current and Carrot River, Living Sky District, we also 
see problems there. Now my constituents . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s the problem? 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the member 
from Swift Current would give me an opportunity, I’ll tell him 
exactly what the problems are. And I know he seems quite 
sensitive about what’s going on and what’s the problem in the 
constituency of Swift Current. So for his benefit, if he’ll just 
stay calm for a moment, I’ll tell him. 
 
Some of my constituents, over what is going on in his 
constituency of Swift Current, are already . . . they’re enduring 
doctor shortages and they’re concerned that 54 beds will be 
closed in what is their regional hospital in Swift Current, 
downgrading that particular facility, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so 
it’ll no longer be a regional hospital. 
 

And those are people from my riding . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
member from Swift Current does seem to have quite a passion 
for this particular debate. So maybe what I’ll do is I’ll just take 
this opportunity to read a letter that was wrote to the Premier 
but might as well be written to the member from Swift Current. 
Perhaps he can knock on this door in fact: 
 

Mr. Premier: Please keep the Plains. It’s an easy, quick 
access for ambulances, saving precious minutes. We 
cannot lose any more hospital beds. We should not have to 
recoup from surgery in a hotel when hospital care is 
needed (Mr. Deputy Speaker). 

 
An Hon. Member: — Relevance. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — And that was quote . . . And the relevancy 
here is there are problems in the constituency of Swift Current. 
 
This comes from some constituents in Swift Current. I’ll send 
this across to the member from Swift Current; I hope you’ll 
kindly address these problems. It comes from Nick and Mary 
Wall of the city of Swift Current. From Nick and Mary Wall of 
the city of Swift Current. And we’ll let the member from Swift 
Current deal with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Instead of acknowledging the problem, the government’s only 
willing to cave in if placed under tremendous public pressure. 
Then they rehire some of the 500 or more nurses that they’ve 
laid off since health reform. Instead of swallowing their pride, 
the government is telling everyone that even more beds could 
be closed and more people could be placed on home care. While 
home care is valuable and it’s needed, it isn’t any magic pill, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the woes of our health system. 
 
The very fact that they make such a suggestion is an indication 
that they have their priorities in the wrong place. It’s time this 
government put human need ahead of financial statements. It’s 
time this government got its priorities straight and placed our 
health system and the problem of waiting-lists ahead of 
severance packages for political friends and expensive foreign 
gambles. It’s time for this government to get back to what it 
really should be doing, and that’s caring. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move, seconded by 
the member from Melville: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the government to take 
urgently needed measures to reduce the length of 
waiting-lists for surgeries and other hospital treatments 
from the present outrageous level of 6,600 patients down to 
a level in keeping with the fundamental principles of 
medicare. 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into this debate, particularly to follow my 
friend and colleague from Thunder Creek. 
 
I want to start by reading to him something which was in the 
paper yesterday. It’s a letter from a Dr. Bartlett. In it, and I’m 
quoting at this point, he says: 
 

Quite simply, it is unconscionable to manipulate people 



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

into believing something that is untrue. 
 
Unconscionable to manipulate people into believing something 
that’s untrue. Well who do you think he’s talking about, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Who do you think that this is directed at? It’s 
directed at the people that are spreading misinformation and 
fear around this province about our medicare system. It is 
directed at the Liberals in this particular case. Make absolutely 
no doubt about it. 
 
We see that in their motion today. We see a lack of 
understanding of what exactly is happening. We see them move 
away and abdicate their responsibility as Liberals — as 
Liberals. That member for Thunder Creek has stood up in this 
House time and again and professed that he supports the 
Canada Health Act — absolutely supports the Canada Health 
Act. 
 
Well what do we know about their support for the Canada 
Health Act? It’s a support that is as deep as a page of paper that 
it’s written on because there’s no money behind it to back it up. 
Where exactly is the money, I say to the member for Thunder 
Creek. Where is the federal government’s support for the 
Canada Health Act that these Liberals supposedly believe in? 
It’s not there. 
 
Seven billion dollars the federal Liberals take out of medicare 
— seven billion! That’s what they suck out of medicare and 
they believe, oh it’s not going to cause any problems. The 
federal Liberals say, well it’s not going to cause any problems 
at all. 
 
Well for the first little while now this merry band of 
malcontents across the way stand up and say, oh no, no, no, this 
isn’t us. That’s the federal party; that’s not us. That’s not the 
provincial Liberals. And yet when a by-election comes along, 
who do they call in? The very man that cuts the money — Paul 
Martin. They call him in to support their leader, Dr. Melenchuk. 
 
And what does Dr. Melenchuk say? Well in essence he says, a 
Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal. What do we know that that 
means? It means cuts, cuts, cuts to medicare. It has meant that 
since the ’60s; it means it today; it’ll mean it tomorrow. 
 
And the members know that. That’s why this is such a 
shameful, shameful attempt on their part to cause fear. And I 
have to say I agree with Dr. Bartlett that it is quite simply 
unconscionable to manipulate people into believing something 
that’s untrue — because that’s what they’re trying to do. 
 
Why? Because they plan on saving medicare? No. Is it because 
they think that there is a real problem in the system? No. It’s 
because they have a political agenda. At least they should admit 
to that. That’s all this is, is more cheap Liberal politics. 
 
We go from them seeing throughout this entire debate — from 
this entire debate . . . First it’s the Save the Plains committee is 
out there as a citizens’ group. Now all of a sudden, yesterday, 
the member stands up in this House and says, our Liberal rallies 
— our Liberal rallies. 
 
Well let’s just be honest about it. This is Liberal politics. 
There’s not a crisis in health care today. There isn’t. There isn’t. 

The member from Melville yells from his seat and says, tell that 
to the people from rural Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, it’s interesting . . . and I didn’t go to Yorkton last 
night, where there was supposedly a rally. But I understand the 
member for Melville was there. And what we have seen at these 
Save the Plains rallies that they’re attempting to convert into 
health care rallies, you know, a.k.a. the KOD (Keep Our 
Doctors committee), it’s a Save the Liberals campaign. 
 
(1615) 
 
But what we see happening here is we see it dropping off. 
Why? Why? Because people recognize the fact that the Liberals 
are not the friends of medicare. They have never been the 
friends of medicare here in Regina. They are certainly not the 
friends of medicare in Ottawa where they slash $7 billion, and 
not a word. Not a word. 
 
Not one of those members over there has ever stood up and 
said, Mr. Speaker, I have written a letter to complain to the 
Minister of Health federally, or the Minister of Finance 
federally. Not one of them. Not one of them has ever said that 
they oppose that $7 billion cut. All they say is that’s not us; 
that’s the federal Liberals. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re on to them. Not just the members on 
this side are on to them. The public is on to them. Listen to 
them. Listen to them. Here they are and all they’re interested in 
doing is stirring the pot — causing fear, misrepresenting things, 
spreading misinformation. It is absolutely, in the words of Dr. 
Bartlett, unconscionable. And I think he knows that. I think he 
knows that. 
 
I want to take a look at what they’re saying elsewhere. What are 
other people saying about this? I’m looking today at a copy of 
the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, not that I regularly read Conrad 
Black’s papers. But this one was put in my hand and it seems to 
have an interesting comment in it. 
 
David Smith, who as we all know is not a particular fan of this 
government, but a political scientist at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), he goes on to say: 
 

There’s concern about health care and not just in 
Saskatchewan. In fact it arises as an issue more frequently 
outside of Saskatchewan. We read about what’s happening 
in Ontario, which is Tory; Nova Scotia, which is Liberal; 
even B.C. (British Columbia), which is NDP. You might 
say it’s terrible here, but it’s worse elsewhere. You might 
say that on balance this government has done a better job 
than most have. 

 
On balance this government has done a better job than most 
have. A better job of what, Mr. Speaker? A better job of dealing 
with the $7 billion that that federal Liberal Party, supported by 
the provincial Liberal Party, yanked out of health care. That’s 
what we have done a better job of here in Saskatchewan. And I 
think it’s time that those members opposite stop playing 
politics, stop playing with fear, and admit it. 
 
On the weekend I was watching the parliamentary access 
channel. It wasn’t a very exciting thing to do but it happened to 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

have a question period on from Manitoba. And the Leader of 
the Opposition, New Democrat Gary Doer, was standing up and 
asking the Tory government what were they going to do about 
waiting-lists. 
 
Do you want to know what their waiting-lists were that they 
were arguing about? Do you want to know what the waiting-list 
was they were arguing about? They were arguing about a 
waiting-list of 8,000 people for the MRI (magnetic resonance 
imaging). They were talking about a waiting list of 4,500 to get 
a CAT (computerized axial tomography) scan. That’s in 
Manitoba, a province of exactly the same size as Saskatchewan 
— 8,000 for the MRI, 4,500 for a CT scan. 
 
And what do these guys across the way have to say? It’s terrible 
that there’s a total waiting-list of 6,000 people. In Manitoba we 
have double that number waiting for MRIs and CT scans. 
That’s what we’ve got. This is the kind of fear, this is the kind 
of misinformation, these are the kind of pieces of information 
that they put out that are simply not true. 
 
Now they say, the member for Thunder Creek stands up and he 
says, you know, all you guys do is stand up and talk about the 
good old days. You talk about how Tommy Douglas set up this 
system. You stand up and you talk about how Orville Hjertaas 
was one of only two doctors in this province to keep his 
practice open and to treat people. 
 
I want to tell you that that’s right, we do. Why? Because 
Tommy Douglas and Dr. Orville Hjertaas were CCFers 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and New Democrats. 
They’re the people that set up medicare. They’re the forefathers 
of this party and they spent every day of their lives fighting 
with Liberals — Liberals who meant to tear down the system, 
to kick in the side of medicare like they wanted to kick in the 
doors of the legislature. That’s what we were dealing with. 
 
Well let me tell you I don’t need to simply talk about what we 
used to do. I can tell you that today in NDP Saskatchewan, 
today there are 10,000 more surgeries occurring than there were 
when we took office — 10,000. Do we hear a word about that? 
No, not a word. Are they out there saying it’s interesting that 
despite the fact we have one of the smallest numbers of folks to 
do hip and knee replacements, we do the highest number in 
Canada. Did they say that? Oh I guess it’s the second highest. 
No they don’t. Not a word. 
 
They talk about the fact that even the good old right-wing 
Fraser Institute — and we know what friends of this 
government they are — the right-wing Fraser Institute says that 
Saskatchewan has the shortest waiting-lists in Canada for heart 
and brain surgery. Then why don’t they talk about that? 
 
You know why? Because, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t suit their 
political agenda. Their political agenda is very simple. Their 
political agenda is simply to destabilize medicare. It’s to cause 
fear. It is to allow people to start to think that system’s not 
going to be there to protect them, and as such they should start 
looking for other vehicles, be it private insurance, be it 
employer insurance, be it user-pay. 
 
That’s what those folks believe in. That’s what they want to 
cause fear in. Then they say the demands are so high, there’s 

going to be such a huge demand because of the ageing 
population, what they want to do is they want to put out the 
seed there that people, younger folks, they’re going to be 
paying the tax bill in the future and won’t be able to afford it. 
 
That’s the kind of fear they want. And why do they want it? 
Because they want to destroy universal, single-payer system of 
medicare. It’s a shameful old Liberal trick. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to go on for too much longer tonight 
because I think we’ve made the point. But let me just tell you 
that we’ve seen this before. And I think it is absolutely 
shameful that the Liberals, when they want to campaign, 
because they think the federal Liberals have something of 
advantage, they campaign with the federal Liberals, with Paul 
Martin, with the man that yanked $7 billion out of health care 
— larger than any other cut. 
 
Do you know they took more . . . the federal government took 
more money out of health care and education than they took out 
of absolutely any other sector. What was our response? We 
could have passed it along. We could have passed along the 
cuts. Do you know what? We didn’t. We didn’t because we 
believe in medicare. We believe in it, not because we founded 
it; we believe in it because it is exactly what makes us a good 
place to live. It is what allows us to share our resources. It is 
what allows us to trade and to share among generations, 
because we know that people deserve health care. 
 
We believe that. And we don’t think it’s linked to the ability to 
pay. So it’s interesting. It’s interesting. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Get rid of the waiting-lists. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — The member says, get rid of the 
waiting-lists. We will never get rid of the waiting-lists. At what 
level of funding does he want us to move to? We’ve seen this 
go on and on and on. 
 
And I could go and quote their leader, Dr. Melenchuk, who’s 
campaigning today in a by-election I assume in Saskatoon who 
says, we’re going to shorten the waiting-lists. We’re going to 
put more money into medicare, we’re going to slash taxes. You 
know, he’s going to do everything — absolutely everything. 
And you know what he’s going to do actually? Nothing. 
Because that’s all the Liberals have ever done — nothing. The 
Liberals do not support medicare and I think that people out 
there know it. 
 
Are things perfect? No. We recognize that. But we’re listening; 
we hear what people are saying. That’s why I’m very pleased to 
see Judy Junor having announced her candidacy and I’m very 
pleased to read her comments in the newspaper saying that she 
wants to be a part of the team that can make health reform right. 
 
Is she running for the Liberals? No. Is she running for the 
Tories? Well no. She’s running for us. She’s running for us 
because she believes in health care reform. She’s running for us 
because she knows this is the party, these are the people, that 
really believe in medicare. Not in a medicare of old, but a 
medicare of today. A medicare that’s affordable, a medicare 
that has services, a medicare that works. 
 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this debate on health care will go on in the 
public for some time. And we will be out there making sure 
people know exactly where the Liberal Party stands. And we’ll 
be making sure they know exactly where we stand. Because 
there is a huge distance between the two. 
 
I am very, very strong in my belief that we should defeat this 
motion today outright and be done with it. Because it is simply, 
simply a Liberal ploy to further spread or further, as Dr. Bartlett 
says, manipulate people into believing something that is untrue. 
It’s unconscionable and untrue. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll be opposing the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just, in 
deference to the naïvety from the member from Regina South, I 
would just want to make some very clear statements at the 
outset. And please allow me to read the motion once again to 
this House and to the people of this province: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the government to take 
urgently needed measures to reduce the length of 
waiting-lists for surgery and other hospital treatments from 
the present outrageous levels of 6,600 patients down to a 
level in keeping with the fundamental principles of 
medicare. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, he’s voting against something that people 
are very upset and concerned about. I don’t know what happens 
in his constituency but I have people coming to me and are 
hurting and are in pain, are being treated with codeine and 
Demerol to subside their pain until they can get into a hospital 
for much needed surgery. 
 
How can you possibly vote against trying to alleviate those kind 
of problems for people that are suffering in this province? How 
can you do that, member from Regina South? But it’s obvious 
you really don’t care, because at the outset before your 
campaign, before you got elected, you campaigned to keep the 
Plains . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. Now I’m 
sure that the hon. member from Melville has heard the line 
before that all statements must be addressed through the Chair 
and not directly across the Assembly at another member. So I 
would ask him to direct his comments through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. I apologize for that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I will address it through you and to the people of 
this province and to the rest of the members of this Assembly, 
the fact that the member from Regina South, who campaigned 
and who we have been told . . . and everybody in this province 
knows and we continue to be reminded, that the decision to 
close the Plains hospital was made in 1993 or 1994, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So guess what? The member from Regina South, with his arm 
around the Premier in his campaign, in his brochure, “I will 
fight to save the Plains hospital.” All right? That was his 
campaign, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Now all of a sudden he says, hey I’m all for closing it. I 
wouldn’t support cutting down waiting-lists for people that are 
suffering, waiting for surgery and treatment in hospital. That’s 
shameful. That’s shameful. I would not have believed that it 
would come to this. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to quote. The members opposite 
are great for quoting; let me just quote. And I’m going to quote 
a couple of things here from a letter by . . . this one from Mr. 
Lewis Draper. Yes, I know you don’t like hearing from Mr. 
Lewis Draper, a former member of your caucus, and this was on 
April 9, 1998, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Dear Sir: What I hate about the provincial budget is the 
hypocrisy of blaming the federal Liberal government for 
all the things that are unpalatable, like the health care cuts. 
The provincial government cannot blame the federal 
Liberal government for health care cuts. The provincial 
government announced the closure of 52 small rural 
hospitals to save money, calling them inefficient, well over 
a year before the federal election. If the provincial 
government saved money this way, can they fault the 
federal government for claiming their share? 

 
They’re so quick to forget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s shameful. 
 
I want to quote something else. I guess being new to the 
Assembly here it never ceases to amaze me how things turn 
around and how people change their whatever — their thoughts 
and their views. 
 
(1630) 
 
And I’d like to quote . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if the member from Regina South, who is so serious 
about opposing cutting down waiting-lists for surgeries for 
people that are suffering . . . I’d be happy to allow him the 
opportunity to stand up again and repeat that to the people of 
this province. 
 
In 1991, April 22, in this House, our Premier, who also was into 
a debate about issues of health care said, and I quote, in his 
comments in a statement that he was making: 
 

And finally what about the health care system. Much can 
be said about this and much will be in the days ahead as I 
bring my remarks to a close. 

 
A health care system that we see today where doctors and 
nurses and other care-givers are worried about intolerable 
working conditions and difficulties of stress which 
manifest themselves today with the nurses coming to this 
Legislative Building to protest what’s happening. 

 
Boy I’ll tell you, think about that picture — has anything 
changed? 
 

What in the world’s gone wrong with medicare and health 
care — 197 beds, 197 people; 113 beds in Saskatoon, 
about 200 in Moose Jaw, Yorkton, and Regina I think in 
round terms, closed down. What in the world has gone 
wrong. 

 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

This is the Premier of the day making a statement in this House 
about the devastating effects that the government of the day’s 
policy was having on . . . what’s changed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We’re back to . . . nothing’s changed, nothing’s fixed. So what 
promises were made in 1991 about fixing all this. Lots of 
complaints, lots of criticisms, but I don’t see anything different; 
it’s gotten worse, it’s gotten worse. 
 
I just want to carry on here. It says: 
 

They say that the costs are getting out of control. That’s 
not true. The costs are within the projected costs of 
Emmett Hall’s survey back in 1968 essentially. But they 
propagate this myth that the costs are way out of control 
and so the constituency people are saying you got to put 
deterrent fees on. Oh well, the premium won’t hurt 
anybody, they say. Well we’ll cut back on the prescription 
drug plan. 
 

And it goes on: 
 

I mean, but what in the world has caused all this bed 
closures and professionals leaving and communities on the 
edge? I'll tell you what’s caused it. What’s caused it is a 
government that has more interest in the well-being of 
Cargill than in the well-being of Royal University Hospital 
in Saskatoon or City Hospital in Saskatoon. 
 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now this government, what are they 
more concerned about? Guyana, Chile, all their offshore 
investments where they lose, lose, lose taxpayers’ dollars that 
could go to sustaining our much needed surgical, hospital, or 
acute care beds. 
 
And the member from Regina South has the audacity to stand 
up in this House and say he would vote against alleviating the 
suffering of the people of this province. That’s shameful. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I just want one other thing that I would like to 
clarify that the member from Regina South has been accusing 
members on this side of the House, that we did not support 
medicare. 
 
Let me just refer to the Leader-Post, Regina, Monday, 
November 24, referring to the policies adopted at the Liberal 
convention, to reaffirm where the Liberals have always stood, 
and that is to uphold the principles of the Canada Health Act to 
ensure publicly funded, publicly administered, universal 
medicare, and to allow all health board members to be 
democratically elected. 
 
Now what’s further from the truth, and I believe the member 
from Regina South is not prepared to change his mind on his 
observations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, much has been said in recent times about 
the efforts of citizens of this province to talk to the people. As a 
matter of fact at one of the meetings there was a gentlemen that 
happened to get up and ask the question, whatever happened for 
government by the people and for the people? This government 
has refused to listen. 
 
A constant barrage of allegations and accusations that we on 
this side are fearmongering, that we are going out and 

organizing rallies and making up stories. And the member from 
Swift Current hollers yes, that’s true. Well I guess he doesn’t 
believe the people from rural Saskatchewan either who return 
letters to us with respect to the health care situation in this 
province — thousands of these letters, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’ve had lots of people that have showed up at the rallies that 
get up to speak. And we don’t make up those stories. Those 
people come and tell their own, their own pathetic experiences 
with the pathetic health care system that we have today. 
 
This one’s long waits for anything serious, shortage of beds, but 
to close the Plains is the worst decision ever made — it’s 
modern, accessible. Millions of billions spent on other two 
hospitals is ridiculous. Do we indeed have a health system? 
Where is Tommy Douglas when we need him? Please start 
listening to the people who have put you where you are. I have 
voted NDP in the past, however due to the arrogance shown by 
your party I will not vote NDP and I’m actively telling people 
to not vote for your party. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re here — we have lots of these. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the closure of a facility like the 
Plains, it will not help to reduce the waiting-lists of people that 
are subjected — subjected to taking drugs like codeine and 
Demerol to ease the pain, to cease the pain until they’re able to 
get to professional services in any hospital. That’s terrible. 
That’s appalling. 
 
The Plains hospital, just as a matter of some interest, is the 
home of world famous anesthetist Dr. Joy Dobson. Dr. Joy 
Dobson, the gold medal winner at the University of 
Saskatchewan’s College of Medicine. Dr. Dobson, one of the 
finest anesthetists in Canada. 
 
She helped in the treatment and management and resuscitation 
of Karlee Kosolofski, the little girl who almost froze to death 
outside her home near Rouleau. There are miracles that are 
performed at that hospital. That hospital is much needed in 
order that we can reduce the waiting-lists for surgery, for people 
to have much needed attention. 
 
This same lady, this same great lady helped in the treatment, 
management, and resuscitation of Kenji Chan, the exchange 
student who was trapped beneath the semi-tractor-trailor west 
of Regina last year and who almost froze to death. 
 
This hospital, besides being much needed for the beds, for the 
expertise, for the ability and the opportunity to attract some 
highly specialized individuals to this centre of excellence from 
which it was built, a centre of excellence in the field of 
cardiovascular care, cardiology, internal medicine, neurology, 
anesthesiology, trauma care, and urology. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are obviously not words that I use 
daily, not being associated with the medical profession. But 
these are people that are experts in their individual fields that 
are desperately needed, that people our citizens rely on and 
need to get to but can’t because of the lengthy waiting-lists for 
hospital care, for medical care in this province. 
 
And that’s sad, it’s really sad. It’s even sadder when the 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

government of the day who’s in charge, the government of the 
day that’s responsible for its citizens, for the citizens that had 
put their confidence and their trust in them to care for them, has 
turned their backs and virtually says who cares, like the member 
from Regina South who says I will vote against a Bill or a 
motion rather that calls for reducing waiting-lists. That doesn’t 
make any sense to me — totally without any compassion or 
feelings. 
 
The same member who campaigned to keep a hospital open 
because it was desperately needed and now suddenly says no 
way, changed my mind. Perhaps like one of his colleagues, had 
an opinion but was brainwashed out of it. That’s a sad state of 
affairs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s certainly not something 
that the people of this province deserve. 
 
I just want to quote one more time from Hansard, April 22, 
1991 when the Premier is speaking, and I quote: 
 

I do not understand how this can happen except for a 
government that either doesn’t care much about the 
sanctity of the health care system or a government which 
doesn’t understand the importance of health care and the 
tradition of this province. 

 
There’s something wrong with this picture. This was said way 
back then; it’s being said again. I mean what’s changed? And 
why hasn’t it changed? If it was going to be changed for the 
better in 1991, then why are we in this debate about the 
disastrous situation our health care system is in this great 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Continue to quote: 
 

Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe the people of 
this province have ever, ever trusted Conservatives. I won’t 
say all Conservatives; they will never trust this government 
with health care. 
 

And again it’s funny. I’ve heard this said in the House before so 
I’m not the first person that’s read it I guess, but it also goes on 
to say: 
 

Putting this government in charge of the health care system 
in Saskatchewan is a bit like putting Colonel Sanders in 
charge of the chicken coop. It’s downright dangerous to the 
health of medicare, Mr. Speaker — downright dangerous. 
 

Well I ask, I guess, what’s changed? I don’t understand where 
they’re . . . I don’t see any improvements from 1991 to this day. 
After 1991, a whole bunch of hospitals closed down, a lot of 
nurses lose their jobs, a lot of doctors leave this province. I 
know my personal physician could hardly wait to get out of this 
province to go across the line, and a lot of his colleagues. 
 
And that’s the sad . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, he’s not. 
He’s not coming back. The member from Carrot River Valley 
whose hospital is being closed down to again extend the 
waiting-list, Mr. Deputy Speaker, says is he coming back? No, I 
don’t think so. 
 
There are more . . . (inaudible) . . . As a matter of fact the much 
needed health care in Carrot River Valley will no longer be 

there. And that will again, that will again contribute to 
waiting-lists some place else, Mr. Deputy Speaker. How can 
you continue to shut down hospitals and hospital beds and talk 
about having regional facilities when in fact you start shutting 
down more beds? 
 
Where are people going to go? Why would doctors want to 
come to communities, to small communities, where there is no 
hospital or no facilities for them to operate. It just doesn’t make 
sense. This continues to be a revenge on rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. It started in 1991 and it continues. 
 
We were promised no more hospital closures by the previous 
Health minister and by the current Health minister; and we 
continue to see hospital beds and hospitals closed in rural 
Saskatchewan. That’s shameful. There are commitments being 
made by this government they’re not living up to. They’ve 
broken promises before; they don’t live up to their 
commitments. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can’t believe that 
they can continue to sit there and believe that the people that 
they represent are supportive of their actions as far as the 
devastation of our health care in this great province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I strongly support this motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I urge 
all members to support this motion to reduce the waiting-lists 
and the costs on the health, the pain and suffering of the people 
of this province that need serious attention. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
One of the great joys of being an elected member in this 
province, and in all provinces in Canada, is that we have the 
opportunity here to speak on behalf of our constituents and to 
speak strongly for what we believe in. 
 
Now it’s been very interesting listening to my friend, the 
member from Melville, talk about his views on health care. And 
I also want to say I was most impressed by the remarks made by 
my colleague, the member from Regina South on health care 
and waiting-lists in this province. 
 
(1645) 
 
I just would like to make a few remarks specifically on 
waiting-lists. But before I do that I want to preface my remarks 
just by reminding everyone again about the commitment that 
this government made in this budget to health care. 
 
The financial commitment was such, $1.7 billion — $1.7 
billion. That’s a huge amount of money, Mr. Speaker, the most 
money that’s ever been spent on health care in this province. 
And it represents $88 million more than we spent last year. That 
represents $1,700 for every man, woman, and child in this 
province. 
 
Now that’s more money than Alberta spends on health care. 
Alberta, which is supposedly the wealthy province, but Alberta 
which also has health care premiums; $1,700 for every man, 
woman, and child. Now to me that represents a serious 
commitment to the health and welfare of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

Health spending has grown since 1991-92, and community and 
home-based services are receiving a bigger share of the budget. 
 
Now some of the services that are provided to the people of 
Saskatchewan for this money, some of the statistics are very 
interesting and I just want to share some of them with you. 
 
Based on the information we have from previous years we 
know, for instance, that there are 4.66 million visits to family 
physicians every year. There are 925,000 visits to specialists. 
There are 1.773 million hours of home care services; 857,500 
days of in-patient hospital care; and 650,000 emergency room 
or clinic visits. That’s a lot of health services to provide to the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to now just give some background information on 
waiting time for elective surgery. When booking a patient for 
surgery, specialists classify cases into one of three groups, and 
in all cases, it’s the specialists that determine whether a case is 
an emergency, urgent, or whether it’s elective. 
 
An emergency surgical procedure means it’s a life-saving 
measure and is always done as soon as possible. Urgent 
procedures are performed in a few days or weeks depending on 
the patient’s condition, and elective procedures are those where 
the physician believes there is a low risk and patients are able to 
wait for their surgery. 
 
Waiting times for procedures are almost exclusively for elective 
cases. The Saskatoon and Regina medical staffs have each 
developed and approved guidelines for physicians to use in 
classifying procedures as emergency, urgent, or elective. The 
medical staffs have also defined reasonable waits for emergency 
and urgent surgeries. There are however no agreed upon criteria 
defining reasonable waits for elective surgery — not in 
Saskatchewan nor anywhere else in Canada. 
 
Waits for surgery vary by specialty. And as my friend the 
member from Regina South said when he quoted the Fraser 
Institute, the Fraser Institute survey says Saskatchewan has 
comparatively short waits for heart surgery and brain surgery. 
 
Waiting times are a result of many factors including the 
availability of specialists. Average waiting times are sometimes 
influenced by specific physicians whose waiting-lists are far 
longer than others in the same field. Patients can choose 
specialists with shorter waiting times. 
 
I’d like to say a few words about the number of surgeries. The 
total number of surgeries performed in Saskatchewan has 
remained relatively stable throughout the ’90s with considerable 
variation in the types of procedures done. During this time there 
has been a shift to performing more procedures on a day 
surgery basis. Day surgery involves less invasive techniques, is 
less costly, and results in faster recovery for patients. 
 
For instance in 1987-88 there were a total of 77,235 surgeries 
performed in Saskatchewan — 29 per cent of those were day 
surgeries. In ’96-97, 87,378 surgeries were performed — 52 per 
cent were day surgeries. The number of procedures performed 
in some specialties, notably ophthalmology and cardiovascular 
surgery, has increased while other surgeries, for example 
tonsillectomies and caesarean sections, have decreased. 

Demand for some procedures including cataract surgery and 
replacement of hips and knees has grown substantially in recent 
years. The Health Services Utilization and Research 
Commission found that this province has the second highest 
rate of cataract surgery and among the highest rates of total 
joint replacement in Canada. In 1983, Mr. Speaker, there were 
1,500 cataract surgeries. In ’96-97 there were 10,484. In 1983 
there were 820 total knee and total hip replacements, and in 
’96-97 there were 1,850. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health districts are working on initiatives to 
improve scheduling services. Work is currently underway with 
the Saskatoon and Regina health districts to improve 
priorization by reaching agreement on how patients are 
classified to ensure that patients don’t wait longer than their 
condition suggests — by establishing committees of district 
staff that monitor the use of their operating rooms with the goal 
of improving efficiency, balancing surgical workload across 
facilities to reduce waiting times, and allocating resources such 
as prosthetics more equitably, and streamlining the surgical 
booking process and consequently the quality of information on 
waiting times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, waiting times for surgical procedures are not the 
best measure of health care performance. If you want to 
determine how well a health care system is performing, it’s the 
rates of surgeries performed in comparison to the population, 
and Saskatchewan has quite a high rate of surgeries performed 
compared to other places. Waiting times can easily be 
manipulated to suit political purposes, Mr. Speaker; and they do 
not reflect what is actually being done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I take my place, may I just reiterate what I 
think are the important points here. In all cases it is the 
specialists who determine whether a case is an emergency, 
urgent, or elective. Waiting times are comprised almost 
exclusively of people who are waiting for elective surgery, not 
those classified as emergency or urgent changes. Waiting times 
for elective surgery in Saskatchewan are very comparable with 
other provinces. 
 
Many people, Mr. Speaker, voluntarily choose to delay surgery 
while others will place their names on the waiting list while 
they are still making a final decision on whether or not they 
want the surgery. Hospitals and doctors are doing a good job of 
scheduling surgeries. Our government will continue to work 
with health boards to ensure waiting time for surgery is 
reasonable. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate this 
opportunity to say a few words with regards to the health 
system as we see it in this great province. 
 
The opposition has some criticism with regards to the funding 
of the health program within Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan’s 
last budget was $1.72 billion. The most that has ever been 
slated for health care in the history of this province. 
 
Contrast this with the federal cut of $7 billion from health care 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

across this nation of ours . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and by 
the Liberals. I’m just wondering if the Liberal members have 
even bothered to let their concerns be known to their federal 
cousins. 
 
What is so sad about this cut is that it will give premiers like 
Klein and Harris an opportunity to say, why bother following 
the national medicare system. We’ll go it on our own. And you 
know what they will do, they will go for two tiers. But then this 
is what our Liberals opposite are all in favour of. 
 
And in case they don’t believe this, quoting from the daily news 
of Canada, Wednesday, December 24: 
 

Tom Kent’s blistering critique of the Chrétien 
government’s betrayal of medicare has suddenly increased 
pressure on the Liberals to restore money to the health care 
system. Physicians and opposition critics welcomed 
yesterday a new report written by Kent. 
 

Now I wonder who this Kent is. I wonder if the Liberals 
opposite know who they are, who he is. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
Kent is long considered the Liberals godfather of social policy. 
 
And so here we have a serious thinking, highly respected, very 
senior policy guru who was there when medicare started. He’s 
got no vested interest and he’s saying the same thing that we 
are. I think it puts some balance back into the discussion. And 
so that’s what we want to talk about just a little bit with regards 
to the federal government and their cut back to the health 
system. 
 
With regards to the Swift Current Health District. The member 
from Thunder Creek gave us some information which was false 
and misleading. He stated that the Swift Current hospital would 
lose its regional status if it cut its beds and that it was going to 
cut the beds. He forgot to turn the paper. He got this 
information from the member from Wood River. That’s where 
he got the information from. 
 
What did the CEO (chief executive officer) of the Swift Current 
District Health Board say? He said that every bit of that 
information was false. And now he uses this in the House and 
tries to scare the people — scare the people, fearmongering at 
its worse. Shame on you people with regards to it. And that is 
what happened in Swift Current. So the next time, make sure of 
some of your facts. 
 
I’d like to take a look at the little town of Kyle which is just 
north of Swift Current about 52 miles. It’s a great little place 
out there. And when the town of Kyle lost its hospital in 1993, 
Lois Lowe says it was like a death in the family — terrible that 
this should happen to a town like Kyle. Guess what happened. 
She worked there for 30 years. Lowe fought the change tooth 
and nail, but has since changed her mind. 
 
People in Kyle and area are better off now. We’re offering a lot 
more services and helping a lot more people in the community 
then we ever did before. This health reform is working. It’s 
working for the betterment of the people — so that our health 
care system is envied throughout all of the world. And these 
people across attack it — attack it because they have politicized 
it. And there’s no reason for that. 

Talking a little bit with regards to these keep the Plains open 
rallies which have been going on for the last little while. It was 
interesting that I read five reasons why the Plains should be 
kept open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first one was a bed shortage exists. Well they 
even admit that there will be no beds cut when the Plains is 
closed. There are 675 beds in the system now, there will be 675 
beds then. Average daily use in Regina is approximately 608. 
Where is the bed shortage — new mathematics? We’re not sure. 
 
Secondly, the Plains is easily accessible. Of course the Plains is 
easily accessible. It took a long time for people to get used to 
going to the Plains. In fact the CEO of the Plains, when it was 
first gone into existence, had trouble convincing people that 
they should come and use it. The General can be found easily; 
the Pasqua can be found easily. There is no problem with that at 
all. 
 
Number three, they state that the Plains is a state-of-the-art 
building. It at one time was probably . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It now being at the hour of 
recess, the House stands recessed until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1375 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1375 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1375 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1375 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1375 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1375 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1375 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1375 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1375 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1376 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1376 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1376 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1376 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1376 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1376 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1376 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1376 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1377 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1377 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1377 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1377 
  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................1377 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................1396 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Passing of Dr. Hjertaas 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1377 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1378 
 Saskatchewan Leads Country in Youth Employment 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1378 
 Carrot River Hospital Closure 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1378 
 Aboriginal Employment Opportunities 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1378 
 Saskatoon Eastview Candidates 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1378 
 Ohio Residents Envy Canadian Health Care 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................1379 
 Saskatoon Eastview Candidates 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1379 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Tax Credits for Political Contributions 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1379 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1379 
 Sale of Crown Life to Canada Life 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1380 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1380 
 Free Vote on Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1380 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1381 
 Funding of Saskatchewan Party from Tory Funds 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1381 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1381 
 Funding of District Health Boards 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1382 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1382 
 Forest Fire Hazard in Northern Saskatchewan 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1383 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1383 



   

 Property Tax Reassessment on Farm Land 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1383 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1383 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Sale of Crown Life 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1384 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 215  The Saskatchewan Property Rights Act 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1386 
 Bill No. 751 — The Big Game Hunt Farming Regulation Ministerial Responsibility Act 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1386 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Community Development for Northern Saskatchewan 
  Belanger .........................................................................................................................................................................1386, 1393 
  Hillson ............................................................................................................................................................................1389, 1395 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1389 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1391 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1392 
 Recorded Division (Superseding Motion).................................................................................................................................1392 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1393 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1394 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 6 — Hospital Waiting-lists 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1395 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1397 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1400 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1402 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1403 
 
 


