





























































Hansard: April 20, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 661 
 April 20, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis which we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from the 
communities of Storthoaks and Gainsborough. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to 
present today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

And these petitions come from the Redvers and Storthoaks 
areas of the province. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, to present a petition as well to the 
Assembly, reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the Redvers area of 
the province of Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of Alida, 
Oxbow, Redvers, Wawota, and Carnduff. I so present. 

Mr. Heppner: — I too rise to present a petition. And I read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

And this is signed by the good people from Carnduff. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of people concerned about the imminent closure of the 
Plains Health Centre, asking to conduct a comprehensive 
review into the health crisis we’re currently experiencing. 
 
People on this signature are from the communities of Alida and 
Storthoaks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to read 
today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Everyone that has signed this petition is from Storthoaks. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition as well 
to present on behalf of Saskatchewan people, dealing with the 
issue of a moratorium on the closure of the Plains hospital. And 
I’m pleased to present on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. 
These folks are from the Carnduff, Storthoaks area of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed from the good folks 
in Lafleche, Assiniboia, and Glentworth. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise again 
today to present a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
primarily from Regina here, and I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of people who are concerned about the 
pending closure of the Plains hospital, and the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the community of Regina. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a petition 
on behalf of concerned citizens with respect to the closure of 
the Plains: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition are all from Yorkton, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in bringing forward a petition in regards to 
stopping the closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition appear to 
be all from the Regina-Dewdney area of the city, where that 
member is in serious difficulty. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 

following matters: the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; saving the Plains Health Centre; and calling an 
independent public inquiry into Channel Lake. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and to the rest of the Assembly, I would like to introduce a 
number of individuals. Seated on the floor is Daisy Anderson, 
and beside her, her son, Ron Anderson. 
 
And also with them — I would ask them to rise — in the 
Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Dennis White. If you could 
just rise, Dennis. And also seated beside Dennis is Mrs. 
Anderson’s daughters, June Tarr and Maxine Ponsford. 
 
We are pleased to have Mrs. Anderson and her family in the 
Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. It was 87 years ago that Daisy 
Anderson’s father, Arthur White, was part of the construction 
crew which built the dome of the Legislative Building. 
 
This is especially significant as today we enter the construction 
phase of the restoration project for the Legislative Building, the 
largest project done to this facility since construction was 
completed in 1912. 
 
People such as Arthur White helped build more than the 
building, Mr. Speaker; they helped build Saskatchewan. And I 
would ask all hon. members to join with me in welcoming Mrs. 
Anderson and her family to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and all members in the 
House, a number of guests that are seated in your gallery. I’d 
like to introduce, first of all, the newly elected Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Elwin Hermanson, and his wife Gail 
. . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Seated with Elwin, of course, is his wife Gail. 
Next to Gail is Dennis Raeburn, the president of the 
Saskatchewan Party, newly elected as well. And next to Dennis 
is one of the candidates, who has been introduced a number of 
times in the House, Mr. Yogi Huyghebaert, and his wife 
Phyllis. And also seated next to Phyllis is the spouse of the third 
candidate in the leadership race, Mrs. Carole Gantefoer. 
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would want to join with the Leader of the Official Opposition in 
congratulating Mr. Hermanson on his victory as Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party and his selection as the leader of the 
so-called Saskatchewan Party. It’s a Saskatchewan Party for 
today in any event. 
 
And I also want to congratulate the member from Melfort, and 
Mr. Huyghebaert, who contributed to the democratic process. 
Democracy, I think, demands as we know, people who are 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

highly interested and motivated in elevating the public life and 
the quality of life in the province of Saskatchewan and our great 
country. And Mr. Hermanson’s victory, I’m sure, will be a step 
in that direction, and the contribution of these two gentlemen 
has been also very important. 
 
So I look forward very much to the discussion of ideas and 
conflicting ideas which will take place in the weeks and months 
that ensue. 
 
I wish Mr. Hermanson luck, but obviously not too much luck. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to 
you to the members of the Assembly, I’d like to welcome all 
our guests here today. But one in particular and that’s the 
president of the new party, Mr. Dennis Raeburn. 
 
Mr. Raeburn is well-known for his long-time involvement with 
the federal Conservative Party, except for a brief stint that he 
spent working for me during the last election. So I’d like to 
welcome him in his new role today as the president of the party. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, also joining us in the gallery today are Shirley 
Hauta and Judy Jabusch, both citizens of Saskatoon. I just point 
out for the information of all of the members sitting here that 
Shirley was one of the people that co-managed our election . . . 
very successful election campaign in 1995 in the constituency 
of Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Shirley’s been involved in the party for a long, long time. She 
comes from long and historical CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) and NDP (New Democratic Party) 
roots. She has not gone from the Conservatives to the Liberals 
to the Reform to the Conservatives. She has stayed as a solid 
member of the CCF-NDP Party. 
 
So I’d welcome both of our guests to the legislature this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Volunteer Recognition Awards Banquet 
 

Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, last night the member from 
Redberry Lake and I were pleased to represent the Premier and 
the Minister of Municipal Government at the North Central 
Regional Recreation Association’s volunteer recognition 
awards banquet. 
 
Eight awards were given for volunteer work in recreation and in 
arts. Six are constituents of mine. The meal was good. MC 
(master of ceremonies) Pat Jones did an excellent job. And the 
recognition of these outstanding volunteers were very 
deserving. 
 
The awards went to Irene Diehl from Marcelin, Debbi 

Hydamacka from Meath Park, Blake and Stella Jones from 
Christopher Lake, Sylvia Jones from Shellbrook, Ron Lysyk 
from Meath Park, Daryl Rudichuk from Wakaw, and Phil 
Weimer from Blaine Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I only have time to mention their names. Their 
communities know and appreciate how valuable their work was. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Recognition 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well to 
make some comments about volunteers in Saskatchewan and 
recognizing the efforts of the south-east regional volunteer 
program as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was privileged to attend the volunteer 
recognition banquet in Whitewood yesterday. The program 
yesterday was hosted by the Moose Mountain, Pipe Si-Cana, 
and Wheatland Souris Regional Recreational Associations, 
Zone One Sports Council, with the cooperation from Municipal 
Government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you may be aware of the fact that 
governments have moved away from backing the regional 
awards banquets, but I would like to commend each one of the 
areas for the work they have done in keeping on and the 
recognition that they continue to give to voluntarism, to 
volunteers who have certainly contributed a major part to our 
communities. 
 
And a particular note yesterday of the number of awards that 
were presented in heritage from Whitewood posthumously to 
Harold Davis, a gentleman who has done very much in the area 
of preserving our heritage and working on the museum in that 
community. 
 
In the area of recreation, and I’m specifically addressing my 
constituency, Jean Morrow of Langbank for her work in sports 
and recreation, coaching ball teams, and being involved in so 
many areas. 
 
Coach of the year, Barb Swallow from Maryfield, who is also 
well-known for her expertise in curling; and administrator of 
the year, Tony Balogh from Kipling. And certainly there are 
many others that could be recognized. 
 
But I want to say thank you to the south-east regional sports 
association for all their work and efforts and commend them 
and wish them well in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Film Industry Expanding 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year our 
government introduced a 35 per cent tax credit to boost the 
Saskatchewan film industry and it’s working. As the direct 
result of the film industry tax credit, Cinepost of Saskatoon 
joined with a number of other media companies on April 14 to 
form a new company, publicly traded company, called 
Newhaven. 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

Newhaven will produce Now and Forever, a movie with a two 
and a half million dollar budget, in Saskatchewan. A $42 
million movie deal, The Englishman’s Boy, produced by Minds 
Eye Pictures of Regina has just been signed. Minds Eye also 
produced The Lost Daughter starring Richard Chamberlain, and 
is shooting a made-for-TV movie in Indian Head starring Harry 
Hamlin. 
 
Another Regina based company, Partners in Motion, has plans 
for several projects including Survivors, Beyond Medicine, Bird 
Man, and Northwest Assignment. Ron Goetz, manager of 
Partners in Motion, says the company has plans to expand its 
staff from 10 to 80 to handle the additional extra work the new 
projects will create. 
 
Both Ron Goetz of Partners in Motion and Kevin DeWalt of 
Minds Eye are optimistic that Saskatchewan’s $23 million film 
industry will expand to $100 million in the next two or three 
years. 
 
The 35 per cent tax credit, combined with the creativity of 
members of Saskatchewan’s film industry, is working towards 
further stimulating our economy by injecting new money and 
creating jobs. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Passing of Lawrence Yew 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
sadness that I rise today to speak on the passing of a great man. 
Mr. Lawrence Yew of Canoe Lake passed away this past 
Saturday in Edmonton, Alberta. I know that simple words 
cannot and will not convey the deep remorse and sadness of all 
northern and native people of Saskatchewan when the news of 
his passing reached home. 
 
Lawrence was known as a man that fought hard and long for 
northern people. Last week Lawrence travelled with me to 
Regina to discuss the Primrose Air Weapons Range issue with 
several government members. In spite of the incredible 
challenge to his health, Lawrence made one last journey to this 
Assembly to fight for a cause that he believed in. Mr. Speaker, 
whether Lawrence was serving as MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), whether he was serving as administrator 
in Pinehouse, or working with the fishermen’s cooperative in 
Canoe Lake, he always cared and helped people consistently. 
He was a very noble man. 
 
To his wife Vicky, his daughter Jolene, his family, and the 
community of Canoe Lake, I sincerely thank you for sharing 
Lawrence with us. 
 
I would like to assure his family that when all the accolades 
have faded, his plaques and achievements stored away, 
Lawrence’s memory will always be with us. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
May he rest in peace. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Restoration of Legislative Building 
 

Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you will 
be happy to know that the position you hold has a direct 
connection to our honoured guests that were introduced earlier 
by the minister of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation). A connection of some interest to you and your 
safety. 
 
Eighty-eight years ago, as the minister said, Mrs. Daisy 
Anderson’s father helped construct the legislative dome. Mr. 
Arthur White worked with Mr. Frank Chester and John 
McLeish, the two men who left the message in a bottle in the 
crawl space of the dome in 1910. 
 
Mrs. Anderson, a constituent of mine, and her family toured the 
building with the minister this morning, and as a 
commemoration of her association with this magnificent 
building that we are privileged to work in, she was presented 
with a framed photograph from 1911 of the construction 
workers building the dome. 
 
The connection to you, Mr. Speaker? Today restoration work 
begins on this building, the preparation of which led to the 
discovery of the bottle, which led to the finding of Mrs. 
Anderson. 
 
And what is the area first restored and redressed and 
re-strengthened and renewed? Mr. Speaker, it’s the dome which 
you and your officials line up to enter the Chamber each day . . . 
under which you enter the Chamber each day. 
 
As the engineer’s report says, the dome area is in danger of 
structural collapse without immediate repairs. So I’m glad that 
Mrs. Anderson and her son Ron, Maxine, June, and Dennis are 
here today to help launch the restoration of this priceless, 
historic building — and the preservation of the Speaker — as 
we know it. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Party Leaders Elected 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to congratulate two new, recently elected leaders. I would 
like to congratulate Mr. Hermanson, the new leader of the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party, and Nancy MacBeth, the 
new leader of the Alberta Liberal Party. 
 
And it’s funny how in this world of politics we have two former 
Conservatives, Jean Charest and Nancy MacBeth, now as 
leaders or soon-to-be leaders of a provincial Liberal Party. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a Reformer turned Tory, but my 
mother always warned me that there was no such thing as a 
reformed Tory. 
 
I express my regrets to Mr. Gantefoer in his valiant fight to 
make the leadership race interesting. The final question though 
is, Mr. Speaker, now with Mr. Hermanson as leader of the Tory 
Party, will he force all his MLAs to go to reform school? 
 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meadow Lake Tribal Council Victorious 
at Indian Winter Games 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you are no 
doubt aware, the Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games were held 
last week in Regina. Young athletes from across the province 
came to compete in the 18th year of the event. 
 
The athletes from the Meadow Lake Tribal Council combined 
for the best team performance of the games. The Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council team had 243 members pitted against over 2,000 
athletes from other tribal councils. They finished first over all, 
accumulating 301 points in hockey, broomball, badminton, 
volleyball, and basketball. 
 
MLTC’s youth and sports development coordinator, Yvonne 
Wolverine, was confident of the victory as MLTC teams have 
won the summer games for the past two years. Athletes from 
both sexes, ranging in age from 10 to 18 years, won medals in 
hockey, broomball, and volleyball among other events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 
congratulation both the organizers of the Saskatchewan Indian 
Winter Games for promoting healthy lifestyles among our 
aboriginal youth, and to the athletes of the Meadow Lake Tribal 
Council for their victory at the games. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

High School Drama Awards 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Swift Current is noted 
for its athletic teams, its great rodeo, its booming economy, its 
innovative people. But what is not as evident is its cultural 
contributions. 
 
The Swift Current Comprehensive High School’s production of 
Sticks and Stones won several awards at a recent drama festival 
in Rosetown. Among the awards the young actors and 
producers received were: best visual production, best technical 
production, and best overall production. Melissa Thinglestad 
was also honoured as runner-up for the best performance award 
in the seven-school, eight-play festival. 
 
The troupe from Swift Current Comprehensive High School 
now moves on to compete at the Saskatchewan Drama 
Association provincial drama festival in Regina at the end of 
April. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all involved and wish 
them the best of luck in Regina. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Regional Hospital Emergency Services 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Party has learned that there was 
no anesthetist on call on the weekend at North Battleford 
hospital. That’s because your government is refusing to 
compensate anesthetists for on-call services. That means no 
emergency services could be performed in North Battleford 
over the weekend and any emergency surgery cases had to be 
rushed to Saskatoon, an hour and a half away. Mr. Minister, that 
is unacceptable. 
 
First you close down 52 rural hospitals. Now you are cutting 
services in regional hospitals like North Battleford, Swift 
Current, and Yorkton. Mr. Speaker, the NDP health care system 
is breaking down at every level and it’s Saskatchewan people 
who will suffer. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you doing to deal with this problem and 
what are you doing to ensure that emergency surgery is 
available in regional hospitals like North Battleford? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, unlike almost every other 
provincial jurisdiction in Canada, this government has 
negotiated and signed a successful contract negotiation with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Under which, Mr. Speaker, 26 million 
new dollars is provided to the physicians of our province, in 
addition a $5 million addition to provide for emergency care. 
 
In respect to the situation in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to assure that member and all members that the Battleford 
district and the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association) I’m 
sure will come to an agreement in that circumstance. 
 
But before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, 
who’s of the Tory Party, may want to explain to this House 
what’s going on in Tory Alberta, oil-rich Tory Alberta, where 
headline after headline tell us: “Hospitals poised for strike; 
Alberta MDs threaten job action; Alberta doctors set up 
pressure.” That’s in the province, Mr. Speaker, where the 
residents are obliged to pay an $800 premium every year for 
their medical service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure 
the people of this province will be satisfied with that answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, staff at North Battleford hospital have told us this 
did cause a problem in at least one case. The North Battleford 
hospital was unable to treat one patient who had suffered a 
broken leg because there was no anesthetist this weekend. That 
patient had to be sent to Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re just lucky there weren’t more cases. This is 
a disaster waiting to happen. It's a direct result of your decision 
to have anesthetists out of the on-call services agreement. Mr. 
Minister, the only people who seem to have unlimited access to 
anesthetists are you and your NDP government. You all seem to 
be soundly sleeping through this health care crisis. 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what are you doing to ensure that 
anesthetist services are available on weekends in regional 
hospitals like North Battleford, Yorkton, and Swift Current, and 
what are you doing to deal with the crisis before us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat, this government 
has signed a negotiated contract with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, of which we are very proud. And I am confident 
that the North Battleford Health District, and the SMA on 
behalf of its anesthetists, will work out this current situation to 
provide services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis, whether standing or from 
their seats, these folks in the Tory Party are raising questions 
about health care; but what they do not do very often is suggest 
their solutions. Now I’m going to ask them today if they would 
define some of their solutions. Is their solution to do what the 
Alberta Tories do and put on every family in the province an 
$800 premium . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair is unable to be 
able to hear the minister provide his response and I’ll ask for 
the cooperation — order — I’ll ask for the cooperation of the 
House in providing the minister the opportunity to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, is the Tory solution to the 
problems they continually raise, is it to do the $800 premium 
per family that the Alberta Tories have done to the people of 
Alberta? Or is it as their new leader, Mr. Hermanson, suggests, 
that they would begin to de-insure services, Mr. Speaker — to 
begin to de-insure non-life-threatening procedures. I hope that 
the new leader of the Tory Party today will define for the 
people of Saskatchewan which procedures he intends to 
de-insure. Is it cataracts? Knee surgeries? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if the 
minister is really interested in hearing what our policy is, maybe 
he can consult with the Premier, call an election, and we’ll let 
him know what the policy is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, one of the problems with the NDP 
health system is that health districts’ hands are tied when it 
comes to spending their own money. You tell them the areas 
where their money is to be spent, and this often leaves them 
with very little choice as to where they spend their money. 
 
Mr. Minister, you like to make health care districts shoulder the 
blame for service cuts and bed closures, but they are left with 
no choice when your government refuses to let them spend their 
own money as they see fit. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have a piece of legislation on the Table that 
we will be introducing this afternoon regarding block funding. 
Mr. Minister, or the Acting Minister of Health, will you ask the 
Premier if you and your colleagues can support this block 
funding to allow health care districts to utilize the funds in the 
best means possible to address the concerns in their area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I was very, very pleased to 
have the member from Moosomin stand in the House this 
afternoon and say that he and his party are very anxious to get 
to an election, because there’s going to be a by-election, my 
friends, there’s going to be a by-election in Saskatoon pretty 
soon. And we’re of course assuming that your new leader will 
be running in that by-election. Now that will be the time for 
your new leader and your party to lay before the people of 
Saskatchewan just what it is you mean. 
 
Now I’m going to quote directly from the Leader-Post. It said 
in the Leader-Post, regarding the position of your new leader on 
health care: 
 

Hermanson says he wouldn’t impose health care premiums 
or user fees, (now that’s a step forward) but (and here’s the 
but you could drive a truck through) he would look at 
raising additional revenues in the health system by 
removing some procedures for non-life-threatening 
illnesses from the medical system. 
 

Now I recall during my time in Health that non-life-threatening 
procedures that he would like to de-insure could include — 
could include — cataract surgery, hip replacement, knee 
replacements. We’ll be very anxious to see what your position 
on these issues really is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Proposed Investment in Guyana 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskPower. Mr. 
Minister, when you turfed Jack Messer last month you said the 
two main reasons were Channel Lake and Guyana. Milt Fair 
said the same thing, Channel Lake and Guyana. 
 
It’s pretty clear what Jack did wrong in Channel Lake but it’s 
less clear what he did wrong in Guyana. According to all your 
public statements, SaskPower did all the proper due diligence 
on the Guyana deal. He only bailed out because of political 
instability. 
 
Mr. Minister, exactly what did Jack Messer do wrong that 
would cause you to cite Guyana as one of the reasons for his 
departure. Did he mislead the board? Did he act without proper 
authority? What did he do wrong to get fired for Guyana? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that I appreciate the opportunity to rise today. 
But first I want to, as the Premier did earlier, congratulate him 
on a very valiant effort, and I say that sincerely, that an 
excellent job in the democratic process was done. 
 
But I want to say to you, to the member for Melfort, as it would 
relate to Channel Lake and the position of the separation 
between Mr. Messer and the Power Corporation, as I said at the 
time that Mr. Messer left, that it was a combination of a number 
of issues. And when asked if Guyana was one of them, we said 
yes it was, that Channel Lake was one. But it was a number of 
different issues. 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

But I think what the public is more interested in is that member 
and the new leader of the Conservative Party’s interest in 
privatizing the Crowns. That’s what is a great issue when I’m 
holding public meetings around the province. They want to 
know whether you, sir, still have the opinion that the Crown 
corporations should be privatized. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 
just doesn’t make sense. If you did everything right in Guyana, 
then why did you fire Michael Hogan over Guyana. If you did 
everything right in Guyana, why did you fire Jack Messer over 
Guyana. Jack Messer’s causing a lot of political instability all 
right, but it isn’t in Guyana, it’s right here in Saskatchewan and 
you know that. 
 
You can’t duck from the Guyana deal because you were over 
there and you’re responsible for it. Will you own up to what 
went wrong in Guyana, Mr. Minister. Why did you fire Jack 
Messer and Michael Hogan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that as it relates to the research and due diligence done 
on Guyana, the documents have been tabled in the House. 
 
What happened here is we had a letter of intent signed between 
SaskPower Commercial and the Guyanese electrical company. 
The research was done, and at the end of the day it was decided, 
because the economics weren’t right, that the deal wouldn’t go 
forward. I don’t know what could be more clear to the member 
opposite. 
 
Is he saying that the deal with Guyana should have went ahead? 
I know he is opposed to the Crown corporations and wants them 
privatized. But today he’s confusing the issue by saying we 
should have completed the Guyanese deal. Which side are you 
on, and what do you want? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Possible Sale of Crown Life 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Minister, the Channel Lake fiasco has made it painfully 
clear that the NDP government has no idea what’s happening in 
our Crown corporations and other Crown-owned assets. So it 
may come as a surprise to him that the Government of 
Saskatchewan owns a controlling interest in Crown Life 
Insurance. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, since it is part of your portfolio, you should 
have noticed by now that Crown Life is on the take-over list by 
a number of larger life insurance companies in Canada and the 
United States. And many people in the business community are 
telling us that Crown Life is for sale by the owner — that means 
you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Will you confirm that the Government of Saskatchewan is 
actively investigating the potential of selling its interest in 

Crown Life Insurance Company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say to the member 
opposite, she will know that the Crown Life is an institution and 
a company that was brought here under the Devine 
administration. A lot of work by community leaders in putting 
together what is a large corporation with a large number of jobs 
in the province. 
 
But I will give you the assurance that our officials in CIC will 
follow this issue with the same intent they followed in other 
areas — in other areas. For example, the sale of the 
Bi-Provincial. 
 
And I would like the member opposite to tell us about that. 
Where you were urging us to sell that interest for 22 million, 
and we sold it for 310 million. Yes, the members opposite, do 
you remember that? 
 
What I can tell you is that on that deal with Bi-Provincial we 
made several hundred million more than what you were 
recommending to us. And I haven’t heard a call for an inquiry 
on that issue. No call for an inquiry from the press or from you 
on Bi-Provincial. 
 
But I want to say to you that when it comes to the dealing with 
Crown Life, our officials are watching it with a great deal of 
interest. And I’m sure that whatever recommendation comes, 
we will be well served by those officials. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal opposition has received more than 5,000 letters in the 
past few weeks from people who are extremely concerned about 
the proposed closure of the Plains hospital. People are equally 
concerned that New Democrat MLAs who campaigned in the 
1995 election to save the Plains have refused to speak out on 
behalf of those they are supposed to represent. 
 
My question is to the member from Regina Lakeview — the 
Justice minister. I understand, sir, that you, like many 
Saskatchewan residents, had a family member who underwent 
lifesaving surgery at the Plains. Surely you must have some 
feelings about the Plains. How can you sit there silently, 
allowing this government, your government, to shut down the 
hospital that a member of your family and many families from 
this province owe their very life to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that the 
Plains hospital has served a very great function for health care 
for the people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan. But we 
are now talking about the 21st century and we are talking about 
new construction at Regina General, new construction at the 
Pasqua Hospital in Regina — the net result of which will be no 
reduction in hospital beds — a modern, state-of-the-art medical 
facility which will be the pride and the jewel of southern 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

Saskatchewan, if not this province, and in fact western Canada. 
 
We are moving into a 21st century health care which will serve 
the people of Regina and the South better than ever before. And 
if the hon. member doubts me in that, then I invite him to join 
me in another tour of Regina General and Pasqua, and join us in 
the future. And if the hon. member has any other doubts, I ask 
him to join me in urging his federal Liberal colleagues to stop 
cutting back on health care and start defending it, as we are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, when we asked some serious 
questions this past Friday about some serious issues on behalf 
of people of Saskatchewan, we got frivolous answers. We got 
references to the Grimm brothers and fairy tale stories. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a frivolous matter. One has to question 
what happened to the pledges that those New Democrat MLAs 
made when they were elected to serve their constituents. 
 
For instance, the member for Regina South promised in his 
1995 campaign literature that he would, and I quote: “work to 
keep the Plains Health Centre open.” The people these New 
Democrat MLAs are supposed to represent deserve to know 
why those members have failed to utter so much as a word of 
protest. 
 
To the member from Regina Centre: you made the official 
announcement that the Plains will be converted into a SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
campus. Have you talked to your constituents? Do you realize 
they have major concerns, or are you so arrogant that you 
simply don’t care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Before the Executive Council 
representative responds, I want to remind the hon. member that 
questions put in question period must be directed to members of 
the Executive Council in — order, order — must be directed to 
members of Executive Council in the authority that they hold 
within Executive Council. And that is the guideline for question 
period. I’ll allow this answer to be . . . this question to be 
responded to. It’s difficult for the Chair to draw the conclusion 
until the question’s been answered, but I do want to give the 
hon. member fair warning that questions must be directed to 
members of the Executive Council in their authority. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take the question on 
behalf of the government. Mr. Speaker, in answering the 
question, let me give it in this form. I have before me a clipping 
of the Regina Leader-Post dated March 13, 1998. 
 
I should preface that by saying that there’s a more recent one 
dated April 18, 1998 on the issue of the Plains. And 
spokespeople from the Regina Health District, particularly Mr. 
Mark Evans, says this, quote: “Evans said the Liberals are 
providing the public with ‘an inaccurate perception’” on this 
whole issue. 
 
But I return to the original quotation of March 13, and this is a 
letter written to the Leader-Post, which says this in part, quote: 
 

I’m confident, however, that when the process is complete 
we will have the best acute-care services in the province. 
These services will benefit not only those who live in the 
Regina Health District but (will be helpful to) all the 
residents of southern Saskatchewan. 
 
No services will be lost, closed or downgraded with the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Who wrote this letter? The former Liberal candidate in the 
provincial election of 1995, Pat Edenoste, supported by Anita 
Bergman, the past president of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. 
That’s what the Liberals say about the Plains hospital. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I don’t know why 
these folks aren’t hearing from the same people that we’re 
hearing from, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order. All 
hon. members will come to order from both sides of the House. 
Order, order. Order. Order. I will ask all hon. members to allow 
the Leader of the Third Party to put his question. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Isn’t it ironic how 
frivolously both these people treat this very serious issue. They 
make fun of it, they make racket and noise so nobody can hear 
the questions that the people of Saskatchewan are asking. 
 
New Democrat members who are supposed to represent rural 
ridings have remained silent as well. And maybe there is a 
reason. And this is a question for the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP member for Estevan told media after being elected in 
1995 that, and I quote: “I had an opinion until I had it 
brainwashed out of me.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, he had an opinion but it was brainwashed out of 
him. Maybe it’s time to call David Duchovny from the X-Files 
to uncover this conspiracy of silence and deprogram NDP 
members. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Liberal opposition is sponsoring a Save the 
Plains meeting in Indian Head tonight. Would you come out 
and listen to the people? Would you do what is right by placing 
a moratorium on this closure until after the next election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Leader of the 
Third Party is quoting to me purported statements made by 
candidates who ran for us in the 1995 election. I am giving to 
this House, and to the Leader of the Third Party, a direct 
quotation from Pat Edenoste, who sought the nomination for the 
Liberal Party in the 1995 election. 
 
When I say that she ran, she serves on the Regina District 
Health Board. She not only is a Liberal but she serves on the 
district health board. She says, Mr. Speaker, in a quotation: “No 
services will be lost, closed, or downgraded with the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre.” Anita Bergman, the past president of 
provincial Liberal Party, who also ran, said the same thing. 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

And what do the Liberals say when I give them back the 
answers? They say those two people will no longer be 
candidates in the Liberal Party. That’s what the member from 
Shaunavon . . . Wood River said. That, Mr. Speaker, is not 
consistent with the health care facts, nor is it a very good show 
of democracy either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government can’t move fast enough trying to send health care 
into a tailspin by closing the Plains. This weekend edition of 
the Leader-Post contained a request for proposal to convert the 
Plains hospital into a SIAST campus. 
 
The NDP has ignored more than 100,000 people who signed 
petitions opposing the closure of the hospital. NDP MLAs have 
demonstrated they don’t believe in democracy, Mr. Speaker, by 
refusing to speak on behalf of constituents they are supposed to 
represent. 
 
Mr. Premier, what do you say to these thousands of thousands 
of people who think — and know — that you’re wrong, dead 
wrong, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, we in this government 
try to listen to the representations of the public on all issues. 
Sometimes they cannot answer them fully, I understand that. 
Sometimes we don’t even answer them correctly, but we do our 
best and I think our record is as good as any provincial 
government in Canada. 
 
And I can tell you one thing, in the area of health care it is 
better than any other provincial government. And I can tell you 
one other thing — it is always, always better than the record of 
the Liberals and the Conservatives and Tories who historically 
have fought health care in this province, tooth and nail. You 
probably were there at the time of the KOD — the Keep Our 
Doctors committee. 
 
You are now advocating two-tier health. You advocated it, your 
doctor advocates . . . doctor-leader advocates private health 
clinics, and you and the Tory parties advocate two-tier and 
privatization of the health care system. That is your position, 
Tories and Liberals, Liberals and Tories; it’s not ours. 
 
We are defending health care, and we’re building the best 
health care system for the 21st century that this province can 
afford, and the Plains will be an example of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Children’s Advocate’s Inquiry 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, public 
outcry arising from last September’s death of 19-month Karen 
Quill at St. Louis resulted in the Minister of Social Services 
instructing the child advocate to conduct an independent inquiry 
into her death. 
 
Mr. Minister, you gave me the indication this inquiry would be 

completed in about three months, which was last December. In 
a telephone conversation with the child advocate, I was 
informed the inquiry would be completed at the end of March. 
Mr. Minister, have you received the results of the child 
advocate’s inquiry into Karen’s death, and if so, I call on you to 
table those results in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have not received from 
the child advocate yet her final report. I expect within three 
weeks to a month . . . the indication that I have from the child 
advocate’s office is that the final report will be available within 
three weeks to a month, and as soon as it is available, all 
members of this House and the general public will have access 
to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Karen’s 
accident, as it was slated by the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) investigation, most likely happened as a result 
of being neglected because her foster mother was overwhelmed 
and overburdened. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is incumbent on you as the minister responsible 
to act upon the lessons learned from Karen’s death. It is 
necessary for a category entitled “abuse and neglect” to be 
added to the child death classification system. This inclusion 
would act as a measuring stick and an alarm bell, indicating 
whether or not our system is effective. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you see to it that abuse and neglect is 
included in the child death classification system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, since my appointment as 
Minister of Social Services, the tragedy in St. Louis and other 
significant events that have affected my department have been, 
clearly for this House and I think for the people of 
Saskatchewan, some of the most difficult issues that we have to 
deal with. 
 
I’m awaiting the report of the child advocate on the St. Louis 
tragedy. The child advocate may speak to the issue that the 
member raises here. I will certainly give consideration to the 
suggestion that the member makes. 
 
When we do the definition of cause of death, of course we use 
the categories which are determined by the provincial coroner. 
We do not establish those — they’re established by the coroner. 
But we would want to work with the child death review 
committee, taking into account the member’s suggestion, and of 
course all of the recommendations that will come, I’m sure, 
from the child advocate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Canadian Wheat Board and 
Canadian National Railway Settlement 

 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I 
stand before the Assembly today to congratulate the Canadian 
Wheat Board and CN (Canadian National) on the fact that they 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

were able to reach a settlement over the level of service 
complaint being heard by the Canadian Transportation Agency. 
 
The Wheat Board filed the complaint to the CTA (Canadian 
Transportation Agency) on behalf of western Canada’s grain 
producers to recover losses incurred by the producers as a result 
of poor service provided by the railways over the ‘96-97 winter 
shipping season. The slow movement of grain to port in ‘96-97 
resulted in producers having to pay millions of dollars in 
demurrage charges and caused considerable damage to 
Canada’s reputation as a reliable supplier of high quality grains. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan, represented by the 
Department of Highways and Transportation, along with 
several farm groups and individual grain producers, intervened 
in support of the Wheat Board to ensure that the Canadian 
Transportation Agency was aware of the full impact of the 
transportation problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the action taken by the Wheat Board is of 
significant importance to western Canadian farmers. And while 
the amount of the settlement by the CNR (Canadian National 
Railway Company) was not disclosed, I am encouraged by the 
assurances of the Wheat Board that the settlement will consist 
of cash compensation plus rate adjustments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only are producers being allowed to recover 
some of their losses, but the settlement also sends a clear 
message that the railways can be held accountable for the level 
of service they provide; a message that producers are not 
willing to stand by and accept financial responsibility for 
problems resulting from poor services by a third party. 
 
While the settlement is significant, we must recognize it is only 
part of the solution. All stakeholders in the system must work 
towards long-term solutions and improvements in the grain 
handling system to ensure that similar problems do not occur in 
the future. 
 
Minister Upshall and myself will continue to work on behalf . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. Now the hon. 
minister will recognize, of course, that she’s not to use the 
proper name of other members in the House when speaking in 
the House. I will also want to remind the hon. minister that in 
making ministerial statements, you must be making reference to 
a new government direction or policy or program and would 
ask her to inform the House of that as well. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister 
of Agriculture and Food and myself will continue to work on 
behalf of the grain producers to ensure that this message gets 
through to Justice Estey while he conducts his grain review. Mr. 
Speaker, our government will continue to propose solutions to 
Justice Estey and the federal government — solutions designed 
to ensure that Saskatchewan farmers have access to an effective, 
efficient, accountable, low-cost transportation system. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to bring this message to the 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to respond 
to the minister’s statement regarding the Canadian Wheat Board 
and CNR’s settlement. The minister says that while the 
settlement is significant, I think the important question here in 
all of this is, that the farmers across this province are asking, is 
where they don’t have the details of this settlement, it’s a little 
bit hard to judge the settlement when we don’t have that kind of 
detail. And I’m disappointed that if the minister had that kind of 
information that she wouldn’t share it with the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Too often the concerns of farmers are just of this nature. The 
Canadian Wheat Board says: trust us; we’re doing a good job 
for you. The government says: trust us; we’re doing a good job 
for you. But none of the detail is available for the farmers of 
this province to judge for themselves whether or not you’re 
doing any kind of a job on behalf, on behalf of them. 
 
The CTA hearings were important. I had opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, to make a presentation on behalf of the opposition to 
that hearings in Saskatoon. And it seemed to me that when you 
got to speak to the issue that many, many people were not only 
looking and pointing fingers at the Canadian . . . or pardon me, 
at the railways of this country, but they were also pointing their 
fingers at the Canadian Wheat Board and saying, what was your 
role in the problems of grain delivery last year. 
 
And there was considerable evidence that the Canadian Wheat 
Board was calling forward the wrong kinds of grains and it was 
causing all kinds of congestion at the port and ringing up large 
demurrage costs. And while the government opposite may be 
prepared to put their head in the sand when it comes to the 
Canadian Wheat Board’s responsibility in terms of this whole 
fiasco, we are not prepared to put our heads in the sand in terms 
of just blindly supporting them on this. 
 
And I would say to the minister opposite, rather than just 
simply blindly supporting them on this initiative, why didn’t 
you say something like, what are the details? How much of a 
payment is going to be received by farmers? Is there going to be 
any discount in terms of long-term freight costs? 
 
It just simply isn’t enough from this government, Mr. Speaker, 
and we would ask them to . . . when the Estey report comes 
down, I hope you have some better answers at that point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
was curious about what new government, provincial 
government direction or new government policy was being 
made today in the minister’s statement. I noted that we’re to 
take this government’s assurance, because it was the Wheat 
Board’s assurance, that cash compensation and rate adjustments 
are to be significant dollar items for producers in the province. 
For now I guess we take their assurances but we’re yet to find 
out in fact. 
 
But as I say, was curious what sort of new provincial 
government policy or direction was being taken here. 
 
I do note that the minister makes reference also to the Minister 
of Agriculture, that they have a stake in the discussions related 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

to the well-being of producers, grain producers in the province 
being the case here. And I would just have to point out to the 
government one more time that I think there is a significant role 
that this provincial government could take in using their powers 
of persuasion on grain elevator companies in this province to 
place a moratorium on the closure of a lot of these elevators on 
branch lines until after the Estey Commission’s review, in order 
to prevent any further deterioration of opportunities that exist to 
develop short-line railways in this province. 
 
So certainly this government could have a significant role to 
play. I didn’t hear them commit to that today. I’d be very 
interested to hear them commit to that very aspect of what I 
think would be crucial in terms of maintaining some sort of a 
bottom line for grain producers in this province; to maintain 
some sort of a possibility of some viability in short-line 
railways in this province until after this Estey Commission 
review is completed. 
 
Unless the government is prepared to do something like that, all 
they’re doing, all they’re doing is just presenting lip-service to 
the farmers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I do want to bring to the attention of 
the House that the ministerial statements are intended to be an 
opportunity for members of Executive Council to advise the 
Assembly of new directions or policies of the provincial 
government. And as I listen to the — order, order — as I 
listened to the remarks of the hon. minister this afternoon, it 
was not clear to the Chair what the new direction or policy is 
that she was reporting to the House. 
 
However, having permitted the statement to be made — order, 
order — however having permitted the statement to be made, 
the Chair concluded it’s only fair to provide the members of the 
opposition opportunity to respond to it. 
 
But I do want to ask for the cooperation of members of 
Executive Council in the future to ensure that when making 
ministerial statements that they do meet that criteria. Further 
ministerial statements? 
 
(1430) 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 211 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1998 
(Block Funding) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 211, 
The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1998 (Block Funding). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 212 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1998 

(Fully Elected Health Boards) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of Bill No. 212, The Health Districts Amendment 
Act, 1998 (Fully Elected Health Boards). 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to supply the 
answer to question 39, and by leave of the Assembly, to supply 
the answers to questions 40 to 46, to convert question 47, and to 
provide a response to question 48. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip requests leave to do 
those things simultaneously. Is leave granted? Leave is granted 
and the response to questions 39 to 46 and 48 are tabled. And 
the question 47 is converted to motions for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 24 
amends The Wascana Centre Act. This Bill implements the 
budget decision to maintain the 1998-99 statutory funding for 
the Wascana Centre Authority at the same level as last year. 
 
This is the fifth year that the province has maintained funding at 
this level, permitting the Authority to continue an excellent 
level of service in developing, conserving, and enhancing the 
Wascana Centre. 
 
This Bill establishes the statutory funding contributions from 
the city of Regina, the University of Regina, and the province, 
for 1998-99. This funding will be 1.421 million. This 
amendment replaces the assessment-based funding formula 
with a fixed funding level and provides for a review of funding 
at least every five years. The share of funding between the city, 
the university, and the province remains the same. 
 
In addition to the funding provision, the Bill contains 
administrative amendments to update language in the Act, 
permit the board to delegate power, authorize the Authority to 
enter into agreements with rural municipalities on boundary 
changes, correct the boundary description, direct the Authority 
to undertake a master plan review in 1998, and highlight 
research and development associated with the University of 
Regina as a function of the university in the preamble. 
 
I take this opportunity to commend Wascana Centre on the 
excellent job they continue to do in developing and managing 
the Wascana Centre on behalf of the city, the university, and the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 24. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few comments 
before I allow this piece of legislation to move into committee. 
Because I don’t see it as a piece of legislation that really has a 
lot of detail or debate other than clarifying some of the issues, 
and certainly giving the Wascana Authority the assurances that 
the funding levels that they’ve had in the past are going to 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

continue or will remain, enabling them to provide the services 
they have over the past number of years. 
 
And while I think for the Wascana Authority that’s something 
positive and it’s good news and it’s good to note where their 
funding will be, the question, as we raised with the Meewasin 
Valley too, is the fact that the government has moved from the 
assessment-based funding to this standard funding. I think for 
many people who have been caught up in the whole process of 
the new assessment program and are facing higher taxes, they 
will wonder, well why Authorities such as Meewasin or 
Wascana Lake versus some of the other businesses or even 
private citizens of the province. 
 
And I think in regards to the funding, the fact that it’s at a level 
gives confidence to the Wascana Centre Authority to certainly 
continue to provide services to the community and to the 
surrounding area, and with that we don’t really have any 
arguments. 
 
As well the minister did mention the fact that there are some 
housekeeping areas to the Bill, the fact that the Bill is 
addressing some areas where they need some clarification, and 
in that regard, Mr. Speaker, that really we don’t have any debate 
in that regard. 
 
We feel certainly it’s appropriate to modernize language. And, 
Mr. Speaker, as I look at some of the language, we’re talking 
about substituting he or his with he or she and him or her. Now 
whether or not those are all the types of language that the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers are all that concerned with, I doubt it 
very much, but it’s little things like that that are being clarified 
and we don’t have, we don’t have a problem with that as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in regards to The Wascana Centre 
Amendment Act, I think rather than slowing up the process, it 
seems to me that the types of issues or the concerns we may 
have and we may want to address could be just as appropriately 
addressed in Committee of the Whole, and with that, I would 
allow this Bill to proceed. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Pipelines Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m pleased to rise today to move second reading of 
The Pipelines Act, 1998. This Act replaces The Pipe Lines Act 
now in place. 
 
The major changes in the proposed new Act are as follows: one, 
it allows for simplification of the licensing process for approval 
to construct, alter, operate, suspend, and abandon pipelines. 
Secondly, it clarifies that the Act includes all oil and gas 
pipelines and all pipelines transporting any substance used in 
the production of oil and gas. Thirdly, it exempts from the Act, 
pipelines regulated by the National Energy Board Act and the 
gas distribution pipelines regulated under The SaskEnergy Act. 
It also allows cabinet to exempt any pipeline or any portion of a 
pipeline from any provision of the Act. 
 
Further, that it clarifies that pipeline companies are to use 

expropriation procedures under The Expropriation Procedure 
Act. It also allows expropriation procedures to apply to certain 
exempted pipelines. It allows the minister to declare a pipeline 
other than a natural gas pipeline to be a common carrier and 
provide non-discriminatory access. It requires that all parties 
notify the pipeline company if they are planning any ground 
disturbance within 30 metres of a pipeline. 
 
It makes the Act consistent with The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Act regarding maximum fines imposed for contraventions to the 
Act and regulations. The Canadian Association of Petroleum 
Producers, the Small Explorers and Producers Association of 
Canada, and the pipeline operators were consulted on the 
changes and are in support of them. As well, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities and the appropriate surface 
rights groups have been consulted with respect of the new Act 
and amendments were made to accommodate certain concerns. 
 
With those brief comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second 
reading of The Pipeline Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few comments in 
regards to The Pipeline Act, 1998. I’m certainly pleased to see 
the minister bringing forward this piece of legislation, although 
I would have to say that I think there are some issues that we 
would look forward and are looking forward to addressing, 
some questions that need to be raised. 
 
I understand that this Act replaces the pipeline Act passed in 
1978. It applies to construction, operation, and alteration of all 
pipelines not covered under the National Energy Board Act or 
The SaskEnergy Act. 
 
The old Act simply stated that the legislation applied only to 
those pipelines that were completely within provincial 
jurisdiction. This exemption for pipelines under The 
SaskEnergy Act may be worthy of questions; however it 
appears at least on the surface that SaskEnergy may be playing 
with . . . by a different set of rules than others and there may be 
some reasonable explanations for this but we certainly look 
forward to quizzing the minister in this regard. It also covers 
pipelines wholly situated within a plant, or a pipeline that is 
exempted by regulations for whatever reason. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the old Act a permit had to be issued by the 
minister before the construction or operation of the pipeline. 
The new Act refers to a licence. Under the old Act, no reference 
was made to an application fee for a permit. With the new Act, 
it’s expressly stated that a fee must be paid to the department 
when applying for a licence. The fee is not stated. As to what it 
will be, prescribed in regulations and that is a area of concern, 
Mr. Speaker, because when you start talking about fees and you 
leave it for the regulations, the unfortunate part is fees that are 
involved in regulations rather than stated in legislation can go 
up at the drop of a hat, and anyone who may be affected by it 
may not recognize the changes that can take place so readily. So 
we will have some questions in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, a company intending to construct a 
pipeline other than a flowline line but is otherwise exempt from 
this Act, but desires to have the authority to expropriate land 
under this Act, may apply, it says, for a licence. 
 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

It seems, Mr. Speaker, as well, that the old Act made reference 
to highways when discussing the process for construction of 
pipelines. I believe the new Act refers to roads instead and 
states that the minister and the minister alone may give 
approval for a pipeline to be built on or across, over or under, a 
road. It appears, Mr. Speaker, that the RM (rural municipality) 
does not have to be consulted or even informed of such 
construction, and that’s an issue and a question that we would 
certainly want to pose to the minister as we get into further 
discussion in regards to the current Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions in this Act. There 
are a number of issues that we would want to raise, and I thank 
the minister for the opportunity at least to discuss some of these 
concerns. But in light of the fact that we do have some areas of 
concern, we do want to have . . . take more time to review the 
legislation and make sure that we are appropriately dealing with 
any concerns, or all the concerns that may be raised by the 
industry or by individuals, or even by rural municipalities, as a 
result of the ability to go under roads or the fact of changing 
from highways to roads 
 
It would certainly be appropriate, I believe at this time, for us to 
move adjournment of debate. I therefore move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise again in this Assembly to move second reading 
of the oil and natural gas . . . The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act. This amendment establishes the authority to 
suspend and reinstate the requirement for natural gas producers, 
users, to obtain gas use and gas removal permits. 
 
The amendment also provides for penalties on late and 
incomplete submissions of drill cores and samples to ensure 
greater compliance with the submission requirements. Current 
legislation requires all consumers buying gas directly from a 
producer to obtain a gas use permit and all producers selling gas 
out of province to obtain a gas removal permit. These 
requirements, or permits, were necessary in the mid-1980s at 
the time of the deregulation of natural gas markets in order to 
provide confidence in the security and reliability of natural gas 
supplies. 
 
Some 11 years later, after natural gas deregulation was 
implemented, consumers are confident that the market-place 
works. Natural gas permits are no longer necessary. Permits are 
not required for other non-renewable resources or commodities 
produced in the province. 
 
This amendment will formally suspend the permitting process 
once the legislative amendments are enacted. This amendment 
also provides the minister with the authority to reinstate the 
permitting process should it be required in the future. 
 
(1445) 
 
The purpose of these changes is to reduce administrative 

burdens both for the industry and the department as part of the 
ongoing commitment of the Government of Saskatchewan to 
regulatory reform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment also ensures the timely 
submission of core drills and samples to the department by 
prescribing penalties on late and incomplete submissions of 
cores and samples. Cores and samples collected by the 
department are a key source of information used by industry in 
developing their oil, gas, and exploration and development 
plans. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this amendment is supported by industry 
and has as well been identified as part of the government’s 
regulatory reform. 
 
With those brief comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second 
reading of The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. Speaker, 
just to make a few comments in regard to this piece of 
legislation. And certainly at the end of my remarks to move 
adjournment of debate to allow for some further, in-depth 
review of the legislation in order to address any concerns that 
may come out of this piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the government this Act is supposed 
to, number one, establish the authority to suspend and reinstate 
the requirements for natural gas producers and users to obtain 
gas use and gas removal permits; and number two, provide the 
penalties on late and incomplete submissions of drill cores and 
samples to ensure greater compliance with submission 
requirements. 
 
The first change, as I understand it, allows the government to 
prescribe penalties for late and incomplete submission of drill 
cores and samples to the Department of Energy and Mines. The 
government says this will add consistency to the regulations 
that already allow the government to impose penalties for late 
or complete . . . or incomplete filing of reports and information 
to the department. 
 
And certainly when it comes to filing reports, Mr. Speaker, I 
think that we’re all aware of the fact that it’s important to have 
your reports in on time; although I would have to acknowledge 
the fact that I have difficulty getting my reports in on time all 
the time. And it’s not always easy just to always comply with 
the regulations. But certainly when it comes to gas and oil in 
this province, I think there are . . . it needs to certainly have 
regulations and rules and guidelines in place. And if it’s fair for 
one, it’s fair for all. 
 
So we will take a look at this issue and the reasons the 
government has, and whether or not there have been in the past 
a number of companies that may not have followed the 
guidelines in place. So I think, as I understand from the 
minister, this is just clarifying the process. 
 
The new Act also gives the minister the power to suspend or 
reinstate the use of natural gas permits for producers selling gas 
directly to customers. These permits were instituted when the 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

industry was deregulated in 1987 to ensure that gas under 
contract to customers was indeed available. According to the 
government, this is no longer necessary and such permits are no 
longer necessary. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note, instead of 
abolishing the use of these permits altogether, the government 
instead simply decided to suspend them. If the government feels 
they are again necessary in the future, it appears they will again 
be reinstituted. 
 
Even with the suspension of these permits, the government still 
has control over the industry, since it can impose the need for 
permits at any time. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, the legislation 
doesn’t make it very clear whether some companies may be 
required to have permits while others will not. It appears to give 
the minister the power to impose the need for permits on a 
case-by-case basis. 
 
And that’s a bit of a concern to us, Mr. Speaker. It’s an issue 
that we certainly want to address. We think it’s . . . if the rules 
are set and the rules are placed there, I believe the rules should 
be the same for everyone involved. I believe everyone, 
including companies, want to know that they’re playing on the 
same playing-field. And if the minister has the power to impose 
the need for permits, you would have to ask, Mr. Speaker, does 
that give the minister the ability to have some influence on 
permits or on the companies that are involved in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
And certainly the exploration or the development of oil and gas 
. . . and when we look at the record of this government and the 
fact of the limitations they put on businesses, such as The 
Labour Standards Act or the CCTA (Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement), Mr. Speaker, there are some concerns, 
some issues that we have and will continue to have. 
 
And we want to address some of those concerns even in this 
piece of legislation, to indeed make sure that the government is 
not moving from what they say would be . . . would simplify 
the process and actually making, creating more red tape or more 
opposition for business to work in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With those comments in mind, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
appropriate that we indeed adjourn this Bill as well, allowing 
for further debate, further question, and detailed review of the 
piece of legislation. Therefore at this time I’ll move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 19 — The 
Physical Therapists Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In regards to Bill 19, 

The Physical Therapists Act, this legislation is important 
because it deals with the body responsible for regulating and 
disciplining, if need be, the physical therapists in Saskatchewan. 
And I think as the minister pointed out the other day, it creates a 
body that really has the authority to review very carefully if any 
disciplinary action is taken against any physical therapist. 
 
And as I understand it, physical therapists have been consulted 
and are in agreement with the piece of legislation. In that 
regard, we don’t have a major problem. We do have a few 
questions that we certainly look forward to addressing in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
The public, Mr. Speaker, as well needs a transparent avenue of 
recourse should they believe they have been wrongfully treated 
by a health care professional. And it appears these changes take 
us further in that direction. And I think that’s appropriate. 
 
I think in regards to the public, in dealing with health care, with 
care-givers, the public need to feel that they’re dealing . . . that 
the physician, or in this case the therapist that they’re dealing 
with, they certainly can deal with in confidence; and if they 
have some questions or concerns, that they have a body that 
they can turn to for some guidance at a time when they may feel 
that some of the actions that have been taken or the way that 
they’ve been dealt with may not be what they consider 
appropriate. So I think that the Bill certainly brings out and 
addresses some of those concerns. 
 
Upon further examination, I believe it is a positive step to 
remove political discretion over discipline determined by the 
council. If the profession is to be self-regulated there should not 
be undue political interference. But I do have some questions 
regarding how many times this discretion has been used in the 
past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that this Act does raise some 
serious questions that I will be raising in Committee of the 
Whole. Questions such as how much additional money will the 
new appeal process cost? And that’s certainly appropriate that 
that’s a concern, that’s an issue that’s raised. 
 
Will the new process mean lengthier investigation time for 
serious offences? I think it’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker, in 
regards to any time a concern is raised, an investigation of a 
possible wrongdoing, that appropriate time is certainly allowed 
for the process to be conducted fairly. And the fact that at the 
end of the day, whether it’s a customer or a health care-giver, 
that they have felt they have been treated fairly by the system. 
So we’ll certainly want to make some enquiries in that matter. 
 
I’m also going to be very interested to hear the government’s 
reasoning for removing therapists’ right to charge a fee for 
service. And when we look at the health care system in the 
province of Saskatchewan, we look at the needs for more beds, 
we look at the waiting-lists that people are on, in some cases 
there may be a place, maybe there’s an argument . . . maybe the 
government shouldn’t just run out and say well no, we’re not 
going to allow it. 
 
I know we have the argument about universal health care, but at 
the same time, Mr. Speaker, I hear many people themselves 
suggesting that maybe we all need to accept a bit of 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

responsibility; and I feel, the idea that we’ve got universal 
health care, people almost expect that the services will be there 
for them immediately and don’t recognize the fact that we’re 
still paying for it as taxpayers. We still pay for it as individuals 
through our tax dollars. 
 
So there may be a few questions in that area we want to address 
with government as to their reasons in regards to removing the 
therapists’ right to charge a fee for service. So those are a few 
questions I think we can deal with effectively and address more 
carefully and correctly in Committee of the Whole rather than 
standing and trying to raise the questions without being able to 
get a response, through second reading. 
 
So therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to take my 
place and allow this piece of legislation to move to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 1 — The Arts 
Board Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to speak today to the changes that the government is making to 
The Arts Board Act. I would like to mention at the outset, Mr. 
Speaker, that it is quite surprising but none the less good to see 
the government listen to the real people in the arts community, 
and those that support it, for a change. 
 
It is also surprising, Mr. Speaker, because since the members 
opposite have come to power they have been more concerned 
with building an empire for key players in the arts community 
than they have been about encouraging and supporting the large 
pool of talent that we have here in Saskatchewan. If we were 
going to support the Saskatchewan artists we must not single 
out those individuals who choose to make a living with their 
talents from the rest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know, Saskatchewan’s greatest resource 
has always been and will continue to be the dedication and 
talent of our people. The arts community is no exception. We 
need to encourage that talent and create an inclusive art 
community which does not create artificial boundaries between 
who is and isn’t an artist. That is what the government’s 
previous legislation seemed to do. 
 
So we are supportive of the government’s decision to remove 
those boundaries in the legislation but I would like to say that 
we are only cautiously optimistic about the impact these 
changes will have. As all members know, removing such 
boundaries and breaking down turf protection can be a very 
difficult thing. Wording change in the legislation is a necessary 
first step but it is undoubtedly a very small first step, as my 
colleague mentioned the other day, to help break down the 
current bias the Arts Board has towards professional artists. A 
bias we fear promotes exploitation of the system by key players 
in the arts community. 
 
To help break down this bias, the government must commit to 

appointing a significant number of amateur artists onto the Arts 
Board. Unless they include these individuals in the process to 
determine how money is spent, we are doubtful that we will see 
any real changes in the allocation of grants. It will be necessary 
to change attitudes as well as legislation, and the best way to do 
this is by including a broad cross-section of the arts community 
on the board. 
 
So I would repeat, Mr. Speaker, that we are supportive of this 
change but would recommend to the government, if they are 
committed to unite the arts community and help all 
Saskatchewan artists, it will take more than a wording change in 
your legislation. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is very supportive of Arts Board 
donations being allocated according to the wishes of the donors. 
I know a lot of people, Mr. Speaker, who would donate to the 
arts community if they were given assurance by the Arts Board 
that their money would go towards a certain community or art 
form. Unfortunately this is not what has happened in the past. 
Rather, the Arts Board has had free rein to spend this money on 
excursions to Europe or New York to plug themselves into the 
international arts scene. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is highly questionable what positive impact this 
has for artists at home. But it is even more questionable whether 
the individuals who donated their hard-earned money approve 
of such trips. Somehow I highly doubt it. So we are very 
supportive of donors having greater power over how their 
dollars are spent, but we are a little sceptical of whether the 
government supports this concept. 
 
Let’s take a quick look at the changes before us in the 
Assembly. The amendment states: 
 

Any contribution to the endowment fund may be subject to 
the general direction of the donor, but the Arts Board shall 
have the exclusive power and responsibility to make 
decisions respecting the beneficiaries of the endowment 
fund. 
 

The Arts Board should listen to the donor, but at the end of 
the day, they can do with their money whatever they want. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that seems to me a funny inclusion in a piece of 
government legislation — the Arts Board can listen if they want 
to. Does this mean to suggest that prior to these changes, the 
Arts Board paid no attention to the donor’s wishes? That they 
have been spending money purely on their own agenda? I know 
that some of this has happened, but I would like to think that 
there was some sensitivity in the past to the donor’s wishes. 
 
So I would just like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I find it odd that 
such a weak clause would be included. You either support the 
concept of donor control or you don’t. We do. But as I have 
said, this legislation gives no indication that the government 
does. I do find it interesting however, that the minister 
responsible for the Art Board stated the reason for amending 
section 26 of the Act is to reassure donors that their money they 
give to promote art in Saskatchewan is not going into general 
coffers of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that the members opposite listen to their 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

own explanation. The people of Saskatchewan don’t trust you 
with their money. Many of them don’t believe for a second that 
you would not redirect their heartfelt donations into your 
infamous pot of gold. Pretty sorry state of affairs, if you ask me, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Nonetheless, we are supportive of all the monies donated to the 
arts going towards the arts and going to support areas of the 
donor’s choice. It just begs the question: what was happening 
before? If not, where was this money going? 
 
As my comments show, the Saskatchewan Party questions the 
government’s commitments to these steps but supports the 
general concepts laid out in the amendment Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1500) 

Bill No. 15 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 15 — The 
Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Out of breath 
here from running to make sure I got here in time for this 
debate, Mr. Speaker, because this is an important piece of 
legislation, also especially for anyone who has happened to 
have any gas work done in their houses lately, whether it’s a 
new hot water heater, as in my own case, or a gas stove, or any 
sort of a gas appliance. We all have to deal with the gas 
inspectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this particular Bill it’s very . . . we’re pleased to 
see that the government is trying, finally, to cut down on the red 
tape that Saskatchewan residents have to deal with. Red tape 
has always been an encumbrance to everyone and it’s in all of 
our benefit, whether it be government or individuals, to 
eliminate as much of that red tape as possible. And hopefully in 
this particular piece of legislation a very small bit of that will be 
eliminated. 
 
But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, when we’re dealing with gas 
inspections we have to find the proper balance between safety 
and the bureaucracy. They’re not synonymous, Mr. Speaker, 
although most bureaucrats think that their actions are designed 
for safety — generally the safety of their own positions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at gas fittings and gas inspections, 
most of this work, the fact is all of this work, is done not by the 
gas inspectors but by a person who is qualified — a plumber, a 
heater, an installer of furnaces and other gas equipment. They 
actually do the work, Mr. Speaker, and then the gas inspector 
comes along and says, yes, it’s done right; no, it’s not. 
 
It really makes you wonder though when the plumber or the 
person, the gas fitter, comes along and installs a piece of 
equipment for you, and then says it’s ready to go, sometimes 
the gas inspector will come along and tell you whether it’s safe 
or not. 
 

Now you’re going to be using it in the meantime, and it may be 
a considerable period of time before the gas inspector actually 
comes along and uses it. In fact I’ve heard of occasions where 
it’s been so long that the appliance has wore out before the gas 
inspector actually shows up to finally inspect it. So it makes 
you wonder why we actually do have a gas inspector on a lot of 
occasions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is an attempt to cut down on the waiting-list for those 
needing the services of a gas inspector in Saskatchewan, 
because in the past some people have had to wait an inordinate 
amount of time to activate appliances which used gas, natural 
gas. 
 
For new installations it’s a serious problem, Mr. Speaker, when, 
to be able to turn your furnace on in the winter, you have to 
wait for a gas inspector to finally show up if your building is, 
let’s say, a new house, Mr. Speaker. For people who are 
changing units out, they still need those gas inspectors, but the 
person installing it has the opportunity to hook it up and make it 
ready to run. 
 
With this amendment, Mr. Speaker, gas permits are now only 
necessary when there is a breaking of the gas piping. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t know if you have much experience in natural 
gas fittings, but any time you change out an appliance, you 
break the gas fittings. They’re not broken in the sense of 
deterioration and failure, but you break the pipe apart, generally 
at a union, and change the piece of equipment out and reinstall 
it, hook it all back up again, and it’s ready to go. And it’s just as 
safe after the change-over as it was prior — hopefully even 
safer because you have a new unit that you’ve hooked in there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you have to kind of wonder just what the government is 
meaning when they term breaking of the gas piping, and a gas 
permit is only needed at that time. Because every time you 
change it out, you’re breaking that piping, Mr. Speaker. So I’m 
hopeful the minister in charge will be able to give some proper 
explanations on this. 
 
The new Bill acknowledged that the installer of gas equipment 
may, in fact, have a better knowledge of the equipment than do 
the representatives of the gas utilities because of the factory and 
specialized training. As a result, SaskEnergy is no longer 
required to actually activate furnaces or other gas equipment, 
leaving it up to the installers to activate equipment properly and 
safely. 
 
Well we have, Mr. Speaker . . . We allow our children to be 
taught with school teachers, some of which are certified, some 
are which are not. When a teacher is certified they’re entitled to 
write their own exams, and give the exam to the student, and 
grade it, and the student either passes or fails accordingly. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we have people who are certified in this province 
to do gas installations. Why would you not allow that person to 
install the piece of equipment and certify that it’s safe for 
operations? 
 
We say that our . . . the teachers who are certified are good 
enough and competent enough and qualified enough to educate 
our children, our future. And yet we’re not prepared to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that the person who installs, starts up and says this is 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

safe for use, to finally say yes, it’s fully qualified, to go ahead 
on a gas range let’s say, Mr. Speaker. Surely if these people are 
qualified and certified to be installers, they should also be 
certified well enough to do their own gas inspections, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The new Act gives gas inspectors broader authority to order that 
improvements be made. The current Act refers only to fire 
hazards, whereas the amended Act simply uses the term, 
hazards. It also makes reference to potential hazards and to 
dangers to persons on the premises or to the premises. Again 
this is an area, Mr. Speaker, where hopefully the minister will 
outline the difference between fire hazards and hazards. 
 
Now fire is oxidization of a fuel supply. If you look at an 
explosion, that’s just a rapid, even more rapid oxidization of a 
fuel supply. So we need to determine, Mr. Speaker, exactly 
what the minister and his officials mean by the term hazard as 
opposed to the previous term of fire hazard. 
 
I guess potentially one of the hazards that wouldn’t include fire 
would be gas leakage and suffocation or asphyxiation. Certainly 
a danger and every winter there are . . . we hear of incidents 
where people become ill or even the incidents have proven fatal 
when gas equipment has either leaked gas — raw gas — or 
leaks out fumes from burnt gas. So potentially that is what the 
minister’s Bill is addressing, but we need to find that out, Mr. 
Speaker, and to determine exactly what the minister is talking 
about. 
 
So I would ask that the minister give some consideration in this 
particular Bill to expanding the certification of the gas installers 
so that they may do the inspections, and that the inspectors 
would then perhaps do a random sampling of those installations 
to determine that the requirements of the Act are being met, 
rather than simply having to have every installation inspected at 
some point in time. 
 
We have very few inspectors. They don’t get around for a 
considerable period of time after the installations have been put 
in, and I think it would be much more efficient if some changes 
were made in that area. And we will be asking the minister to 
look into that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we believe that while there are some concerns and some 
questions in this particular Act, that we can allow it to go on to 
committee and hopefully the minister will then answer those 
questions. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Parks Amendment Act, 1998 
 
The Chair: — I would ask, before we start, the minister to 
introduce his officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with us 
today Les Cooke, associate deputy minister of SERM 

(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management); Don 
MacAuley, over here, director of parks and facilities; and Bruce 
Martin, a parks policy specialist. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of 
committees. I would like to agree, but at the present time we 
have some questions that we need to ask first to find out exactly 
what this government is up to. It looks like they’re taking over a 
whole bunch more land again. Hopefully this isn’t land bank 
under a different name, under the park program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you have 
quite a number of various land descriptions taking place in this 
Bill outlining the boundaries of the parks. I wonder if you could 
explain to us what each one of these sections means and if it’s 
simply a correction, that the land description was in error 
initially, if it doesn’t encompass any new lands, and then that’s 
sufficient — just say it’s just a correction of boundaries. But if 
it encompasses some new lands, can you please describe what 
those new lands are and what they were previously being used 
for? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member for 
the question. The references made to Meadow Lake, Candle 
Lake provincial parks, and basically all references except for 
Macdowall bog and Douglas Provincial Park, those are 
housekeeping. There were errors; so there’s no new land added 
to Candle Lake, Meadow Lake, those parks. So it’s just 
Macdowall bog and Douglas Provincial Park where there is 
actual new land additions to the parks. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. That 
makes it a lot simpler in dealing with . . . if it’s just a correction 
of the titles, then it’s not a problem. 
 
When you deal with Douglas Provincial Park, I believe you’re 
adding an additional 3,200 acres to this park. How long has this 
particular piece of land been in the Crown’s purview? How 
long have you had possession of it? And what was this land 
used for prior? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The 3,200 acres which you refer to has 
been Crown land for as long as any of us can remember and it 
borders on a community pasture there. Over the years, 
periodically, grazing has been allowed on the land, and 
certainly with the 3,200 acres added to Douglas Provincial Park, 
we will be using grazing as a management tool on the 
grassland. So just because it is being added to the park does not 
mean that grazing will be eliminated. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now you and 
I have had some discussions and will have some discussions in 
the future on grazing when it comes to provincial Crown lands. 
 
When you use the term “grazing,” are you looking at an annual 
grazing of some kind? Would it be for the entire grazing season, 
or part thereof? Are there restrictions on the grazing, such as a 
fixed number of animals, that would be different from what the 
community pasture would be involved in? Are there any special 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

requirements for this 3,200 acres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The grazing which will occur will certainly 
be controlled and managed. We have, for an example, 
endangered burrowing owls in the portion which is being 
added. 
 
So what we will be doing, working with the community pasture 
nearby, we’ll be working with Department of Agriculture and 
Food to determine how and what grazing rates may be put in 
place. For an example, there may not be grazing every year. We 
may wish to have the cattle removed a little earlier if it’s a dry 
year. Our prime priority is to manage the ecosystem with the 
aid of grazing. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Indeed, 
grazing as a management tool is very important and I’m pleased 
to hear you state that, because there has over time seems to have 
been a conflict between Environment and the wildlife people in 
the Environment and agriculturists when it comes to grazing. 
 
Traditionally, the Environment department and the 
environmentalists there have felt that domesticated animals 
should have no relationship or interaction with wildlife. And in 
my opinion, Mr. Minister, that is absolutely wrong. If you take 
North America 500 years ago there was a large bovine herd 
throughout central North America and they had a considerable 
impact and interaction with wildlife — the rest of the wildlife. 
 
We don’t have buffalo today roaming at large, bison roving at 
large. But we do have domesticated, cloven-hoof animals, cattle 
that replaced those buffalo, those bison, and serve the same 
purpose, Mr. Minister. So they are an integral part of our 
environment and therefore should be included as part of our 
wildlife considerations and not simply be excluded because 
they are domesticated, and I’m pleased to hear that you’re going 
to use grazing. 
 
Now the question arises though: when will that grazing take 
place? Once we hit estimates we’ll be having a discussion about 
some grazing in other areas where you are putting limits on 
when that grazing can take place, limits on the number of 
animals that can be in those grazing pastures that are 
significantly less than what most agriculturists in the area, most 
cattle ranchers, would estimate as the proper numbers to 
maintain a good quality pasture and still provide . . . still put on 
the maximum number of animals for that pasture. 
 
So what kind of numbers are you looking at for this grazing 
area? I’m not totally familiar with the type of land that it is, but 
if say ranchers in the area of the community pasture are running 
25 head per quarter section in the community pasture, will you 
be allowing 25 head per quarter in the 3,200 acres that you have 
in addition to the Douglas Provincial Park? Will you be 
allowing them in, let’s say June 1, or will it be August 1 or what 
kind of time frames are you allowing in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you. The whole issue of grazing, of 
course has to be looked at basically on individual quarter 
sections. The land, much of the land, is very light and sandy so 
it would not carry as many cattle as a quarter section of dark 
soil and high moisture levels. So what we will be doing . . . and 
certainly as a tribute to ranchers and the PFRA (Prairie Farm 

Rehabilitation Administration) and other government agencies 
involved with grazing, we have seen a vast improvement in the 
management of our pastures and grazing. We have things such 
as rotational grazing and such like. We are committed to work 
with Agriculture, as you suggested, in determining carrying 
capacities — there’s a formula with a number of criteria — and 
we will certainly use that as a guideline. If however some 
particular wildlife species could benefit by a little lighter 
grazing capacity, we want to consider that as well. So we will 
be working with the industry in determining this and working 
with the agriculture community. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you 
used the term, lighter grazing, it raises my antenna and it makes 
every farmer squirm because they’ve experienced some of your 
lighter grazing. I have . . . people contacted me from the 
Alameda area where some of your lighter grazing is about to be 
put in practice this year. And whereas a quarter section of land 
in that area would normally carry between 20 and 30 head of 
animals per year, your lighter grazing recommendations from 
your department in that area is 10 animals every 3 years, so 
roughly 3 animals per year. 
 
That’s significantly lighter grazing, Mr. Minister, and I would 
suspect that the people who were previously using this 3,200 
acres as community pasture lands are going to be somewhat 
concerned with that. So what kind of consultation have you had 
with the users of the community pasture, if they were grazing 
these lands previously, to determine the actual impact that this 
change is going to have on those kind of operations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well first of all, the land has not been used 
for grazing for a number of years. It was not community pasture 
land, although there was some leases, and I think on a few 
occasions part of the 3,200 acres was managed partially by the 
community pasture. 
 
We are committed to work with, as I pointed out, the 
landowners in the area, Department of Agriculture, and we must 
remember this is provincial park not a community pasture. But 
we are going to accommodate livestock and use it as a 
management tool, and we will be using criteria determining the 
carrying capacity, and we are prepared to work with the 
agriculture industry on this. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could then give me a run-down of who was using this 
particular land? You say some of it was in the community 
pasture, some of it was leaseholders, and some of it hadn’t been 
grazed. So who was using that land and why was it not being 
utilized in some manner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We don’t have the exact breakdown, but 
we can certainly get that written information over to you. We 
can go back five years and let you know who has been using 
what areas and what areas have been lying idle, and we will 
certainly be glad to provide that technical information to you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What 
consultations did you have with the operators of the community 
pasture or the producers who were utilizing the community 
pasture and what about consultation with any leaseholders of 
the other pieces of property? 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, we met and received the 
cooperation and blessing from the rural municipality of Maple 
Bush — that’s RM 24 — with local residents, with 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation, as this borders on Lake 
Diefenbaker, and with the Department of Agriculture and Food. 
So we, as I say, received the cooperation and blessing of all of 
these groups of people on this addition of the land. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Did you discuss this change with the 
people who were holding leases on a portion of this 3,200 
acres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, there were no . . . there’s no 
active leaseholders on this 3,200 acres, but we will go back five 
years and let you know who has had an interest in that parcel. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. You 
mention that part of it was being used though as a community 
pasture; the community pasture is obviously run by the 
Department of Agriculture but there are producers who utilize 
that community pasture. Was there any consultation with the 
producers who were utilizing that community pasture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We don’t have the exact size of the number 
of acres that was being used as part of the community pasture 
but we believe that it’s less than a quarter section, probably a 
hundred acres or something. And we are working on an 
agreement where the community pasture, provincial pasture, 
probably will incorporate this hundred acres or so in their 
ongoing operation; so we’re prepared to do that. But we’ll get 
you the exact figures, as I say, when we get the written 
response. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. If you 
take out the hundred acres that still leaves 3,100 acres. What 
kind of arrangements will you be making for grazing on that 
property? Will it be a lease? Will it be through the community 
pasture, through the Department of Agriculture? What kind of 
arrangements are you going to be making to handle the grazing 
on the other 3,100 acres then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Because there is no active leases on that 
3,100 acres, we may solicit contracts/leases on our own, we 
may work through the Department of Agriculture. But first of 
all, we’ve got to do an assessment to determine if we need some 
grazing, how much. And we will be . . . this is part of our 
overall management plan. 
 
The fact that there’s no active leases means that there was no 
grazing, at least in recent years, and we are certainly prepared to 
look at the grazing in conjunction with the management of the 
grassland. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — When you look at the grazing, you’ve 
talked about the criteria for grazing, the qualifications. Can you 
outline for us what that . . . those criteria would be, what those 
qualifications would be. You’re going to do an assessment you 
say as to potentially the carrying capacity of that land. If the 
assessment comes back that . . . Are you going to be using your 
criteria for this assessment? Are you going to be using 
Department of Agriculture’s criteria? Who is setting the criteria 

to make the determination of what the carrying capacity and the 
grazing rotation should be on this land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — What we are certainly prepared to do is 
look at the recommendation, say, from local grazing co-ops, 
pastures, Department of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Saskatchewan Research Council has assisted us in determining 
carrying capacities. And again, we must remember this is a 
provincial park not a community pasture; so we may have 95 
per cent of the recommended agriculture carrying rate, and this 
can vary. 
 
We want to manage the grassland as you pointed out. Cattle 
certainly can be used as a management tool. 
 
So we’re not closing any door. We want to hear what 
Department of Agriculture recommends, the local people. And 
again, this will vary on the 3,200 acres because some is quite 
sandy and very fragile, others might be productive grassland. So 
we’re looking at all avenues and certainly open to any 
recommendations and suggestions. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well my 
concern is that 95 per cent doesn’t sound too bad of an 
agricultural-based assessment. But if it’s 30 per cent of that then 
I have a concern. And I’m sure that the local producers in the 
area would also have a concern if they had previously had 
access to that land. 
 
That’s sort of the circumstances that I’m familiar with down in 
the Alameda area where there’s been a dramatic reduction in the 
supposed carrying capacity, as allowed by Environment, on 
those particular lands. 
 
When you look at the burrowing owl and the piping plovers, 
what kind of impact will that have on the grazing capacity of 
those lands? Will you say that quarter section A is excluded 
from grazing because a burrowing owl nest is there? Or will a 
portion of it, say perhaps, be fenced off — 10 acres or 20 acres, 
whatever would be appropriate — to say that where the 
burrowing owls are but the other 140 acres is eligible for 
grazing? 
 
Will you be making those kind of exceptions to the rules, let’s 
say, or how will you deal with those kind of situations where 
you have burrowing owls on a particular piece of grazing area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
burrowing owl, that is one species which does benefit and do 
better with some grazing. So we’ll need grazing or haying or 
some mechanism of keeping the grass cut low for burrowing 
owls. 
 
The piping plover nests along the sandy beaches, and certainly 
these beaches are utilized not only by cattle at times but people 
on all-terrain vehicles. What we might do is fence off a portion 
of the beach to keep vehicles as well as livestock out, but this, 
this is again part of our management plan. 
 
There are other species like Sprague’s pipits which do require 
tufts of grass and higher vegetation than say the burrowing owl 
or the killdeer. So we want to strike a balance, and again we’re 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

going to work with Agriculture to achieve this. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mentioning accessed water, Mr. 
Minister, will the animals placed in there for grazing have 
access to the shore line of Diefenbaker Lake or will they be 
restricted from that shore line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Again the access of livestock to the 
reservoir will be something that we’ll have to work out. For an 
example, if there’s cottage development near the site we will 
probably restrict the livestock, but obviously the cattle need 
water. We may have dugouts further back, away from the shore 
line. And we want to, in addition to protecting, say, piping 
plovers, make sure the erosion is reduced as well from 
trampling. With being a new reservoir, the shore line is very 
unstable. 
 
So it’s part of our management plan, and we will be working 
with the local people to see how we best control the livestock 
along the shore line of the reservoir. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Certainly 
any livestock in the area would certainly need water, access to 
water. When you talk about dugouts, who would be responsible 
then for maintaining those dugouts and ensuring that there is a 
water supply in it? Would the parks department be pumping the 
water from the reservoir to the dugout? Would the producer 
who is leasing the land be responsible for that? Who would be 
responsible for it if the animals are not allowed access to the 
reservoir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well this is getting right down into the 
management, hypothetical management. And obviously we can 
use dugouts, the shore line of the reservoir, or wells; and 
obviously if there’s cattle in there — which there is not now for 
the large part of the area, I’m not sure whether there’s dugouts 
there right now — but this would be part of the overall 
management plan. 
 
If there’s no source of water, there will be very little interest in 
grazing the area as well. So it’s something we will be obviously 
looking at. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, in your master plan 
to take over the province’s agriculture and property, I think it’s 
important that we know what you’re planning on doing with 
this. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we look at the burrowing owls in the area 
and the piping plovers, because there’s . . . piping plovers in 
particular because we have a relatively new shore line there in 
the last 30 years or so. Has there been an increase in or a change 
in the status of these particular species, and has there been a rise 
in their number since the introduction of the Douglas Park? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Depending again on water levels, and it 
varies annually at Lake Diefenbaker as well, but on certain 
years we have a fairly good number of piping plovers. But if the 
water levels are high, the beach is not available, the birds 
obviously go somewhere else to nest. 
 
And with respect to the burrowing owl, unfortunately despite 
our best efforts in working with landowners and protecting 

thousands of acres of grassland from being broken up — 
certainly grazing occurs on that — the burrowing owl numbers 
continue to plummet. And this is very disturbing. 
 
As I say, we want to make sure that we ensure that this habitat, 
if there’s burrowing owls nesting there when you determine 
what owls are there and try to keep them there with artificial 
nest boxes and such like. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You seem to 
have a bit of a catch-22 position here. If the water’s up, there’s 
no piping plovers; if the water is down, then there’s no water 
for cattle. And so then they don’t eat the grass off and the 
burrowing owl’s in trouble. 
 
So you’re going to have to do something about that, Mr. 
Minister. That’s what you have dams in place for, I guess — to 
sort of regulate the level of that water so that you can have the 
best of both worlds. And there’s nothing wrong with building 
dams, as you well know, Mr. Minister. You know, dams are 
good, especially in this dry country we call Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well we have to look at the 
economic advantages to all of those particular types of 
situations and weigh them on an individual basis, Mr. Minister. 
 
I do have some concerns though, and we’ll carry it on in some 
of the other areas, about the grazing. I think it’s very important 
that grazing be allowed on those particular pieces of land and 
that the restrictions do not become too onerous on the producers 
who want to use them. 
 
I do know something about grazing and about burrowing owls. 
But when you come to bogs, like the Macdowall bog, I’m a 
little bogged down on that one. In our part of the world the only 
water that we have is at the Alameda dam, so we don’t get a lot 
of bogs in our country. 
 
I wonder if you could tell me and tell the people, the public, 
exactly where the Macdowall bog is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The Macdowall bog is appropriately named 
Macdowall after the community of Macdowall, which is about 
25 miles south-west of Prince Albert. And bogs are something 
we do not have a lot of, especially in southern Saskatchewan. 
And they are I guess areas where the groundwater is very close 
to the surface, providing very wet, moist conditions for a 
variety of plants especially, but also some animal species as 
well. 
 
The Macdowall bog, although a small area of 57 hectares, 140 
acres or so, contains a number of rare orchids and other rare 
plant species which have been familiar to university plant 
ecologists for many years. And they’ve identified a number of 
plant species there which are rare and endangered and unique, 
and we feel that it’s up to the people of Saskatchewan to protect 
this area in the form of a park, ecological reserve classification. 
And this is certainly what we are planning to do. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Was this land 
Crown land previously, or who was the owner of it and how did 
it come into the government’s possession? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — This quarter section is Crown land and has 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

been managed by SERM for many years. There is a grazing 
lease on the quarter section but because of a railway track and a 
creek the actual grazing only occurred on the area away from 
the bog, and of course cattle got into bogs. They may not get 
out of there either, so the cattle have enough sense to stay out as 
well. 
 
So we’ve consulted with the lessee and he is in full agreement 
along with many other people in the area, and the scientific 
community, that this area is well worth preserving. And the 
lessee will continue to graze on the portion of our parcel of land 
which is not included in the bog area. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will this 
lessee also face the requirements that the lessees will face of the 
Douglas Provincial Park — the same kind of requirements 
based on the circumstances locally — but will the same criteria 
be necessary to go through for evaluations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Unlike the grasslands being proposed for 
the Douglas Provincial Park there’s very little grazing 
opportunity in a bog. The animals may get mired down, and we 
certainly don’t want that to happen. 
 
And it’s a very fragile area. As you pointed out rightly so 
earlier, livestock can be used as a management tool on 
grasslands. This is a bog which is much different. So we don’t 
anticipate any grazing in the bog area. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps 
you could give some consideration to people who raise moose 
or something. They are bog dwellers and perhaps they could 
find some browse in that particular area. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there any cost associated with bringing this 
piece of land under the park’s protection? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — No. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well always glad when the answer is no 
to cost. Hopefully the answers aren’t no to everything. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much land in Saskatchewan today is 
considered protected in comparison to where we were 5 or 10 
years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We can certainly provide more written 
detail a little later on that. But roughly about 5 per cent, give or 
take a bit, of the land base in Saskatchewan has some form of 
protection. And there’s about two or three dozen forms, ranging 
from provincial parks, ecological reserves, wildlife 
development fund land, Habitat Trust land, heritage marshes, 
Ducks Unlimited projects, community pastures, more recently. 
And as you will see, many of these parcels of land are 
multi-use, in particular with grazing. 
 
So we are at about 5 per cent. And as you are aware, the study 
which was done back in the ’80s determined — the Brundtlund 
Commission — that a minimum of 12 per cent of an ecosystem 
must be preserved to ensure species survival and diversity. So 
we have a long way to go. And we will continue to work 

towards this goal and are committed to do so, and this 140 acres 
is one more step in that direction. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What was the 
process by your department to declare a certain area protected, 
such as the Macdowall bog? And were requests made to you by 
the general public or by special interest groups or 
environmental groups to protect that particular piece of land or 
any other piece of land. How does that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — As I mentioned earlier, the Macdowall bog 
is a very unique area, a very small area, and it’s been familiar to 
scientists at the University of Saskatchewan, such as Vern 
Harms, Dr. Vern Harms, who has been studying the area for 
many years. And he, along with other people, have identified 
rare plants which are very rare in Saskatchewan; not found 
anywhere else in the province. 
 
And groups like Nature Saskatchewan, and local chapters in 
Saskatoon and Prince Albert, regularly visited this site because 
of its uniqueness, and so it’s because of their interest and 
knowledge of the area. And when the local people realized what 
they had there they also supported having the site designated. 
 
Now before we designate a site we do a lot of public 
consultation not only with the interest groups but also with the 
local people and the community, and right down to the lessee 
that may be affected. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the 
consultations, were all of those groups in favour of this, such as 
the local RM and the local producers, the lessee — if he 
maintained his lease I’m sure that then it wasn’t a problem. But 
were the local people in favour of this, such as the local RM? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — As near as we can gather right now it was 
overwhelming support. We did not hear any dissenting voices 
during our consultation process. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. You talk 
about it being a place of quite a number of rare plants, or at 
least rare in Saskatchewan. I wonder if you can give me an 
outline on what kind of rare plants were there and whether or 
not they are unique to Saskatchewan or whether those particular 
plants are just . . . their availability in Saskatchewan, or the fact 
that they are in Saskatchewan is just unique for Saskatchewan 
but there are significant numbers of them outside in some other 
location. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well this will be fun here. We do have a 
number of rare plant species found here. All of these are rare in 
Saskatchewan; some are rare nationally. And I’ll try to 
pronounce some of them such as the narrow-leaved sundew, 
northern twayblade, hairlike beak-rush, common butterwort, 
prickly salaginella, American bog rush, white adder’s-mouth 
orchid, glaucous grass-of-parnassus, bog adder’s-mouth orchid, 
and slender spike rush. 
 
So these plants all require very moist conditions and a very high 
groundwater level. And like I say, we don’t have that many 
areas like this in Saskatchewan. And at the same time they can’t 
be sitting in water, so the conditions are very unique. And that’s 
what makes this area and this 57 hectares — 2, 4, 6, 8, here’s 10 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

species alone which are considered to be rare in Saskatchewan, 
and some of them are rare in Canada. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could give me the Latin names for those. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate which ones are 
unique to Saskatchewan and not in the rest of Canada, or are 
rare in say perhaps Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Alberta, and 
which ones are rare across all of North America. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — I don’t have that breakdown on the 
pamphlet here, but again we can provide that to you. And we’ll 
also provide the Latin names and I’ll have you read them back 
to me. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I should have 
you know that I did some reading in Latin when I was an altar 
boy, so it won’t be the first time I’ve read Latin. 
 
Mr. Minister, does the bog have a useful purpose at present 
such as being available for recreation purposes, being available 
for hunting? Are there restrictions to who can have access to it, 
or is it available to the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The area is closed to hunting and also 
off-road vehicle access for obvious reasons. Certainly anyone is 
allowed to go out there. It’s illegal to pick and transport these 
rare plants out obviously, and there will certainly be no 
development such as picnic sites or anything like that which 
could infringe on the area. 
 
It’s basically a scientific site, and people who are really 
interested in plants can go out there and observe these plants 
and make note of them. But for the general public there will be, 
there is access, but there’s no facilities to encourage public 
access at that time. There’s no recreational opportunities, like I 
say, picnic sites or trails per se. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Will there 
be any consideration given to allowing hunting in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Again you make reference to the hunting. 
Because it’s very inaccessible bog soil, there’s hunting around 
the area but basically there’s very few hunting opportunities in 
the bog. For an example, much of the area would be too soft to 
even carry a deer across it so we have no intentions of opening 
up a season on common snipe which might be in the area, or 
anything like that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well I think most of the sniping, Mr. 
Minister, takes place in here, not out in the bog. 
 
Mr. Minister, my researcher has asked me to ask you to explain 
a term called calcareous fen. I wonder if you could explain that 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well whereas many of the bogs in Canada 
are acid-based bogs, and calcareous means it’s 
calcium-limestone based, again which makes this particular area 
unique. And from the productivity of an area for organisms, the 
calcium-based bogs are much more productive, usually contain 
a greater variety of plant and animal species. 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess that 
bog is safe then unless we get acid rain. Mr. Minister, you 
talked about various plant life in the bog that is rare. Are there 
any endangered animals that might also be using that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — At this stage in the game, the scientists 
have only really had an opportunity to look at the flats in the 
area, but certainly this, over the years, and by protecting the 
area, we will ensure the opportunity is down the road to 
examine the insect life at the bog, and plant and animal species. 
 
And obviously bogs are an important area for frogs, and on a 
global scale frogs are in trouble including in Saskatchewan here 
in some areas. Their numbers are declining; we’re not just sure 
for all the reasons yet. 
 
Again the whole purpose of setting this aside is that we will be 
able to do more studies and find out that there is other unique 
and rare species there in the form of insects, amphibians, and 
such like. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps one 
of the other potentially endangered animals in Saskatchewan 
that might use that is the moose. 
 
Mr. Minister, you added two additional parcels of land to the 
park system with the 3,200 acres at Douglas Park. With 141 
acres of Macdowall bog, are you looking at any further 
purchases or any acquisitions or additions of land to the park 
system in the near future? And if so, what parcels of land do 
you have in mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We do not have any specifics to inform you 
about right now, but part of our representative areas network is 
flagging unique native natural areas throughout the province. 
Some of these may abut a provincial park, and as such, we 
might decide the best way to protect this area is to . . . or 
classify the area is to put it in with a provincial park. 
 
But we are, as I say, working community pastures and all 
wildlife agencies and agriculture community as well to try to 
complete our representative areas network. As you’re probably 
aware, we announced 1.8 million acres of PFRA pastures as 
qualifying for an example of our representative areas network. 
This shows that agriculture and wildlife can and will work 
together, and we’re very appreciative of the landowners, the 
lessees, and PFRA in particular in achieving this goal. 
 
(1600) 
 
So with 2.2 million people using our parks every year, parks are 
very important to people, and we will continue to add to parks 
where we can and improve opportunities for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. It is 
indeed important that we maintain an ecological system that 
allows those of us who live in the cities to get out and observe 
the plants and animals in their natural habitat. And it’s equally 
important for those of us who live out in the country to maintain 
some of that habitat and to also have access to it in other areas. 
 
But I do have a concern when it comes to the interaction of 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

agriculture and the parks and the environment, and as I 
expressed earlier, I think it’s very important that we do continue 
to have grazing as part of the management process on a number 
of these lands. And that grazing process should not be unduly 
restrictive as it seems to be becoming in some circumstances, 
and we’ll talk about that later under estimates. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think that these will be valuable additions to 
the parks in Saskatchewan and I look forward to perhaps 
visiting them some day and standing along that railroad track, 
but not in the bog. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well thank you very much and I appreciate 
your support. The environment, natural areas are very important 
to the people of Saskatchewan whether we are rural or urban. 
And we are very happy to have this announcement here in this 
session of the legislature. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, welcome to you and to your officials. Nice to be here 
this afternoon. 
 
I just have a couple of questions that you could comment on, 
Mr. Minister. I wasn’t in the House earlier so I’m not sure that 
you covered any of this, but maybe you could answer a few 
questions anyway. 
 
One is regarding, I guess, regarding the moose population in 
north-eastern Saskatchewan. I wonder if you could comment on 
some of the numbers that your surveys are finding and what 
you’re planning on doing with that for the coming hunting 
season. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well it simply . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Before we carry further, all general 
questions should be under clause 1 and we are now past that. 
We are on clause no. 5 which is the Macdowell bog, and 
questions have to be related to that. Now if the member would 
like to ask leave of the committee to go back to clause 1, then 
he could do that. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would ask the 
leave of the Assembly to ask some general questions under 
clause 5. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So I think the 
minister heard my question. Mr. Minister, would you care to 
respond to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, it’s certainly no 
secret that there was a lot of hunting pressure on moose 
populations in north-east Saskatchewan and the Hudson Bay 
area — I guess east-central Saskatchewan you might say. 
 

What our aerial surveys have shown that wherever there is road 
access where people could have easy access into an area, the 
moose population was down. But once you got back 20 miles or 
whatever from these areas, our moose population was fairly 
good. 
 
Now to counteract that, of course we have eliminated the use of 
lights for night hunting. And there’s no other real opportunity to 
hunt at night other than with the use of lights, so we’ve closed 
that door. We are also working with Indian bands in the 
Cumberland area for an example. They are equally concerned 
about the demise of the moose population as is everyone else. 
And we hope to, by this fall, have some way of getting a better 
handle on the number of animals shot, who was hunting in a 
particular area, and the number of animals being taken out of an 
area. 
 
So this will be an ongoing effort with first nations people 
wherever there are problem areas in the province and we will 
pursue these with every opportunity. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you. Do the numbers appear greater in 
north-western Saskatchewan in the numbers of moose than they 
do in north-eastern or north-central Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — That is correct. Our surveys in the divide 
forest in the west side of the province actually showed a slight 
increase in moose numbers, as did our surveys in Moose 
Mountain Provincial Park and Duck Mountain Provincial Park. 
We’re very pleased with this information. So basically, except 
for where there are roads and access, the numbers are stable or 
up a little, which is very encouraging. 
 
Our goal and mandate is to manage this resource and not let it 
be put in severe jeopardy, and we will continue to do that. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Minister, are those survey numbers that 
you have, are those made public at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, the information is public 
and we will supply you with the copy of the results that we’ve 
come up with in this past winter. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much. I’ll be looking forward 
to seeing those numbers. Just a question regarding the numbers, 
and of course some six to twelve months ago you and your 
department, your government I guess, Mr. Minister, received a 
great deal of pressure from individuals right across this 
province. And certainly we were happy to pass on concerns 
through petitions and those types of things that we had out 
across especially northern Saskatchewan, north-eastern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What kind of damage was there done to the wildlife population 
from people coming across the border from Manitoba into 
eastern Saskatchewan, people coming across the border from 
Alberta, and certainly people coming up across the American 
border into southern Saskatchewan, looking at areas like the 
Cypress Hills for example. Any estimate on numbers of animals 
that were lost, that went out of this province, whether it be to 
Manitoba, Ontario, Alberta, or the northern States? 
 
The Chair: — Order. I want to remind the hon. member that 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

we are on Bill No. 9. The estimates of Committee of Finance 
where these questions may be more relevant will be coming up 
as soon as we report out of here. And I would ask that these 
questions be maybe held until Committee of Finance and we’ll 
go back to the Bill No. 9. Committee of Finance will come up 
later in the day and those questions are certainly relevant for 
that time, but not relating to Bill No. 9 
 
Okay, so we will continue with Bill No. 9. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman of 
Committees. I’d like to thank the minister and his officials for 
coming in today and for answering our questions, and I look 
forward to their written responses on some of those questions, 
including the pronunciation of the Latin names. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9  The Parks Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(1615) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Chair: — I would ask, before we start, the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have sitting 
beside me here Les Cooke, associate deputy minister; behind 
me, Shelly Vandermey, executive director of corporate services; 
next to her, Dennis Sherratt, a director of fish and wildlife; and 
back in my chair, Dave Tulloch, a team leader of corporate 
development unit. 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and his officials. Just a few comments I’d like to get 
into at this early stage, and we’ll certainly get into some debate 
later on. But I was listening with keen interest to the debate just 
a few moments ago in the Assembly in regards to fencing and 
grazing of Crown lands and management of property. 
 
And one of the concerns that’s been raised on a number of 
occasions when it comes to grazing, and it’s certainly 
something . . . And I’m pleased to see Mr. Sherratt still 
involved because we’ve chatted with him about this for an 
awful long time; about the fact of the wildlife development 

funds and the number of lands that they’ve purchased over the 
years, and the fact that there’s been a real reluctance to move 
into allowing for controlled grazing on those properties. And I 
was pleased to hear some of the comments earlier on, talking 
about a move in that area. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, in regards to wildlife land 
and control grazing, how far the department is going in 
addressing this concern and where we’re at today and whether 
or not, as lands are certainly purchased through the wildlife 
development fund, one of the . . . I know in the . . . a colleague 
from Canora indicated his son actually got a summer job last 
year just running around and pulling down fences. So that took 
away the opportunity to just put livestock on wildlife 
development land. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can kind of explain 
where we are, if there is a program in place to address some of 
these concerns, how much land might be accessible through 
control grazing. And especially in view of the fact that this 
spring already is a strong indication, unless we get some real 
significant rainfall in the very near future, certainly the area I 
represent, a lot of that we were fortunate we had a late winter 
snowfall that’s added some moisture. But there’s a good portion 
of the province that isn’t as fortunate, and chances are that we 
could have some shortfalls when it comes to grazing areas. 
 
And what is the department currently doing? Where are you at 
as far as addressing some of these concerns when it comes to 
wildlife development land and allowing controlled grazing, and 
what kind of consultations have gone forward with even the 
wildlife organizations in addressing this concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In response to 
the question, we do have a number of parcels of wildlife 
development fund land for an example, scattered throughout the 
province. Currently haying is allowed on about 40,000 acres, 
and certainly this is beneficial to the surrounding landowners as 
well. 
 
We have not ruled out the idea of grazing on some of our 
grassland quarters. And we are working with SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) groups, 
like the wildlife federation, to determine how this might best be 
done. Obviously there could be a demand in an area. We need 
to know how to select individuals to go on there. We may not 
want grazing all year, so we may look at things like electric 
fences, temporary fencing to accommodate grazing in an area. 
 
I might add too, that we’re also in the process of developing 
lure crops on lands where wildlife damage is prevalent year 
after year. 
 
So we certainly want to work with the agriculture community, 
and certainly will be continuing on with activities such as 
haying. But we have not reached the threshold yet where we 
will be opening up our wildlife development fund lands for 
grazing at this time, but we certainly haven’t ruled it out either. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
would certainly encourage you to continue the process. I know 
it’s been a long, arduous process discussing this because there’s 
individuals on both sides of the issue that have real strong 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

feelings as to whether you should graze or allow grazing, or 
whether or not it should be no access to grazing whatsoever. 
 
But I personally feel that there can be a number of benefits with 
some controlled grazing. I think there are benefits that could be 
brought into wildlife lands and certainly, even environmentally 
speaking, in the province when it comes to those lands. 
 
Mr. Minister, you mentioned about haying. Has your 
department looked at haying on the basis . . . Do you sell the 
hay? Do you basically tender out the haying and sell all the 
hay? Or have you looked at means whereby you would 
maintain and have some of the hay so that . . . you just talked 
about lure crops. I think in some areas if you had access to and 
especially wildlife lands, if you had some available, even 
towards the centre of a quarter or an area that is wildlife land, if 
you had some hay available there it may be a means of 
providing hay and feed for wildlife if winter tends to be a rough 
winter. 
 
Now this past winter was not a rough winter, so as a result we 
certainly didn’t have the damage to vehicles, at least in my area, 
that I’ve seen in the past. Although in fact I think most people 
were beginning to think that we didn’t have hardly any deer left 
around until just even less than a month ago, and it’s surprising 
how many deer are showing up, coming out of the bush. So it 
indicates that we still have a pretty good population out there. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I guess the issue and the question has been 
raised for quite a long period of time. Rather than waiting and 
finding out maybe you’re short and maybe there’s a need for 
some feed supplies, does your department maintain some of the 
feed stocks and store them for that purpose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Again, every case where haying is 
conducted, it would depend upon the type of hay. And native 
grasses, which is much of our WDF (wildlife development 
fund) land, is not very appetizing to deer, such as second-cut 
alfalfa would be, so in those cases we would probably sell the 
hay to the farmer. 
 
However, if there’s a lure crop and we hire a farmer to operate 
that for us, we would, if there was deer in the area and crop 
damage was an issue, we would take a crop share of that alfalfa. 
And in other cases, we’d have to actually go out and purchase 
food which would be attractive for deer. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess that’s 
one of the strong cases in point of allowing some of the grazing 
by domesticated animals. Because certainly wildlife like new 
growth and that opens up that opportunity. 
 
When you’re talking about lure crops, and I think you may 
remember some of the debate even last year, and I raised the 
question about cultivation and planting . . . putting some 
contained crop like alfalfa on some wildlife land and using that 
not only as a lure crop but in possibly haying part of it rather 
than letting it grow old, and maintaining, even on a share basis 
. . . so that department has access to some good quality feed if 
that’s needed. Is that what you’re talking when you’re talking 
lure crops? Are you talking, on wildlife development lands, 
some marginal cultivation to put a lure crop right on that piece 
of property or are you talking lure crops outside the boundaries 

of wildlife land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We have about 20,000 acres of alfalfa on 
lands. Quite often we buy a quarter section and maybe 40 acres 
cultivated. So what we would do in that cultivated land, we’d 
seed oats and get our cover crop, and then have the alfalfa there. 
And we lease this out on a long-term basis with the landowners 
and they will re-seed it every five, ten years, whatever the case 
might be. So it’s actually right on wildlife development fund 
land. And we aren’t about to go and break up native prairie, for 
an example, to grow alfalfa, but wherever there is cultivated 
acres we will seed that down if there is certainly a need for lure 
crops and winter feed for wildlife. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And in regards to 
the fact that you’re talking of certainly cultivated areas on a 
parcel of property that you may be purchasing, I certainly think 
that’s appropriate. And I commend the department officials for 
their initiative in recognizing this not only meets the need of 
feed supply but also derives some revenue to meet some of the 
other, ongoing needs. 
 
But I would certainly encourage the officials as well to not rule 
out the fact that there may be parcels and property that can 
come up or you may end up with substantial wildlife damage in 
surrounding properties. Just because it doesn’t have any 
cultivated areas on . . . just adding some of that, it’s possible . . . 
and using that as the lure, as the basis for a lure crop, rather 
than asking landowners to put that up beside. So I’m just 
bringing forward that as some recommendations and 
suggestions for your department to follow up on. 
 
Mr. Minister, another area I’d like to move into a little bit, and 
that’s in regards to the whole area of elk and wild game farming 
in the province of Saskatchewan. Just recently we met with 
individuals from the Elk association. And some of the questions 
they were raising; and there are some arguments, they’re 
bringing some arguments forward, about moving the 
domesticated elk or farming elk into the area of the Department 
of Agriculture, outside of SERM. And we had a bit of 
discussion with the Minister of Agriculture the other day. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, in regards to the concerns that are 
being raised, some of the issues that are coming forward — and 
I’m sure that you and your department officials have been also 
approached — what is the department doing? And what are 
some of the reasonings for it that the department would be 
taking certain initiatives, and especially not recognizing or 
allowing the move of domesticated elk into the agricultural 
field, as it has certainly become a very major agricultural 
economic base in the province of Saskatchewan? And I think 
that the producers are looking at that as agricultural economy 
versus wildlife. And so where is the department in regards to 
some of those issues that have been raised? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you for the question. This is a very 
timely topic. As you’re well aware, we are developing a game 
farming policy for Saskatchewan. To give you a bit of history, 
back about 10 years ago or so when game farming became 
established, it was totally managed by SERM. And over the 
years Agriculture — and rightly so — had an interest in the 
industry, marketing meat and identification of animals and such 
like. 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

And as my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, pointed out 
last week, SERM has a very valid role in the game farm 
industry. We will be continuing to be a participant in the 
management of the industry, and we have a good working 
relationship with the executive of the elk breeders association. 
We’ll be meeting again with them this week on this. 
 
And as you rightly pointed out also, the game farm industry has 
certainly flourished. And I believe it’s certainly, in part, to the 
responsible approach that we have taken to the industry. Now 
some critics may say that the industry has been hampered, but I 
don’t know how you can say an industry has been hampered, 
growth has been hampered, when we see roughly a 20 per cent 
increase in the industry every year. 
 
(1630) 
 
And what we want to ensure, along with the Department of 
Agriculture and the game farming association, elk ranchers, elk 
breeders association, is that we have the best guidelines in 
place, because people have a lot of money invested in game 
farming. We want to . . . We do not want to take any risks about 
the introduction of disease, and we want to see the industry 
continue to grow. 
 
We have a valid interest in the industry and we will maintain a 
presence there and work with the Department of Agriculture 
and the landowners as well as the associations as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, when it 
comes to wildlife . . . or I shouldn’t say wildlife but game 
farming in the province of Saskatchewan, and certainly the area 
of elk management and the elk herds that are progressing in the 
province, and certainly growing in the province, I think 
Saskatchewan probably leads the way, if I’m not mistaken, in 
the number of producers. 
 
But there are some issues that arise as well in regards to 
boundaries and some of the limitations, some of the concerns in 
regards to transporting game animals across provincial 
boundaries. And I don’t know if . . . where we have some very 
stringent limitations in regards of bringing Alberta elk in. I 
know there are some concerns coming out of Ontario yet. I’m 
wondering what restrictions are still in place. And if there are 
limitations in place in regards to the movement of elk 
interprovincially in Canada at this time and what they are, and 
the reasons that would be there in regards to those restrictions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Because of the potential for disease, 
various provinces have protocols, controls on, and a number of 
years ago — I guess perhaps because of lax regulations — 
Alberta had a large die-off, infection . . . not infection, but a 
die-off of elk from TB (tuberculosis). At least the animals had 
to be put down and it cost the taxpayers a lot of money. 
 
Saskatchewan, we are very fortunate that disease has not been 
prevalent. We’ve had a few isolated cases. We’ve acted on them 
very quickly and we were able to, because of our record 
keeping, determine where the elk came from and where the 
infection may spread to. And we want to certainly maintain 
that. 
 
One of the more controversial issues right now is the 

importation of elk from Ontario, and I think that many of the 
elk breeders will currently agree that we do not want elk 
coming in. There’s a potential for two diseases to be transported 
into Saskatchewan, and what we are doing is, through 
Agriculture Canada and other sources, developing a form of 
testing the animals for the presence of these diseases before we 
bring them in. We hope to have that in place within a year. And 
for those who have purchased elk in Ontario and cannot bring 
them home, we certainly sympathize with them, but at the same 
time we want to protect the stock that we do have here. 
 
As it stands now, Alberta and Saskatchewan are not even 
sending elk back and forth across the borders. We used to, but 
because of disease and other problems, the borders were closed. 
We’re hoping to open up the border with Alberta in the near 
future. 
 
And just another example of how our industry has expanded in 
the last 10 to 15 years, we have probably more elk behind 
fences in Saskatchewan than we do in the wild, which is around 
10,000 animals. So we again believe that this success has been 
largely attributed to the controls and monitoring and good 
protocol that we have and we want to continue to work with the 
industry to maintain those, and improve them if there are 
problems in certain areas. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if 
indeed there are some 10,000 animals in the wild, I think there 
are a number of hunters that are looking for refunds because 
I’ve talked to a number of individuals who haven’t . . . over the 
last few years have been drawn and haven’t even seen an 
animal; so they’re beginning to question suggestions that there 
are that many animals in the wild. 
 
But beyond that, Mr. Minister, when it comes to elk movement, 
are you saying that actually elk can move out of Saskatchewan 
quite freely? That the other provinces recognize that we’re . . . 
Basically the trade in elk, mostly is taking place within 
provinces and you’re currently working on a national testing 
program that will meet standards that everyone can agree on? 
That would certainly open up the doors down the road to allow 
for that interprovincial trade. Is that basically what you’re 
saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Again we are very fortunate here in 
Saskatchewan and I think it’s largely due to the responsible 
actions taken by our elk breeders and certainly the government 
as well. But we have the, probably one of the most disease free, 
highly sought after population of game animals here in 
anywhere in North America. And every province and state has 
its own protocol. 
 
Now for an example, the state of Montana, if an individual 
bought a Saskatchewan elk and Montana would allow it in, we 
would certainly allow the animal to go out. And with the 
exception of Alberta, pretty well the borders are open for 
Saskatchewan elk to go out. And this is because we basically 
have a very good protocol and are recognized as disease free, 
and we want to certainly keep it that way. 
 
The other angle for SERM’s involvement in game farming is 
that virtually every other jurisdiction, whether it’s the U.S. 
(United States) fish and wildlife service or the Government of 



April 20, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

Ontario or whatever, it is the wildlife departments that monitor 
this, and so that’s another argument for our presence to be 
maintained in the elk farming, game farming industry. And we 
certainly share our information with the Department of 
Agriculture and work very closely with them as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a 
question that has risen in recent months, and it was brought to 
my attention again yesterday, and I’m not sure how much your 
department . . . involvement your department has with this, but 
it’s in regards to DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) testing. 
 
And there’s a number of concerns in regards to the DNA testing 
of animals, trying to establish parentage and relationships with 
young to old, to identify them as that being the parent, whether 
it’s the male or the female. 
 
And there are a number of concerns in regards to the current 
testing, the fact that a number of breeders have sent material in 
for testing and they find that it’s coming back and it really 
doesn’t mean anything. It’s costing them an arm and a leg and 
they’re having some major problems with it. 
 
And I’m wondering if your department is involved at all or if 
. . . who’s managing this, and whether this is a concern that’s 
being raised with your department and how you’re approaching 
the whole issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — You made reference to the DNA testing. 
We’re not thoroughly familiar with that, but I understand that 
individual ranchers may approach the university to do some 
DNA testing. And DNA testing is pretty well foolproof to find 
out, you know, where your offspring might come from. 
 
One test that we do, and it’s not totally successful, is to check 
an elk for red deer genes. The two species can interbreed. And 
because red deer can interbreed with elk, we certainly do not 
want red deer in here because inevitably animals will escape. 
And even elk with red deer blood in them, we are concerned 
about that. And I believe many of the game farmers are as well, 
as they want to keep high quality, pure elk in their strain. 
 
So there is a test for that. It’s not totally foolproof when you get 
down to 10 per cent or so, but there’s always scientists working 
to improve testing capabilities and new approaches, and we will 
certainly be pursuing that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you’re saying then, Mr. Minister, your 
department really hasn’t been involved or hasn’t been asked for 
some direction in regards to some of the testing. It’s specifically 
taking place, individual producers with the lab at the university. 
And as far as the DNA testing, while we’d like to believe or 
we’re led to believe that it’s fail-proof and that it certainly 
meets the challenges out there, if it is, then something isn’t 
working right. 
 
And it’s an issue that is a major concern. I’ve chatted with — 
you’d know him quite well — I’ve chatted with Ryan Clark. I 
think he’s, of all the producers in this province, quite well 
known and has done a lot of research when it comes to elk 
production. He’s gone to other parts of the world where there’s 
a lot of game farming, to do some research. And raised the 
question with him as well. 

And I guess the concern that comes about is maybe how the 
testing is going on, how the markings are made. And 
unfortunately for the individual producers who have been trying 
to seek and identify parentage and the pureness of those 
animals, they haven’t had very positive results to date that I’m 
aware of. And I guess that’s why I was raising the issue, 
because I’m trying to find out where do I go to get some more 
information and try to determine . . . 
 
And I guess at the end of the day, is this an area that your 
department may find itself involved in, or have you been 
approached by the industry to set some guidelines or to at least 
give some direction as well? Or do we just go through 
Agriculture? How do we follow up and try to get more 
information as to the whole process of DNA testing and how it 
currently is evolving in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — There certainly is more work to be done on 
the DNA testing, as foolproof as it may appear on the surface. 
New Zealand is the most advanced country on DNA testing. We 
will be working with New Zealand in getting the newest 
information brought forward to us, and probably the 
Department of Agriculture will be leading on that, although 
we’ll certainly be working with them on it. 
 
Just getting back to the red deer testing, one of the reasons that 
a Saskatchewan elk may sell for $40,000 and an Ontario elk for 
$10,000 is because of the red deer blood in the elk, and as I 
mentioned earlier, the pure elk are much more valuable than the 
hybrids and so that’s why we have the red deer test. And if we 
are suspicious that there may be red deer blood in a shipment of 
elk from somewhere, we’ll do that test and act accordingly. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if you’re 
offering $40,000 for a bred female, I’d say sold. I’m not sure — 
I know there are some animals out there — but the general is 
still more the range of the 20 to 25, and I’m still waiting to 
make a little profit on the animals I’ve got and I guess hoping 
the industry holds up a little bit. One of the challenges certainly 
facing the industry I think this year is the uncertainty about the 
Asian velvet market. They haven’t seen the Asian buyers come 
on stream since the downturn in their economy. Usually it’s 
about June when they start marketing. 
 
And I know there are some concerns out there right now 
because they’re really uncertain as to what they may see when it 
comes to the velvet market, but certainly the elk industry I think 
is here, as we’ve see in the bison sector. And one thing about 
the bison people, they have gone a step further to the fact that a 
lot of the product that they are making available now is being 
used for human consumption. They’re developing quite a 
market. 
 
And I’m not sure if down the road that may not be an area the 
elk industry may have to find some means as well, other than 
the breeding stock, because it seems we’ve seen it in the past 
with livestock coming in from Europe. And a lot of the animals 
that came in from Europe a number of years ago, and the high 
prices, and you reach a saturation point and you reach a point 
where the industry basically levels out, and then you have to 
find some other means to derive the revenue. 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 1998 

So I know that the industry is going through a number of 
changes, and there are a number of concerns out there. And I 
would just encourage your department just to . . . and pleased, I 
guess, as well to say that we’ve enjoyed chatting with the elk 
association certainly and the bison association and they’ve 
indicated they have been more than pleased with the 
involvement and the year they’ve had from your department 
and we’d commend you for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a number of other issues that I’d like to 
get into as well. Unfortunately I have a commitment in a few 
moments — actually not just a few moments, but it may be just 
a few moments and I don’t want to, don’t want to just cut my 
time on highway traffic. I’m not exactly sure if there’s 
somebody might be out watching, and you know how public 
officials are — you better make sure you allow enough time. So 
in order to allow my schedule to work out, I certainly would 
look forward to addressing you at a later date but I believe the 
member from North Battleford has a few questions he’d like to 
raise this afternoon as well that he can follow up on. 
 
Thank you so much. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and your officials. 
I’d first of all like to ask you if you can give me an update on 
the Meeting Lake community pasture, which I understand there 
is a process in place for it to be moved into treaty land 
entitlement. Can you tell me where that is at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And in response 
to the hon. member from Battleford, yes. The Meeting Lake 
pasture is in the process of being converted to . . . as part of a 
TLE (treaty land entitlement) and reserve status. We will get 
you a written response on that, but as near as I can recall, the 
pasture patrons have agreed to the process and I understand that 
there will be some kind of a leaseback. But we’ll get you more 
details on that. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, may I also inquire, 
and perhaps this would be in your written response, but I have 
to say that in regard there and the Bapaume pasture, I am 
receiving reports which frankly I’m in no position to assess, to 
the effect that patrons are being offered sizeable payment in 
exchange for a yes vote on the TLE process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — As with all of the TLE processes, it’s up to 
the band to decide how much they will pay for to get access to a 
particular parcel of land. If the lessee is prepared to be 
bought-out, I guess so be it, but that is the process. And again,, 
we can give you an update status on the Bapaume pasture as 
well. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — But basically what you are saying is that if, if a 
first nation chooses to offer a payment to the patrons, then 
that’s no different than say if they were buying private farm 
land and they’re offering a purchase price. It’s on the same level 
and that is completely in order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — That is correct. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Minister, I am receiving complaints to the 
effect that some people are sitting on outfitter leases that they’re 
doing nothing with. And that for the payment of $250 a year, 

which is of course a very small token payment, large amounts 
of land are sitting there, nothing is being done with them, and 
other people who would be interested in getting into outfitting 
are prevented from doing so because there is no lease land 
available. And furthermore, the people who are sitting on these 
$250 leases are demanding payments of hundreds and hundreds 
of thousands of dollars before they will assign their leases. 
 
So the effect is that we have large tracks of land being tied up 
for a mere $250 that could be productive in the sense of 
allowing the outfitting industry to progress in this province. 
And I wonder if you would comment on that if this is a valid 
concern or not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Yes, certainly what you have identified is a 
problem in certain areas. This fortunately is not widespread but 
what we have is a handful of outfitters that have a lease on a 
parcel of land, as you indicated, and for whatever reason they’re 
not using the property. 
 
At the same time, we have people wanting to get into the 
outfitting business. So what we are doing . . . And we’ve had a 
very good working relationship with the Saskatchewan 
Outfitters Association and we are looking at protocol and how 
we might deal with these problems. For an example, if an 
outfitter does not use his lease for three years in a row, what is 
the reason and why is he hanging on to it? 
 
So we want to work with the outfitting industry to try to come 
up with a standard resolution to these problems. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members on 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Centre: 
 

That the names of Ms. Suzanne Murray and Mr. Buckley 
Belanger be substituted for that of Ms. Pat Lorje and Mr. 
Jack Hillson on list of members composing the Standing 
Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................661 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................661 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................661 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................661 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................661 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................661 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................661 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................661 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................661 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................661 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................662 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................662 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................662 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................662 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................662 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................662 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................662 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................663 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................663 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Volunteer Recognition Awards Banquet 
  Langford ....................................................................................................................................................................................663 
 Saskatchewan Volunteer Recognition 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................663 
 Saskatchewan Film Industry Expanding 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................663 
 Passing of Lawrence Yew 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................664 
 Restoration of Legislative Building 
  Flavel..........................................................................................................................................................................................664 
 Party Leaders Elected 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................664 
 Meadow Lake Tribal Council Victorious at Indian Winter Games 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................665 
 High School Drama Awards 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................665 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Regional Hospital Emergency Services 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................665 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................665 
 SaskPower Proposed Investment in Guyana 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................666 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................666 
 Possible Sale of Crown Life 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................667 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................667 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................667 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................667 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................669 
 Children's Advocate’s Inquiry 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................669 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................669 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Canadian Wheat Board and Canadian National Railway Settlement 
  Bradley.......................................................................................................................................................................................669 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................670 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................670 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 211 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1998 (Block Funding) 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................671 
 Bill No. 212 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1998 (Fully Elected Health Boards) 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................671 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................671 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 24 — The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1998 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................671 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................671 
 Bill No. 25 — The Pipelines Act, 1998 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................672 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................672 
 Bill No. 26 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................673 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................673 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 19 — The Physical Therapists Act, 1998 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................674 
 Bill No. 1 — The Arts Board Amendment Act, 1998 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................675 
 Bill No. 15 — The Gas Inspection Amendment Act, 1998 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................676 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 9 — The Parks Amendment Act, 1998 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................677 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................677 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................683 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 9  The Parks Amendment Act, 1998 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................684 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management — Vote 26 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................688 
MOTIONS 
 Substitution of Member's on Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................688 
 
 


