





























































Hansard: October 21, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2061 
 October 21, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present to open this sitting. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately repair and pave the gravel portion of Highway 
No. 349. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Archerwill. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I have a petition 
to present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1999, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
These folks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come from Robsart, Biggar, 
Consul, and Gull Lake; and those towns and communities like 
Maple Creek and that surrounding area. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise to present petitions 
asking the provincial government to reroute Highway 40 to 
alleviate the dangerous and confusing entrance to the city of 
North Battleford, and to correct the congestion at the entrance 
to the city of North Battleford. 
 
Your petitioners come from Cochin, Maymont, Battleford, and 
North Battleford. I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
regulate SaskPower and SaskEnergy so as to require them 
to provide electricity and natural gas at affordable rates for 
non-profit municipal recreation facilities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, with the inevitability that winter’s on its way, the 
petitioners from the communities of Imperial and Liberty are 

very concerned about the cost of the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member 
knows that no added comments — just the prayer is all to be 
read. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for reminding me of 
that. However the people, the concerned people on this petition 
are from the communities of Imperial and Liberty, and I so 
present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk:  According to order a petition regarding the 
relocation of Highway 40 to alleviate congestion at the entrance 
to North Battleford presented on October 20, 1998 has been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) is found to be irregular and 
therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed, 
and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 
praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to regulate SaskPower and SaskEnergy so 
as to require them to provide electricity and natural gas at 
affordable rates for non-profit municipal recreation 
facilities; and finally of citizens humbly praying that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to act to save the Plains 
Health Centre. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 73 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

For the Minister of Education and the Minister of 
Economic Development: when does your government 
intend giving recognition to the 20-year-old creation of a 
graphical form of communications designed by Rosetown 
speech pathologist Subhas Maharaj; do you intend to put 
the idea to use for our hearing and speech impaired as 
others around the world already have; or do you intend 
waiting until the patented technology is taken south to the 
U.S. (United States) and then bringing it back later with 
our devalued dollars? 
 

I so present, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud today to 
present to you, through you and to you the members of this 
Assembly, a supporter of mine. 
 
Now you may find it odd — this supporter is not from the 
constituency of Arm River. He’s actually from the constituency 
of Wood River. So that’s, Mr. Speaker, how far spread my 
support is. 
 
I would, however, like the Assembly to please make welcome 



2062 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

an employee of the Shaunavon Co-op system and my 
son-in-law from Shaunavon, Mr. James Bateman. Please make 
him welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the legislature 
a very good friend, a long-time friend of mine seated in your 
gallery, Ron Filleul. 
 
Ron and I worked together at the Wheat Pool for quite a 
number of years. We actually ran together at noon hours out of 
the YMCA (Young Men’s Christian Association). And I miss 
those runs, Ron, and I miss the many hours of good talk we had, 
although usually while we were running I was too busy huffing 
and puffing and trying to keep up with Ron. 
 
In addition to being my friend, Ron is president of the CNIB, 
Canadian National Institute for the Blind, in Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming Ron Filleul. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like 
to join with my colleague and those in the House here today in 
welcoming James to the House. It’s nice to see you . . . 
whenever you have a constituent that is also a supporter come 
to visit, so I welcome you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Closure of Plains Health Centre 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you. 
 
In a few short days this Premier and his New Democratic 
government will be closing the Plains hospital, referred to as the 
people’s hospital. Liberal leader Jim Melenchuk, Darlene 
Sterling, Lenore Schmelling, and the Save the Plains 
Committee, along with the Liberal caucus, fought a long and 
difficult battle to keep this much-needed hospital open for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
To our caucus it was like a medical team working to save a 
healthy patient with years of productive life ahead. But we are 
soon going to lose this patient which was responsible for so 
many miracles. The death of this hospital makes absolutely no 
sense whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I call on my colleagues and all members 
of this Assembly and all the people of rural Saskatchewan to 
rise and join with me in a moment of silence in honour of this 
great hospital. 
 

Moosomin Girl Picked for Midget Hockey Team 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’d just like to take a moment this afternoon to 
recognize the achievements of a 14-year-old hockey player 

from the community of Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the interesting thing we have here is that 
Cindy Leslie is one of 190 girls that were invited to a camp to 
pick out the midget hockey team in the province of 
Saskatchewan to represent our province at the Canada Winter 
Games in Corner Brook, Newfoundland. 
 
What we find, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Cindy at 14 is actually 
being asked to compete in an age level one level higher than 
hers. Of the 190, she was down to that 40 select few that were 
called for that last camp, and of that 40, she became one of the 
Team Canada midget players. 
 
And I would like to congratulate Cindy Leslie and ask the 
members to join with me in congratulating Cindy and wishing 
our midget team well at the Canada Winter Games. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Synchrotron Light Source Project 
 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Today I want to shed some light in this Assembly — light that 
is a million times more intense than any medical x-rays. I’m 
referring to the University of Saskatchewan’s Canadian Light 
Source (Synchrotron project). 
 
As of yesterday, Saskatchewan was one step closer building a 
home for the first synchrotron facility. The Canada Foundation 
for Innovation, also referred as the CFI, is the key federal 
funding agency and has selected Saskatoon’s synchrotron 
project as one that will be examined more closely while it 
makes its final decision in awarding research grants. 
 
The U of S (University of Saskatchewan) synchrotron project 
has asked the CFI to supply the final $71 million required for 
the project to go ahead. By moving to the final stage of review 
process, most in the scientific community are optimistic funding 
will be approved. 
 
There’s wide-spread support across Canada for the Synchrotron 
to go ahead. Once it is in place it will save Canadian researchers 
over a million dollars a year because they no longer have to 
leave Canada. 
 
The research applications are broad and varied. They include 
both academic and industrial research in such areas as medicine, 
computers, physics, and biotechnology. And who knows, with a 
bit of luck, it may mean that the opposition parties no longer 
have to operate in the dark. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Athabasca Visit 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Seeing as 
Athabasca lacks any representation at this session, I thought I 
would tell about my visit to Athabasca this past summer. We 
canoed from just north of the Cluff Lake mine up into Lake 
Athabasca and across the southern shore of Lake Athabasca. 
For 14 days we didn’t see another human being, had no 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2063 

cellphone coverage and no radio coverage, and had not the 
faintest idea of what was going on in the world. 
 
The Athabasca sand dunes which cover hundreds of kilometres 
are one of the most beautiful but least visited parts of our 
province. The William River provides an incredible contrast 
with Sahara-like sand dunes on the west bank and northern 
forest on the east for approximately 100 kilometres. The 
Athabasca sand dunes stretch for another hundred kilometres 
along the south shore of the lake. 
 
The huge sand dunes rising above the northern landscape gives 
another worldly feeling to the area. For those who are not up to 
the trip but would like to see this incredible part of our 
province, Robin Karpan of Saskatoon has recently published a 
book entitled Northern Sandscapes with many beautiful 
pictures of this wonderful part of our province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wadena Condominium Project 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The member 
from Kelvington-Wadena has been practising her fiction writing 
skills by sending a letter around the province saying how much 
she dislikes Saskatchewan and how mistaken the people have 
been in exercising their democratic right to a free vote. 
 
Things are bad in Saskatchewan, she says. The people are 
sheep, she alleges. 
 
She is wrong, I suggest. 
 
The member has been so busy writing other parts of the 
province that she has neglected progress in her own 
constituency. So let me remind her of a story on page 1 of The 
Wadena News, September 30, 1998. 
 
There is a housing shortage in Wadena, the story goes. And as 
the member from Prince Albert Carlton suggested on Monday, 
steps are being taken to alleviate that shortage. 
 
Carolina Developments has confirmed plans to build a 
condominium project downtown, providing homes for those 
who desire condominium living downtown. The units will be 
pre-sold. This project will increase Wadena’s tax base and give 
prospective homeowners more options. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there has been so much good news in my 
constituency of Swift Current lately that I am very happy to 
share this bit of optimism with the member from Wadena. She 
needs it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Oktoberfest 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this week Humboldt is celebrating their annual 
Oktoberfest. Oktoberfest activities kicked off last Sunday with 
more than 20 accordion players jamming it up. 
 
Activities continued throughout the week with such things as a 

window display contest by downtown merchants; coffee and 
German cakes at the Wilkommen Centre; the beer tank gang 
entertaining at St. Elizabeth’s Hospital transition ward and the 
senior citizens’ hall; and much, much more. 
 
Festivities will wind up Saturday evening with a beer keg 
rolling contest and entertainment by the Little German Band. 
Dancing will follow with food, beer, and schnapps to sustain 
and energize everyone throughout the evening. 
 
Come, join in Humboldt’s celebration and enjoy a little bit of 
Germany in the heart of the Prairies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteer Recognition Awards 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I was 
pleased to attend the volunteer awards banquet in Saskatoon 
sponsored by Sask Sport, Sask Culture, and the Saskatchewan 
Parks and Recreation Association. The purpose of the banquet, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, was to honour volunteers who make 
possible the wide variety of community-based programs we 
enjoy in this province. 
 
And I would like to mention each recipient by name: Mr. Ved 
Arora of Regina was nominated by the Multilingual Association 
of Regina; Margaret Cugnet of Yorkton by the organization of 
Saskatchewan Arts Councils; Bob Ivanochko of Regina by the 
Regina Ethnic Pioneers Cemetery Walking Tour Society; 
Dianne Anderson of Regina by the Saskatchewan Canoe 
Association; Dale Clancy of Saskatoon by the Saskatchewan 
Amateur Wrestling Association; and Birdie Prosofsky of 
Regina by the Saskatchewan Ladies Golf Association; and 
finally Eugene Arcand of Saskatoon representing First Nations 
youth. 
 
In addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were two groups 
recognized for their contributions to volunteerism in 
Saskatchewan: the Mortlach Fiddlers and the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police Training Academy, Depot Division, for its 
contribution to fitness training in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, without volunteers, our provincial life 
would be greatly diminished and I congratulate these winners 
and the thousands of volunteers like them. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News for Weyburn 
 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
inform the Assembly today of good news items from the city of 
Weyburn in my constituency which is booming along quite 
nicely. 
 
As an example of the activity in Weyburn and as an indication 
of the confidence Weyburn people feel in our town, I’d like to 
point out that Weyburn City Council has been presented with 
and is considering a five-year capital plan which will enable us 
to sail into the 21st century. 
 
This capital plan calls for a total expenditure of around $18 



2064 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

million and includes a number of necessary projects: a fire hall 
workshop worth 2.7 million which is already under way; a 
water storage reservoir; a $3.2 million primary sewage lagoon; 
the transfer of city hall to a more adequate building; and 
improvements to the public library. 
 
These improvements are the city’s commitment to the future; a 
commitment that council feels comfortable in making. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, these proposed improvements to the city’s 
infrastructure are just one more illustration of how our province 
is growing. Congratulations to the city of Weyburn and their 
future plans. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Highways in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the Minister of Highways. Keeping in mind what 
the member from Swift Current just said, perhaps he should 
have read the article recently that appeared in the Foam Lake 
Review entitled, “New research program announced.” It said 
that Highway 310 from Foam Lake to Ituna will be used as a 
testing ground for tires. The article says: 
 

According to experts this is the only stretch of road in 
North American that contains all the potential tire hazards: 
potholes the size of volcanic craters; gravel ridges the size 
of Mount Everest; and carefully calibrated washboards; 
roaming wildlife; and plain old-fashioned broken 
pavement. 
 

Of course, this article was intended as a joke. However, it 
drives home a very serious problem. Saskatchewan highways 
are not safe to drive on thanks to NDP (New Democratic Party) 
neglect. 
 
Madam Minister, when are you going to do something about it? 
When are you going to fix Saskatchewan’s crumbling 
highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
I’m actually pleased to be able to rise to announce all of the 
work that we have been doing across this province on highways 
and transportation. We put in a 10-year plan started 2 years ago 
with a commitment of $2.5 billion over 10 years. 
 
We’ve been living up to that commitment as we’ve added 
additional money: $30 million last year, $20 million more in 
our budget this year, and because of the exceptionally good 
season we’ve even put in additional dollars into the 
transportation system this fall. 
 
I have been around this province and have certainly have seen a 
lot of construction done. And I have been in all areas of the 
province to see the number of kilometres that have been worked 
on on our primary and secondary system right across this 
province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
minister made commitments and she’s broken every one of 
them since she made it. Mr. Deputy Speaker, everywhere we go 
in this province, people say they have the worst highway in 
Saskatchewan. And it’s really hard to tell who’s right. 
 
So the Saskatchewan Party decided to hold a contest. We’re 
inviting people to phone in and tell us which is the worst 
highway in Saskatchewan. And you phone: 1-877-326-3652. 
And we’re going to start taking entries today. Then in the spring 
we’re going to send out a team of judges to decide; I’ll be one 
of the judges. In fairness, we’d like to ask the Minister of 
Highways if she’d also be one of the judges. After all it’s not 
like she’s busy actually fixing the highways so she may as well 
go on our worst highway tour with us. 
 
Madam Minister, will you be one of the judges in our Worst 
Highways in Saskatchewan contest? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have in our 
plan not only made the commitment in dollars, but we also have 
made the commitment to people in Saskatchewan to work on a 
number of the challenges that there are there in transportation, 
in good planning, and organized planning. 
 
Actually tomorrow I’ll be at another sod-turning for our 
commitment on twinning Highway No. 1 east. We’ll be doing 
that tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — A week or so ago I was in a constituency 
on the opening of the Outlook bridge — $11 million project. 
We’ve done upgrading of over 170 kilometres of rural 
highways affected by the changes in grain and rail 
transportation. We’ve done construction on the Athabasca road 
this year. We’ve done over 3,500 kilometres of highways and 
northern roads this season, have received dollars in upgrading 
and maintenance and preservation work. 
 
We are putting more dollars in. We are doing more planning 
than ever before . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, exactly, 
and we’ve had no help from the federal government. That is the 
one level in which we still have received zero help. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Commitments are meant to be kept not just spoken, and the 
minister’s already $82 million behind in her supposed 
commitment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you’re going to have a contest you have 
to have prizes. And we've come up with the perfect prize for the 
person who submits the worst highway in Saskatchewan. It’s a 
free wheel alignment from the Saskatchewan Party and a 
commitment to fix the highway from the Highways department. 
 
Now we can’t speak for the Highways department until after the 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2065 

next election. So we ask the minister, after we have selected the 
worst highway in Saskatchewan will you commit to fix that 
highway next spring? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe in two 
principles right here. If the people of Saskatchewan want to 
judge the road conditions, and if they want to judge where the 
biggest pothole was, it was the hole that these people made 
across from us in which we spend $2 million a day in interest 
trying to fix it. The huge deficit in which, where they took off 
fuel taxes when they couldn’t afford to do it and we’ve been 
still trying to repair that hole also. 
 
But if the Saskatchewan Party wants to hold a contest on this, I 
am sure that they can just do very fine at it. But my 
understanding is that their wheels have fallen off and they’re 
actually in the ditch. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Possible Job Action at Regional Colleges 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my questions are for the newly-appointed 
Minister of Post-Secondary Education. Just as we’ve gone 
through one labour dispute in this province it seems another one 
is fast approaching, one that could seriously affect many 
students in our province. 
 
Mr. Minister, over the last several weeks our caucus has 
literally been inundated with calls from concerned students and 
parents from six regional colleges in southern Saskatchewan, 
concerned that their school year is in jeopardy due to impending 
strike action by employees of those regional colleges. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand that the union has taken a strike vote 
and that as of last Friday negotiations between management and 
the union have ended. Mr. Minister, what are you doing to 
avoid strike action being taken? Will the students at these 
colleges, many of whom are taking their first year university 
classes, see their school year jeopardized by this latest labour 
dispute involving your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all to 
the member opposite, I want to reassure the students of 
Saskatchewan that are attending the regional colleges that we’re 
doing everything possible right now to ensure there is no strike 
and the continuation of classes. 
 
He is correct that strike notice was issued last Friday, October 
16. And the management, by formal response in a letter, 
acknowledged the strike notice but, I should say, have asked 
them back to the table. Negotiations to this point in time have 
gone very, very well and I’m convinced that we will find a 
resolution to this problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the minister 
needs to contact some of his own officials because negotiations 
have not gone very, very well. Your officials indicated last 
spring that there was a problem and that it required fixing and 
that your officials committed your government to ensuring that 

that problem was going to be fixed. 
 
We’re not even talking about a new contract, Mr. Minister. 
We’re talking about an old contract, which according to the 
union, came with the commitment by this government to settle 
long-standing issues outside of the last contract settlement. That 
never happened, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is our understanding that the strike vote taken 
by the union came back with a very strong strike mandate. Are 
you going to sit idly by while the student’s school year is put in 
jeopardy? What is the government prepared to do to avoid this? 
Will it be back-to-work legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again I want to reassure the member 
opposite and the students across the province who are attending 
the regional colleges that we are doing everything possible to 
resolve this dispute. 
 
I would disagree with the member that the discussions have not 
gone well. They’ve gone very well to this point in time. Again, 
myself and the Minister of Education as well will do what we 
can to ensure that we find resolution to this problem. And I’m 
convinced that that will happen. My most recent information 
tells me that they will both be back at the table very shortly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wheelchair Buses in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. My question is 
for the minister responsible for Disabilities. Mr. Minister, last 
month you entered cabinet with a brand new portfolio, that one 
of Disabilities minister. And you must be very disheartened 
now that you’ve heard that more than a third of the wheelchair 
buses in Saskatoon have been pulled off the road because of 
mechanical problems. The Saskatchewan Abilities Council says 
it’s a direct result of underfunding by the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are the wheelchair buses in Saskatoon being 
shut down and what are you doing about it? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
local issue in Saskatoon, as the member knows, where there is a 
transfer of the transit for the disabled program from the 
Abilities Council, and the city of Saskatoon had proposed to 
take it over, which resulted in inspections and audits and so 
forth. 
 
This program is approximately 20 years old. In our department 
we have been reviewing it for the past year because a lot of the 
vehicles that were originally provided are now wearing out and 
we need to look at a program for capital replacements. 
 
So we are working with communities to renew the program and 
there . . . the two things is capital and operating. The problem is 
too that these are very specialized vehicles. And if you have a 
problem, you have to place an order months in advance. So 
there is a problem and we’re working with people in Saskatoon 
to try to find a resolution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2066 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

Benefits Under Saskatchewan 
Aids to Independent Living Program 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that 
the people with disabilities in Saskatoon aren’t really very 
happy waiting while you renew and review policies. They are 
actually suffering. 
 
I have another question for the minister in charge of Social 
Services. Mr. Minister, why does your government discriminate 
against disabled people who are covered under SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance)? The Saskatchewan 
Aids to Independent Living program provides special assistance 
to people with long-term disabilities. However, if these persons 
are covered by SGI, they cannot access the SAIL 
(Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living) benefits until their 
SGI coverage runs out. 
 
Mr. Minister, if a disabled person is receiving coverage from 
Wawanesa or from The Co-operators, they are still entitled to 
SAIL benefits. Why is it that the only government insurance 
company — why is it that only the government insurance 
company is excluded from this? Why are you discriminating 
against this class of disabled people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I understand it, when 
people qualify for benefits from SGI pursuant to the programs 
they have, they would not necessarily qualify for the same 
benefits that might be provided through the SAIL program. And 
therefore when those benefits are provided by SGI, we expect 
that people will access those benefits but those benefits will 
then not also be provided through the SAIL program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, we’re not asking for special 
coverage. What we’re saying is there’s a problem with no-fault 
insurance because there is a cap on it. When it runs out even 
persons . . . it eventually runs out for people with disabilities, 
with permanent disabilities, and that’s a real problem, 
especially for people who’ve become disabled at a very early 
age. That’s what I am saying. Before that SGI coverage runs out 
these people should qualify for the SAIL benefits, and we’re 
saying that this is discriminating. When are you going to change 
this very unfair policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think that there’s any intention to 
be discriminatory. All we’re simply saying is that if people 
qualify for benefits pursuant to a policy that SGI has in place, 
there’s an expectation that people will access that. But if those 
services and those programs are not available under SGI, then 
SAIL is there to assist people. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the NDP 
were laying off 600 nurses, hospitals in the United States were 

recruiting them. Now a few years later the NDP has gone, oops, 
can you come back now please? We really need you nurses. 
 
Alberta realizes the severe nursing shortage and is doing 
something about it, Mr. Speaker. It’s offering cash to any nurse 
who recruits a new co-worker. Alberta is placing ads across the 
continent as far away as Houston, Texas to recruit new nurses 
as well. Other provinces don’t just say we’re going to hire more 
nurses, they’re actually doing something about it. 
 
Madam Minister, I know it’s hard to attract people when all you 
can offer is one of the country’s highest tax burdens, low 
morale, closed hospitals — like the Plains hospital that’s 
closing the end of this month — the possibility of quick 
burnout, and back-to-work legislation. 
 
But maybe, Madam Minister, could you tell us if you do have a 
plan, and what it might be to attract more nurses to 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for the 
question. What I can tell the member is that the spaces available 
for nurses’ training have been increased this fall. I believe the 
spaces have increased by some 30 positions in terms of 
availability of positions for students who are wishing to pursue 
the whole work field of nursing. 
 
The other point I can make is that I had the opportunity last 
night to meet with the members of the College of Nursing. And 
it’s interesting to see what’s happening across North America in 
terms of nursing shortages and also an overabundance of 
nurses. 
 
We . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Florida as a matter of fact. 
Florida. Because of changes that are taking place all across 
North America, there are some parts of North America that 
have shortages of nursing and other parts that have too many 
nurses. 
 
What I can tell the member is that our government in the 
summer of 1998 funded 200 more nursing positions, and I 
understand that all of those nursing positions have been filled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Madam Minister, maybe you can enlighten 
this House how long it takes for a nurse that goes into training 
this fall to be completed. What are you doing about the shortage 
of nurses now, and next year, and two years from now? 
 
Madam Minister, the way you treated SaskPower employees 
was an obvious threat to health care workers. However, they 
have said they will not be intimidated by the NDP’s heavy 
hand. The nurses have said they will not abide by your salary 
cap. 
 
If they ignore your wage controls, is your plan to order the 
nurses back to work as well? Is this part of your grand scheme 
to create a great working environment for our health care 
workers? And will this threat of back to work be in any of your 
government’s recruitment ads? 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the member did 
not hear the answer to my question . . . or to his question on 
Monday. 
 
What we indicated on Monday is that the Saskatchewan Union 
of Nurses collective agreement expires at the end of March of 
1999. We are not yet at the bargaining table. 
 
I can tell the member that we expect to see SAHO, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, bargain a 
collective agreement with all of the various health unions and 
we expect that those collective agreements will be arrived at in 
a mutually satisfactory manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Madam Minister, the SaskPower 
workers and SaskPower were very close — within a part of a 
percentage point — of coming to an agreement and your cabinet 
legislated them back to work. 
 
So why are you going through the charade of letting SAHO 
waste time and money bargaining with the health care workers 
when, if they won’t accept your cap, you’re going to legislate 
them back to work? Why don’t you just tell us now that you’re 
going to legislate them back to work? 
 
They’re negotiating in good faith, Madam Minister. And how 
are you ever going to attract any other health care workers to 
this province with that kind of an attitude? Can you tell this 
House today that you have some latitude from your cabinet, if 
they will not settle for this, if we cannot attract health care 
workers back to this province, to move away from your cap — 
the cap that’s been imposed on health workers in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the member 
opposite heard the answer to his question. 
 
What I said is that the nurses have not yet begun to bargain their 
next collective agreement with the Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations. The collective agreement does not end 
until the end of March, 1999. 
 
What I can tell the member is that we expect the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations and the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses, as well as CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 
Employees), SEIU (Services Employees International Union), 
and the health services association to arrive at mutually 
acceptable collective agreements with the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Madam 
Minister, SaskPower workers were at the table for 10 or 12 
months and you saw what happened to them. So again, what’s 
the use of the charade with SAHO wasting their time and 
energy when you’re going to impose a settlement? 
 

Maybe your money’s all being spent. I raised that yesterday 
about a public administrator in Rosetown that were getting paid 
$800 a day . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . or Kindersley, I’m 
sorry. 
 
Your answer to the media was that it’s maybe only one day or 
two days a week, Madam Minister. Do you realize that $800 
dollars a day, four days a month, is $3,200? 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell me how many people in 
Saskatchewan earn $3,200 a month working for our local co-op, 
our local grocery stores, across the province? Can you tell us, 
Madam Minister, what you’re doing with that public 
administrator and why you appointed a patronage appointment 
to do that at $800 a frigging day? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well what I’d like to say to the 
member is that in July of 1998, I understand that the 
Government of Saskatchewan through the Department of 
Health was advised that the board of directors of the Heritage 
Manor were no longer prepared to sit on the board of directors. 
 
Now the Heritage Manor is attached to the Kindersley hospital. 
What I can say to the member is that we appointed, we 
appointed . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — But what I can say to the member is 
that the public administrator was appointed. The public 
administrator comes to Kindersley from his home close to 
Lloydminster one day a week to oversee the operation of this 
80-bed long-term care facility. What I can also tell the member 
is that on November 1 of 1998 the health district in that area 
will take over the operations of the long-term nursing home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Supplements for Low Income Self-Employed People 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question 
today is for the Minister of Social Services. This year, Mr. 
Minister, your government introduced several new programs 
aimed at helping low-income families or, as your government 
has said, building independence and investing in families. 
 
The employment supplement program is one of those programs 
designed to provide a monthly payment in order to supplement 
income earned by lower income parents. However, Mr. 
Minister, for self-employed people, their income is deemed by 
this provincial government to be 40 per cent of their gross 
business income reported to Revenue Canada, not the family 
income as reported to Revenue Canada by which the federal 
child tax benefit is calculated. 
 
Mr. Minister, this leaves a lot of people out in the cold. These 
rules for self-employed people do not help build independence 
and they discourage people from becoming self-employed or 
independent. 
 
Will your government do the fair thing and apply the same 
criteria to the employment supplement program which is used 
to determine the federal child tax benefit? 



2068 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
thank the member for the question. 
 
The intent of the programs that were put in place earlier this 
year is to encourage independence on the part of those who 
would otherwise be trapped on welfare and we want to 
encourage that in a positive way as opposed to punitive ways 
that are employed in other provinces. 
 
The member makes an excellent suggestion. We’ll take that 
question and look at it and see what we can do with that. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bus Passes for Saskatoon Students 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question this afternoon will be for the Minister of Education. A 
situation in Saskatoon is dividing our community. The 
Saskatoon Board of Education made a decision to give free bus 
passes to a small number of high school students in one area of 
our city. However, there are hundreds of high school students 
living on the west side of Saskatoon who also take city buses to 
east-side high schools because they cannot be accommodated 
closer to home. Parents and students, Mr. Minister, are calling 
my office about this seeming inequity that’s taking place. 
 
And my question for you this afternoon is related to the 
following. These parents have no entitlement to request a 
review nor is there any appeal mechanism available under the 
terms of the education Act with which they may request the 
board of education to seriously deal with their concerns. In fact, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the only way they can get their concerns 
addressed is through the media. 
 
My question is for you, sir, when is the education Act going to 
recognize the need for appeal processes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — To the member opposite, first I want to say 
to you that I’ve had an opportunity to look at the issue that 
you’re addressing this afternoon and I’ve had an opportunity to 
discuss it with my administration. 
 
As you well know the responsibilities as it relates to 
transportation — decisions as to where schools are established 
within jurisdictions — are really with the school board. And as 
you know in our discussions with the school division and with 
the director of education, our view is that into the future that 
decision will be made at the local level. And at that point our 
department, through the grant process, will attempt to make 
available resources to address the issue as it relates to 
transportation to people in those areas. 
 
As the Department of Education Act makes its way into the 
future, into this Assembly, we’re going to be examining the 
question that you’ve raised which are the appeal processes and 
to see whether or not we can implement or institute the 
legislation that will address, on occasion, those kinds of issues 
that you are putting forward today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

Mr. Osika: — With leave to move a motion with respect to a 
member on a committee that was missed yesterday. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Member on Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee 

 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s been a 
change. It’s not a new one. It’s been a change. It wasn’t missed. 
Moved: 
 

That the name of Mr. Jack Hillson be added to the list of 
members composing the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 

 
Seconded by the member from North Battleford. I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I move, seconded by the member for 
Regina Victoria: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to a date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker upon the request of the government, and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven days clear notice if 
possible of such date and time. 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s with great interest that we stand here 
on day no. 3 since being recalled to deal with what the 
government indicated was one specific point of business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look at the orders of the 
day for today and I see one motion. I see one motion instead of 
a number of issues that this government should be bringing 
forward. 
 
The official opposition for a number of years now has asked 
this government to have a regular fall sitting whereby we can 
discuss the issues that are relevant to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The concerns over health care; the concerns over 
highways; the concerns in the agricultural industry; the 
concerns in education. All of those are very near and dear to 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And we thought that the chance had finally been arrived at, that 
indeed this Premier was going to ensure that we would spend a 
number of days talking about issues, dealing with even potential 
legislation that this government could bring forward to ensure 
that things proceed in a positive fashion. 
 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2069 

But we didn’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What we got was one 
motion to ensure that this House closes. And I want to point out 
to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
motion was introduced at the conclusion of approximately five 
or six hours of debate on Monday of this week. That this motion 
was the first motion that the government put forward after 
dealing with the labour dispute. 
 
That motion was not agreed to by the opposition because we 
said there was much more to discuss; there was much more to 
be concerned about. 
 
And yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after the Saskatchewan 
Party official opposition put forward a motion in the morning 
that says there is a lot of concern in the area of agriculture — 
we have impending problems for farmers, we have situations 
where land may be lost because farmers cannot handle the 
burden of the high input costs and the tremendously low 
commodity prices — after some debate in the morning, we 
noted that the government came forward with an emergency 
motion that said we should lobby the federal government to 
ensure that those concerns are addressed. 
 
How ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that on Friday last the 
Minister of Agriculture said there was no need to declare this a 
crisis. There was no need for an emergency debate. That indeed 
the kind of discussions that were occurring between the 
Minister of Agriculture here in Saskatchewan and the federal 
Minister of Agriculture were going quite well. Farmers didn’t 
have anything to worry about. 
 
Yet on Tuesday of this week, we see that the government has 
already indicated that agriculture is a concern, that indeed we 
have to lobby the federal government to ensure that the issues 
are raised. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think yesterday’s debate 
showed very clearly that there are concerns in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and it’s not necessarily the concerns with the 
entire agricultural industry. I think what it is, is the 
understanding of how things work in agriculture. 
 
Those of us from rural constituencies talk on a regular basis 
with farmers and those people involved in agriculture. And they 
know what is meant by input costs, fertilizer costs, chemical 
costs, crop insurance costs, hail insurance contracts that need to 
be purchased, the costs of fuel — all those kinds of input. 
 
But on the other side when I talk to some of my relatives, 
friends, that live in urban communities, that haven’t grown up 
on a farm, there is a need to ensure that those people also 
understand. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t have the opportunity to speak 
yesterday because there were a number of my colleagues on 
both sides of the House who spoke very well about the issues in 
agriculture and what needs to be done. But I want to indicate a 
very simple example. And I’ve used this example with many of 
my friends in Saskatchewan who are more urban in nature. 
 
What we want to look at in agriculture is not necessarily the 
yield per acre, or necessarily what the farmer has combined, 
what we need to do is look at the entire picture. When a farmer 

looks at revenue versus expenditures, there is a need of course 
not just to balance revenue and expenditures, but indeed to 
make a profit because that is the farmer’s salary. That is the 
difference that occurs between revenue and expenditures. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and many farmers . . . for 
many farmers that I’ve talked to in my constituency, there is a 
concern this year that that will not balance, and in fact 
expenditures will exceed revenue. And I want to give a simple 
example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a real example of a farmer who 
has come to my office and said to me, this is the situation I’m 
facing. 
 
There was a difficulty this spring, of course, with the early 
drought that we had in the province — May — and I believe it 
wasn’t until about June 17 or 18 that we saw our first rainfall 
and indeed that there was germination. But already crops had 
been severely affected. And those that did germinate and came 
up, the yields weren’t great. They weren’t a total loss, but they 
weren’t great. 
 
In many instances we see 40 bushel an acre barley crop, and I 
might add feed barley, not malting barley. So when we start to 
look at 40 bushels an acre yield, people who hear that number 
say, wow, you know that’s a great yield; the farmer is doing 
well, he’s received 40 bushels an acre barley. 
 
But let’s take a little closer look. The Farm Debt Review Board, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, who I’m sure as being involved in 
agriculture, many people in this province understand that the 
Farm Debt Review Board travels around the province dealing 
with situations whereby the farmers have developed the 
problem. In this one instance, the Farm Debt Review Board, in 
my constituency, has looked at input costs and has indicated 
that the input costs range between 85 and $125 per acre. 
 
Now what does that mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well, to apply 
the fertilizer, the cost of the fertilizer, to put the seed in, the 
treatments that are required to the seed, the chemicals necessary 
to combat . . . the pesticides necessary to combat weeds and/or 
insects if we’re talking about canola and others like that; as I 
indicated, crop insurance that I’m sure most farmers would be 
willing to purchase if they could afford it; hail insurance — we 
have a lot of areas in the province that are subject to tremendous 
hail storms. All of these costs including the fuel, including the 
combining, the swathing, range 85 to $125 dollars per acre. 
 
Now, let’s get back to the example of 40 bushel an acre barley. 
We’re looking at a return right now in the elevator of some 
dollar per bushel. It has increased slightly. When we look at a 
dollar per bushel, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the return on an acre 
then in the revenue column is $40 per acre. That same farmer 
has just had expenses and we’ll use the low end, let’s just say 
it’s $85 per acre according to the Farm Debt Review Board. 
That farmer is in the hole $45 per acre. 
 
Well, you know, the simple example would be for someone 
who doesn’t understand this would be, don’t grow any more 
acres. The less acres you grow, the less you’ll go in debt. I think 
that’s the situation facing hog farmers right now. Hog farmers 
are enduring a cost of production to provide pork for you and 
me to eat and in the end it’s actually costing them money to 
produce the hogs. The simply answer is, don’t produce any 



2070 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

hogs, you know, and you’ll save yourself money. 
 
Well that’s not reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Reality is those 
farmers are out there working. They’re putting in long days all 
through the growing season, and in the end all they want is a 
fair return — a fair return, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There is no 
need for the brown envelopes as my colleague from Saltcoats 
ended yesterday . . . indicated yesterday because that’s a thing 
of the past. What we need to look at is to ensure that prices, the 
product paid to the farmer is adequate, adequate to cover the 
costs. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can travel from one end of this 
province to the other, and you will find out that in many cases 
this year there is a shortage. There is a situation where expenses 
exceed revenue and indeed farmers who have looked at capital 
purchases and trying to balance at the bank won’t, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And this government does very little about it. We have 
no legislation before us, we have no ideas from this government 
on how we’re going to deal with this other than to adjourn the 
House today. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we take a look at a 
farmer’s costs, and we take a look at what farmers need to do, 
transportation is of course the major issue. And I’m sure my 
colleagues across the floor who are involved in agriculture 
know that transportation is a key issue, that we need to look for 
a plan of how we’re going to address this. 
 
As a representative coming from the eastern side of the 
province, that area of the province experiences the highest 
transportation costs in all of Saskatchewan. Whether we’re 
shipping the grain to Vancouver or to Prince Rupert or whether 
those commodities are being shipped to Montreal, we have 
some of the highest costs in that area. 
 
The alternative that farmers have looked at in that area is the 
Churchill or the Hudson Bay Route Association. And there’s a 
need to look at different systems because what is crucial is that 
farmers have to have a fair return for their output. They can’t be 
forced to take losses year after year. 
 
As the Minister of Finance indicated in the spring, it’s critical 
that we have a large tax base, that we have the people. And 
what will occur, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this province if the 
agriculture sector continues to go the way it is, is we’re going to 
see a loss of a lot of farmers. 
 
We’re going to see situations which already exist in the 
constituency of Canora-Pelly whereby financial institutions 
who have taken over the land cannot even find a renter for the 
cost of taxes. There is land that is remaining fallow right now 
because financial institutions cannot find a farmer to actually 
cultivate and operate that land. That is what is occurring in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we need to do is to cohesively and very 
co-operatively develop a plan with the federal government to 
ensure that our farmers are on an equal playing field. 
 
Farmers in Ontario can take their milling grain directly to a 
flour mill and sell it to a flour mill and in that way obtain a 
price of $7 a bushel; Saskatchewan — you can’t do that. If, if, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we had a pasta plant in Saskatchewan, 
you know that durum farmers couldn’t even deliver their grain 
directly to that pasta plant. 
 
And I think changes have to be made. And I think it’s up to 
government to look at leadership in those areas, trying to do 
what is necessary. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I took a look at the list of Bills in 
second reading and I was wondering why government didn’t 
take this opportunity to debate some of those Bills, to look at 
the ideas that have been proposed in these Bills. I’m just going 
to mention a few, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(1430) 
 
Bill No. 209, Bill No. 209, The Public Inquiries Amendment 
Act, 1998, also referred to as The Health Care System Review 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . My colleague from Saskatoon 
Fairview indicates that this is an old idea. Well you know it’s 
not an old idea. 
 
Right now in eastern Canada that’s exactly what is being called 
for right across Canada. We spend $1.72 billion on health care 
— tremendous amount of money. Nobody disputes that. But are 
we spending it wisely? Are we ensuring that what we are 
actually doing in the province of Saskatchewan is the correct 
thing to do? Well the only way we’re going to do that is to have 
a review of the health system in Saskatchewan, and that is what 
is being called for in every province. 
 
So for us to sit here today and say, well it’s time to adjourn, 
we’ve dealt with the issue on SaskPower — you can’t do that. 
You have to look at the whole review process. And I think it 
was time for this government to actually take a good close look 
at that. 
 
Last year we debated, we debated health reform, we debated 
health reform . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Must have touched 
a nerve over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because what we . . . I 
mean this government knows clearly that health care is an issue 
to everyone. We talked about closure. We saw the kinds of 
rallies that have occurred. People want to be assured that there 
is a bed at the end of the day. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this past summer I had a 
personal occurrence happen to me. I was in the Yorkton 
regional hospital as it’s called. And I was there on one evening 
in the intensive care unit as a visitor, and I watched the nurses 
scrambling because for that particular night they had to decide 
how they would cut back from six intensive care beds down to 
four; not because they wanted to, but because there was no staff 
to operate those six intensive care units. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know I’ve discussed that issue with 
the chairman of the East Central Health Board. I’ve discussed 
that issue with the CEO (chief executive officer) and the 
chairman as well. And there’s been assurances that that will not 
happen again, that there will not be that tremendous pressure 
put on staff. 
 
But as indicated today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are reaching a 
critical point in health care. We don’t have nurses; we don’t 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

have nurses that can actually be there. And we need to ensure 
that that is what is actually in place, that people feel confident 
that our health care system is going to be there for them. 
 
This government is not providing the leadership. What does this 
government do? They are going to close the Plains Health 
Centre effective October 30. I think we could be doing much, 
much more. I don’t think we should be adjourning today. I think 
we should be discussing the kinds of things that are relevant to 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, or Deputy Speaker, I’d like to also refer to 
Bill No. 201, The Crown Corporations Disclosure Act, 1998 — 
the ability for the Crowns to ensure that the people of 
Saskatchewan know exactly what’s going on. The auditor has 
recommended it. Forty per cent of this province’s economy is in 
the hands of Crowns, and yet there is no mechanisms to ensure 
that there’s adequate reporting; that there is indeed control by 
this legislature of the Crowns. 
 
We’re proposing that, and I think government members would 
support that because that is a need that has been addressed for 
years and years and years — long before I became a member 
and I’m sure long before some of my colleagues have become 
members here. 
 
There is a need to address the Crown situation and to ensure 
that the people of Saskatchewan know what the Crowns are 
doing and why they’re doing it. I think we should be dealing 
with that today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or tomorrow or on Friday, 
not adjourning this House. I think those are issues that the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan want us to deal with. 
 
Bill No. 202, The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998 
(Foreign Investment Prohibition). You know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that was one of the main concerns that people raised 
about Crown corporations over the past six to eight months with 
me. They indicated to me: I live on one side of the road and the 
rural underground development program did things for my 
neighbour on the other side of the road — three years ago, four 
years ago, when that program was in place. And yet it was 
cancelled by this government because they said there was going 
to be a shortage of money. 
 
On the other side of the story they looked at a country of 
Guyana and said well . . . there was a need to look at, I believe 
it was a $34 million expenditure into the country of Guyana. 
And I’ll tell you, people in Saskatchewan cannot understand 
that, how the Crown corporation could abandon its own people 
where people would be forced to be subjected to power outages, 
power interruptions, plus even a safety concern. 
 
We still hear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of deaths being caused by 
electrocution because in their haste, a farmer fails to lower a 
grain auger and touches a power supply line and thus is 
electrocuted. That could be eliminated if the rural underground 
development project continued. 
 
This Bill says, no more $34 million for Guyana if indeed we 
should be investing in the province of Saskatchewan. Is that 
what the Crown is for . . . for ensuring that there is services 
provided to the people in Saskatchewan? I think that’s exactly 
what they’re for. People feel cheated on this one. They know 

that there was a program in place that dealt with people to a 
certain degree, and then they feel abandoned because that is 
what has happened. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill No. 205 says The Crown 
Corporations Rate Review Act, 1998. Well, perfect example of 
that. We debated this in question period already for the last 
couple of days. 
 
What about the SaskEnergy rate increase? Is it valid? Is it not 
valid? Is the 12 or almost 13 per cent increase in the price of 
gas, is that acceptable? But we’ll never know that. 
 
We in Saskatchewan are the only jurisdiction that doesn’t have 
a rate review commission, an independent rate review 
commission that can say, yes, it’s acceptable because these are 
the things that have occurred in the industry; or no, it’s not 
acceptable because you’re still making huge amounts of profits. 
 
It’s tough to say to people in the province, to say, well we’re 
going to up your rates, but on the other side we’re now going to 
look at an extra 10 or 20 or $30 million profit. People can’t . . . 
people don’t accept that. And I think what this Bill is asking for 
is that we take a look at that and implement something that is 
being used throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
We don’t need to close this House today. We need to deal with 
these kinds of issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Bill No. 211, The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1998 
(Block Funding). I’ve heard from meeting with many people in 
the health care field that every part of the province is a little 
different than the next part of the province, and I agree with 
them. 
 
I think that’s true in health care; I think that’s true in education; 
it’s definitely true in agriculture; it’s true in the resource sector. 
We know that there are gas and oil fields located near 
Kindersley but there probably never will be any discovered in 
the Canora-Pelly constituency if you look at geographical maps. 
That’s a given. 
 
So as a result of that, how can we in health care expect that that 
large amount of money that's given to health district boards has 
to be allocated according to the formula right across this 
province? It doesn’t make sense. 
 
What should be done is that a block amount of money that 
currently this government decides on is given to a district board, 
and the district board addresses its needs and its concerns and in 
that way spends its money wisely. That’s the kind of thing that 
is suggested in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I think most importantly, Bill No. 212 is immediately 
required. And Bill No. 212 says . . . It’s called The Health 
Districts Amendment Act, 1998 (Fully Elected Health Boards). 
 
School boards have the ability to raise their own money through 
a local tax, through property tax, and they receive grant money 
from the government. But they are fully elected health boards 
. . . fully elected school boards. They are responsible to the 
taxpayer that elects them. 
 



2072 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

That’s what we require in health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Because if we have fully elected health boards with block 
funding, they can assess the needs of their health district, the 
needs of all of their communities, the needs of the individual 
people, and spend their money accordingly. That’s what is 
needed in this Assembly and I think that’s what this Assembly 
should be dealing with. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another Bill, Bill No. 210, The 
Saskatchewan Health Ombudsman Act. How many times did 
we have last year during the session, during the 1998 spring 
session, did we hear from people in this province about 
individual problems in health care? —where that there was a 
situation where a CAT scan couldn’t be obtained for six months 
or an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) was postponed for 
months and months, that there wasn’t adequate addressing of a 
cancer problem. 
 
Those are the situations that we need to have addressed. Who 
can address them? The legislature? Well I think we listened to 
the former minister of Health last year talk about issues and say 
well it was the district boards’ responsibility. Well, overall 
when we know that there is interaction between district boards 
— that people in Canora-Pelly require some health services in 
Yorkton, and they require other health services in Regina and 
Saskatoon. If they encounter problems, who is best to deal with 
those problems? But clearly we believe it to be a health 
ombudsman. 
 
And I think that that’s something that this government should 
take under advisement and move very quickly to ensure that the 
issues, the critical issues to people that are very dear to them — 
I don’t think we understand what really goes through people’s 
minds unless we actually are personally involved. 
 
And I know the example that I gave about the Yorkton regional 
hospital in dealing with those intensive care patients was 
something I wouldn’t understand unless I was actually there and 
watched and watched those nurses literally to the point of tears, 
having to determine which two patients out of six had to be put 
back on the ward for the day and the night until they had 
enough staff to meet that. Tremendous pressure on those 
families and that’s unacceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
That’s why we need a health ombudsman. 
 
Bill No. 220, Mr. Deputy Speaker, says The Trade Union 
Amendment Act (Repealing Successor Rights). I want to raise 
that one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I think clearly, in the 
Canora-Pelly constituency and all across Saskatchewan, we’re 
talking about rail line abandonment. The railway companies are 
looking at short-line rail lines and saying we don’t want them 
any more. They don’t fit into our scheme. 
 
I think what we have to do is ensure that business groups, 
communities, individuals, have the ability to form their own 
railway company, take over a short-line. And this Bill that 
would eliminate successor rights and put everybody on a level 
playing field could do that. It could allow opportunities to 
become real in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s what we 
need to do. And the current legislation does not allow that. 
 
We have difficulties in the province of Saskatchewan with rail 
line abandonment. When we also look at rail line abandonment, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s with interest that I noted the comments by the 
Minister of Agriculture yesterday on transportation and elevator 
location. 
 
We just witnessed in this province a huge announcement by one 
of the major corporations in this province. Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool had said that they were going to be closing some 235 grain 
elevators in about 170 communities that were going to be 
affected. Tremendous pressure on those communities that now 
are looking at the real possibility that that grain elevator is lost. 
 
What it means, well, I think what we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is immediately there is a burden on our transportation system. 
I’m not referring to the rail any longer. I’m now talking about 
the road system. Because the grain that has been coming to that 
local elevator, and many of these elevators have been handling 
nearly a million bushels of grain in a fiscal year. A million 
bushels. Now they’re going to be closed. Well that million 
bushels has to continue on the roadways to some other location, 
25, 30, 35 miles away. That’s the first pressure. 
 
The second pressure is actually on the community that had the 
elevator. And I want to mention one little community in my 
constituency, the community of Veregin. Veregin lost its 
elevator and it’s closed. As a result, they lost a tremendous 
amount of their tax assessment base. 
 
Taxation in Veregin for the other people, if those services and 
costs are to be maintained, have to be picked up by every other 
individual. Tremendous burden now on the taxpayers living in 
that community to absorb the cost and the revenue that came 
from the elevator company. 
 
(1445) 
 
So elevator closures are not just a simple matter of saying, well 
we’re moving ahead towards the 21st century and we have to 
look at a better system of transportation and we have to look at 
more grain efficiencies because there is a price to pay. The price 
is in the communities, the rural communities that will be 
abandoned. 
 
There is a price. And what we have to look at is to ensure that 
any options, any options that are possibly there, those of 
farmers, those of communities, those of businesses to either 
save the elevator and become a grain handling facility for 
someone else, to ensure that the rail line can become a short rail 
line and used by someone else, those are necessary. And I 
would have hoped that this government would have provided 
some leadership on that in this short session that we have before 
us. 
 
One of the other two Bills that I’d like to mention is Bill No. 
207. This Bill is called The Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement Revocation Act. In other words, the CCTA (Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement) as it was commonly 
known. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not sure what’s happening 
in this. Because if you recall, not only here in the House but I 
believe outside the House, the former minister of Labour made 
some comments about the possibility that an agreement was 
near, and I think he even indicated that within a week we were 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2073 

going to see the end of the CCTA. I know there was articles in 
the newspapers that said that. And here we sit in October, that 
no changes have been made. 
 
Saskatchewan taxpayers still are paying higher rates than 
necessary because this piece of legislation still exists. It would 
have been a great opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have 
dealt with that legislation today or tomorrow or the next day — 
a chance for that piece of legislation to be debated. And if 
indeed the former minister was correct and that this was going 
to be ended, that there was going to be an agreement to replace 
it, we could have had that placed before the people of 
Saskatchewan. But it’s not on the order paper. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many, many Bills 
that are listed on the orders of the day — things that could be 
dealt with, things that the Saskatchewan people need to have 
dealt with. And this government chooses not to do so in this 
short session. They wanted to end this session on Monday 
evening instead of looking at the concerns that we have before 
us. 
 
Today in question period, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I raised the 
issue about a potential strike facing regional colleges. That is 
real. We have talked to many, many students; we’ve talked to 
many parents; and we’ve in fact had some comments from 
people who are involved right in the dispute, people who belong 
to CUPE. And they have indicated that this is an old problem, 
that this is something that this government has been facing for a 
number of months, in fact years, and it’s done nothing about it. 
 
There was a promise made last spring, or so we’re told. What 
we need to hear from the Minister of Education is indeed, was 
there a promise? Was there a situation in place in the spring 
where strike action was imminent? Here we sit in October and 
students have been given a letter. 
 
And I want to raise one piece of information, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This is a letter to a lady in Pelly, Saskatchewan. It 
says: 
 

Dear Student: Thank you for your letter expressing concern 
over the possibility of strike action by regional college 
employees. It is my understanding that regional college 
management and union have not yet begun their 
negotiations for a new collective bargaining agreement. It 
is therefore premature to anticipate problems. 
 

I thought I heard the minister indicate to this House today that 
bargaining was proceeding . . . I believe he used the expression 
very, very well. This letter is signed by the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education and he’s indicating to this student 
that negotiations have not yet begun. Now what’s the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s the date? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — The date of this letter is October 13, 1998. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Two weeks ago. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Yes, just two weeks ago he’s indicated that 
bargaining hadn’t started; going very, very well I might add 
today in the House. When I spoke to one of his officials on 

Saturday morning while at the University of Regina installation 
of its new president, that official said to me that the negotiations 
were reaching a very critical stage, that indeed he hoped that 
there would be some resolve this week because it was becoming 
critical. 
 
Yesterday we found out that negotiations actually ended on 
Friday when the union indicated to management that they had a 
strike vote conducted and the results of the vote said proceed 
with strike action if necessary. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we’re at a stage where 
negotiations are dreadful. They aren’t going on anymore. They 
are over with. Students, like this lady in Pelly are concerned 
that the classes that they’re taking are going to end because 
there’s going to be a strike action. 
 
Now the power dispute resulted in back-to-work legislation. 
Well, while power is very, very important to everyone — no 
question about it; heat is required as we come into the winter 
months — but a person’s education, something to this particular 
individual, is also very, very important. They want to be assured 
that this minister: first of all, knows what the problem is; is able 
to recognize that we’re dealing with something that occurred 
last May; thirdly, that there is a new contract that is being 
negotiated; and fourthly, that there is some guarantee that 
indeed that the education of that particular individual is not 
going to get messed up. 
 
That’s all these students are wanting. They want some 
leadership from government to say, yes, we’re going to ensure 
that there is, you know, the possibility that if there is a 
disruption, we have in place a plan that’s not going to 
jeopardize your education. That’s what’s critical to these 
people. That’s what they needed to see from this government 
this week. And they didn’t get to see it. 
 
You know, I guess, the Minister of Education, the 
newly-appointed Minister of Education, has to address some 
concerns as well. The member from Yorkton who last year 
faced an ominous task being the minister of Health, and I’m 
sure he had a big smile on his face today when the new Minister 
of Health fielded questions and he had a chance to sit back and 
say, my gosh, I guess I’m glad I’m not in that position any 
more. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he’s in a new position, and 
I think he has to address something that is very, very critical. 
But I guess since he hasn’t put forth any new ideas for this 
session, maybe it’s time that I raised them now with him so that 
he can look at them with his colleagues and look at them with 
all the partners of education and address some of the concerns 
that are being raised by these people. 
 
Eight years ago, eight years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was 
a concern in this province about distance education. How were 
we going to provide a quality education to schools that were 
becoming smaller, but because of geography, because of the 
distances to another school, you can’t just close them? They’re 
going to stay open. They’re going to stay open all the time. 
 
Well, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were meetings that 
took place with the vice-presidents of SaskTel. And those 



2074 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

people indicated very clearly that distance education was the 
way to go. It was the thing of the future. 
 
School Division of Eston-Elrose — and I want to raise that one 
example Eston-Elrose — has within its own system right now a 
tremendous distance education program. There are teachers who 
teach in the community, I believe, of Kyle, and have their own 
classes in two other communities at the same time, through 
something referred to as picture tel. That was leading edge 
technology. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nothing much more has 
happened since those conversations with SaskTel eight years 
ago. We haven’t moved forward in distance education. 
 
A good example is right in the minister’s home constituency of 
Yorkton. People in the community of Theodore last year were 
petitioning the then minister of Education to allow for the 
Yorkton Regional to have distance education in place and thus 
provide classes to the minister’s home community of Theodore. 
Tremendous example. 
 
I think not only could Theodore have taken advantage of that, 
but many other towns more than 35 miles away from that. So 
they were looking at a possibility of recognizing what is 
occurring. But we don’t have those things in place, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now I think the government has to provide some leadership 
because you know what’s going to happen? There’s going to be 
continued school closures unless this government addresses the 
concerns. School boards will have no alternative but to 
discontinue grades, which is exactly what happened in the 
Yorkdale School Division. That board made a decision to 
discontinue grades 10, 11, and 12 because of economics — 
because of economics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not because this 
government provided any other alternatives. 
 
This government should be providing alternatives. If distance 
education was provided without huge costs to the Yorkdale 
board, maybe they would have continued allowing grades 10, 
11, and 12 to exist in the community of Theodore for another 
year or two or three. But they didn’t. Because there is no 
alternative. 
 
You know, I think what we have to look at also, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I know that the Minister of Education has received 
letters on the small schools factor. The small schools factor is a 
contentious issue right now. The letters that are coming from 
boards of education are indicating to the minister to look at this 
situation, to address this. 
 
And I’m sure the minister recognizes that there is a bit of a 
problem in that area. And I think we have to look at that. 
Because you know, Mr. Minister, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, right 
now the small schools factor is determined by comparing one 
building to another building. It doesn’t have anything to do with 
the actual program that is delivered in the school. 
 
And for those people who are not closely attached to rural 
communities, because in the cities those kinds of . . . in urban 
communities those kinds of things don’t occur. The example I 
want to use is that in small communities a factor is issued in 

calculating the kind of grant that a school board will receive 
based on the number of students in a grade. And as that number 
falls below 20, there is an allotment of a per dollar figure for 
each student in each of those grades. And I’m referring to 
kindergarten to grade 12. 
 
The regulations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, break it up into three 
categories — an elementary category, a middle category, and a 
secondary category. And each is different, based on the distance 
to the next building. 
 
Well that’s very confusing for people, and I think it’s a situation 
that Theodore people could not understand. Their school, which 
was a K to 12 school, the small schools factor for grades 10, 11, 
and 12 was determined by, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
communities of Springside and Sheho — Springside school, K 
to 6. 
 
Now you tell me, what does a K to 12 program in Theodore, 
grades 10, 11, and 12, what does the grant payable for those 10, 
11, and 12 have to do with the school in Springside? You know, 
that’s a situation that this minister has to address. 
 
And there are concerns raised by boards of education right 
across. We have to compare programs to programs. The former 
minister of Education in fact indicated that that was a concern 
and that she was going to be looking at it with her officials. 
Well she’s no longer the minister of Education, and I would 
hope that this Minister of Education would take a good look at 
it. 
 
What is required? We need to compare program to program . . . 
simple! This formula was a good formula if all schools were 
kindergarten to grade 12, because then you’re comparing a 
building that has K to 12 to a building that has K to 12. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, across Saskatchewan now 
the configurations are many. We have K to 3 schools, we have 
K to 6 schools, we have K to 8 schools; there are kindergarten 
to grade 12 schools, there are grade 7 to 12 schools in the same 
small town as maybe a kindergarten to grade 6 school. The 
minister now has to look at that and say what’s fair? What’s fair 
for the students and for the parents in those communities? 
Those are concerns. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Education is 
proving how little he understands, how little he understands 
about the education program. The board of education, the board 
of education has nothing to do with the regulations. The 
government set the regulations. The government is the one who 
imposed those regulations and now they’ve indicated that the 
board has to live by the regulations that are not fair, that are not 
fair. 
 
So what I’m asking, what boards of education are asking this 
minister, is to sit down with his officials, take a look at the 
existing regulations, and recognize whether or not there is a 
problem. If there is a problem, will the minister fix it? If there is 
no problem, explain to the communities how the current 
regulations best fit their needs. That’s all that’s being asked for 
by boards of education. 
 
(1500) 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

You know and, if the minister doesn’t have the letters, I can 
easily fax them to him. I’m very sorry to hear the minister 
chirping today because this is a serious issue in rural 
Saskatchewan. And I guess it’s about as serious as the 
comments made by the minister in health care when he was the 
minister and he didn’t care about health care and he probably 
doesn’t care about education either. So I think boards of 
education have to be prepared for what this minister might be 
up to. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve been involved in 
education for a long time. I’ve served as a teacher for 11 years 
and I’ve been on the school board for 9 years; and in all 
instances what you try to look at is what is fair for the students, 
what is best for the education of individuals. And I think that’s 
what people in this province are asking for. They feel right now 
that the property tax has become a burden; that indeed the 
former 60 per cent funding by government and 40 per cent from 
the local taxpayer has become completely reversed and 40 per 
cent only comes from this government. And they feel that that 
is an excessive burden on each and every individual and they 
want this government to look at that. 
 
What is the long-term plan of this government? That’s what we 
expected to see this session, Mr. Deputy Speaker — some 
planning, some looking forward. Some ideas, some fresh ideas 
on how we could deal with problems that are facing 
Saskatchewan presently. But we didn’t see that yet. And what 
we want, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is for this government to come 
forward with some plans. They have the opportunity to do that 
today. They have the opportunity . . . had the opportunity to do 
that today; they have the opportunity to do that tomorrow. 
 
We would like to see some honest, real legislation from this 
government that deals with problems, and there is no way that I 
can support that motion that ends this current sitting of the 
House. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or 
Deputy Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise today to address 
this motion. 
 
It’s most unfortunate that the government believes that there is 
nothing that needs to be done by the legislators of 
Saskatchewan; there is nothing left to be done this year that 
requires the attention of this Assembly. 
 
You know we’ve called for fall sittings for the last seven or 
eight years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we believe that there 
is a need in this province for people to have the opportunity to 
address their MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly), 
their representatives, and have those concerns heard and acted 
upon in this legislature when they’re most pertinent. But that 
doesn’t seem to be the interest of the government. 
 
Now it’s a lot easier to govern when you’re outside of this 
Assembly than it is when you’re in the Assembly. Because 
there’s a lot less opportunities for people to ask you questions 
— pointed questions, questions that may question the motives 
and the actions you’re taking. And that’s why, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we believe that it’s not the time to adjourn this 

Assembly, that there is a lot of issues that still need to be 
addressed by the members of this Assembly. 
 
And perhaps part of the motion that we were originally brought 
into this Assembly to address — the back-to-work legislation 
for the IBEW (International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers) 
workers — should have included a small clause in there to say, 
Saskatchewan members of the Legislative Assembly should be 
sitting in their desks in the fall addressing the issues facing 
Saskatchewan. I believe that would have been a very 
worthwhile addition to that Act. 
 
Now it would seem though that the members opposite, 
including the Premier, have no interest in that. We’ve had three 
fall sittings up until this date. 1991, right after the NDP Party 
had won government, they called a fall session to start their 
programs to put their people in place and that’s understandable. 
Every party would have done the same thing. 
 
But from that time on, from 1991 until 1997, there was no fall 
sitting. But last year the Premier had a special concern. The 
Premier wants to go down in history for his interventions in the 
Canadian constitution. Well we saw his intervention in 1980 
and ’81 with the kitchen debacle that set out our constitution, 
allowed Prime Minister Trudeau to repatriate the constitution, 
which has led in turn to a lot of the problems we have had in 
our discussions with Quebec. 
 
But the Premier wanted to be known as the great statesman, as 
the person who first got the Calgary accord passed through his 
province’s legislature. It didn’t happen, but that’s what he had 
hoped to do. And for that reason we had a fall session, a fall 
session in which we discussed more things than just the 
constitution. 
 
We discussed those things in spite of the Premier and his wishes 
and the wishes of the government members, not because they 
wanted them to be heard. We did that in spite of them, not with 
them. 
 
The same applies this year in 1998. The people in 
Saskatchewan are having an opportunity to have some of the 
issues they bring forward talked about in this House. And that’s 
happening not because of the co-operation and the desire of the 
government to participate in that, but rather in spite of the 
government. 
 
The Government House Leader on Monday stood in this House 
and presented the motion that we’re debating today and tried to 
end the session on Monday night. Didn’t want to hear about all 
the other issues facing Saskatchewan, including the issue that 
the government brought forward yesterday, the emergency 
motion on agriculture. 
 
It’s really surprising and interesting how on Monday night there 
was no crisis in agriculture. And yet when we brought forward 
on Tuesday morning that we were going to present an 
emergency motion on agriculture, the Minister of Agriculture 
quickly rushed out and discovered that there was a crisis in 
agriculture and therefore it needed to be debated, because the 
government members had to be in the House yesterday to 
debate issues because they couldn’t get passed their motion to 
adjourn, to recess the Assembly. But today we’re here debating 



2076 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

that particular issue. 
 
What are some of the issues though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
need to be talked about in this Assembly? Some of the things 
like highways. You know, I brought up the question today 
about how terrible the highways are in Saskatchewan, which 
one is the worst highway in Saskatchewan. Everyone who has 
driven around Saskatchewan knows that there’s a good many 
bad highways. 
 
And there are, there are a few good highways though. There are 
a few good ones. You drive north out of Regina here, you will 
find a very good highway through an NDP constituency — very 
good highway. 
 
You know, you look at some of the highways . . . the minister 
talks about highway construction. In her own constituency, 
going north from Weyburn there is some construction going on. 
But it’s surprising how it ends right at the boundary of the next 
constituency. 
 
You know I don’t know what the minister for SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) did to 
make the Minister of Highways mad . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. Order. 
Order! Now certainly members will all have an opportunity to 
engage in this debate. At the moment the hon. member for 
Cannington has the floor and I invite him to continue. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
shows that there is a lot of interest in the highways . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Now the Deputy Speaker 
has not been in his chair for three seconds. The hon. member 
for Cannington has the floor and I encourage all members to 
allow the hon. member to continue in his debate. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It goes 
to show that there is certainly some interest in the highways or 
lack of highways in this province and that the government 
members are extremely sensitive about the highways in their 
constituencies as well as across this province. 
 
As I was starting to say earlier, it’s interesting though that the 
construction of highways in the minister’s home constituency 
comes right up to a border and ends. Now I don’t know what 
the minister for SERM, the member for Indian Head Wolseley 
did to make the minister unhappy that she didn’t carry on with 
that construction into his constituency, because that was 
actually the worst part of the highway. But it stops just at the 
border of the minister’s constituency. So I think maybe the 
other minister needs to talk to the Minister of Highways to get 
some of that fixed up. 
 
There are a lot of other highways, Mr. Minister, that are equally 
bad or even worse shape because the road that the minister was 
fixing wasn’t all that bad, which reminds me of another road 
which wasn’t all that bad but did get some work this summer. 
Highway 33, south-east from Regina is a pretty good road, Mr. 
Speaker. I would be proud to have that in my constituency. 
 
And unfortunately, or fortunately for the people who live in the 

area, the minister was fixing that highway again. Not a lot of 
holes in it. The fact is there were no holes in it but the 
Highways department is out there fixing up the road through the 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle’s constituency. 
 
Now there are some highways though, Mr. Speaker, that do 
need a lot of work. I had a citizen call me concerning No. 8 
Highway north of MacNutt. Now I’m not sure which 
constituency MacNutt is in. It might be the Minister of 
Education’s but it’s up in that area . . . and my colleagues say to 
the member from Saltcoats constituency. 
 
This person phoned in and said the Highways department is 
going to do some work on our road, on our highway. What 
they’re going to do is they’re going to cut a foot and a half to 
two feet off of either side of the highway and pile it on top 
because the road is too low . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
it makes the road higher but it certainly makes it a heck of a lot 
narrower and it didn’t have shoulders to start off with, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s the kind of solution that this government 
has for rural highways. We’ll turn them from low wide roads 
into narrow high roads. Not any better but they’re a different 
shape. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not highways just higher roads. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, not highways, just higher roads. On 
the south end of No. 8, Mr. Speaker, in the Redvers area, the 
highway is so badly rutted that school buses are in jeopardy 
driving down the road. They bounce out of these ruts. 
Especially if there happens to be some rain, the ruts are filled in 
with water. This is on pavement. This is not gravel; this is not 
dirt. This is what we call pavement in Saskatchewan with huge 
ruts in it. 
 
Water can be up to six inches deep standing on the highway in 
the ruts and when a heavy vehicle hits this they’re pulled, 
they’re thrown around, and Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is 
threatening the lives of the children in the school buses that 
drive that road. And Redvers is one of the major communities 
with one of the larger schools. 
 
In fact it’s not just a danger, not just a danger to the children 
riding in those school buses, but it’s going to be a danger to the 
highway crews this winter when they’re out on the road with 
the trucks and the snowplows pushing snow. What’s going to 
happen when they hit these ruts? Are their blades going to dig 
in and peel off six inches of supposed asphalt off the centre of 
these roads? That’s a real problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — There isn’t six inches. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, as my colleague said there isn’t six 
inches. It’s a half inch of oil and six inches of clay. What’s 
going to happen when they hit those? Are they going to bounce 
into the ditch or are they going to bounce across the road and hit 
the vehicle coming towards them? That’s the kind of situation 
the highways are in in Saskatchewan. 
 
So that’s why I brought forward today the idea of having a 
contest to allow the people of Saskatchewan to express their 
opinion . . . 
 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2077 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I’m listening to the hon. 
member for Cannington relate in his speech about the highways 
of Saskatchewan. I simply wish to remind the member that the 
motion before the Assembly is: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to a date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker upon the request of the Government, and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each Member seven clear days notice, if 
possible, of such date and time. 
 

And I simply remind the hon. member to tie the debate into the 
motion. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s the 
need to keep this House open and that’s the fault with that 
particular motion. We need to keep the House open to discuss 
issues like the highways and to give people the opportunity, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to actually start putting in their suggestions as 
to which is the worst highway in Saskatchewan. 
 
I know you come from out in the Outlook area and once in a 
while perhaps you drive some of the roads out there. Highway 
— I believe 15 — I’ve been over that road and it was pretty 
poor, a pretty poor road. Now I don’t think it’s the worst 
because I believe the worst highways in Saskatchewan are 
actually in my constituency, Highway 361. That’s the worst one 
in my opinion. But I haven’t driven every road in 
Saskatchewan. But when we get some agreement as to which 
may be the worst roads in Saskatchewan, I will be out there and 
inspect those roads. 
 
And again I offer . . . ask the minister if she will be a participant 
at judging which are the worst roads in Saskatchewan. You 
know, I know that Highway No. 32 south through Ceylon is a 
pretty poor road. And perhaps some of her constituents would 
like to vote that as the worst road in Saskatchewan because it 
certainly is full of potholes and a danger. 
 
(1515) 
 
You know you wonder why the American farmers are outraged 
about Saskatchewan products going south. I think it’s amazing 
that Saskatchewan products actually get to the border rather 
than cross the border. It’s amazing that we’re able to get trucks 
from anywhere in Saskatchewan to the U.S. border with the 
condition of our roads. So I think they should actually be giving 
medals to those truck drivers who brave these roads and survive 
to get their products to the U.S., border — not to criticize them, 
not to vilify them but to honour them for being brave enough to 
support the economy of Saskatchewan by taking their life in 
their hands to actually haul a load of cattle or grain to the U.S. 
border. 
 
The minister has made commitments over the past that there is 
going to be $250 million a year, $2.5 billion of commitment to 
highways in 10 years. But the member, the minister makes the 
commitment but she never follows through with it. And that’s 
why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must keep this House open. 
That’s why the motion presented by the Government House 
Leader is invalid and why it must be defeated. Because we need 
that minister to keep her commitment, not just to simply talk 
about it but rather to stand in her place and said, yes, I will be 

providing the $250 million a year that I promised for highways. 
 
She hasn’t done it, and the fact is she’s $82 million behind in 
her commitment. And the commitment’s only three years old. 
Only three years old and she’s already over $80 million behind. 
 
I know what they’re doing. They’re making the big promise up 
front, not spending any money at the beginning . . . hopefully 
they’ll get re-elected. If they don’t, they don’t have to meet the 
commitment. If they get re-elected, oh well, it will be like the 
five-year plans out of Russia. Oops, sorry, that one didn’t work; 
we’ll come up with a new one. That’s what they’re doing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They actually have no intentions of ever 
meeting those commitments but they sure sound good. 
 
And that’s why, that’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we cannot 
allow this government motion to pass. Because this minister 
and most of the other ministers are not keeping their 
commitments and they need to stand in this House and say why 
they’re not. 
 
The government has . . . is collecting roughly $450 million a 
year in fuel taxes and licensing fees — $450 million, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And they’re spending less than half of that on 
actual highway construction — less than half of that on actual 
highway construction. And people want to know, what am I 
paying all this money for on fuel taxes, what am I’m doing 
paying all this money on fuel taxes when they’re not actually 
building any roads? 
 
People drive around the province of Saskatchewan and it’s 
amazing when you actually find a highway under construction. 
You go to Alberta, you go to Manitoba, you drive to our 
neighbours to the south in the U.S., and you always run into 
road construction someplace. 
 
But that’s one of the good things we can advertise about 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Come to Saskatchewan; 
you’ll never be held up in traffic with road construction. It 
won’t happen because there isn’t any in Saskatchewan. And our 
roads prove it. 
 
We do get tourists that come up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
drive across the border and maybe they go up to La Ronge for a 
holiday and they drive back, and as they cross the border they 
say, I will never drive those roads again. Never. The fact is 
they’ve even had signs up in some of the truck stops south of 
the border saying, don’t go to Saskatchewan; the roads aren’t fit 
to drive on. And they have pictures of them. 
 
And that’s why our tourism suffers. Because these people, like 
the member from Swift Current, won’t support road 
construction in this province. He’s got a good road; drives a 
double-lane highway from Regina to Swift Current. But what 
happens when you get past Swift Current? What happens when 
you want to go south, or you want to go north to Saskatoon? All 
of a sudden the roads aren’t fit to drive on. 
 
But it doesn’t bother the member from Swift Current because, 
other than going to Medicine Hat for his shopping, he doesn’t 
drive to Saskatoon. He doesn’t drive south to the U.S. border. 
And he only drives into Regina to sit in his seat and chirp and 
collect his paycheque. 



2078 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need serious road construction, 
highway construction, in this province. And it’s not just 
highways, it’s also our municipal roads. We’re seeing rail line 
abandonments. We’re seeing elevator abandonment — 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is abandoning 235 elevators across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If you don’t think that’s going to have a major impact on our 
roads, you obviously don’t understand the agricultural 
economy. That grain is going to move and it’s going to move 
now in big trucks and those trucks are going to pound our roads 
to pieces. 
 
And who’s paying for that? Well right now it’s the property 
taxpayer in that municipality that’s going to pay to fix that road, 
even though, even though they have not necessarily all the costs 
related to them. 
 
The elevator in a community can close . . . drives from that 
community through the neighbouring RM (rural municipality) 
and onto the inland terminal. The second one is paying the bills, 
and that second municipality and the people in that small town, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, are the ones who don’t want this House 
shut down. 
 
They don’t believe that this motion should pass today because 
they want their issue discussed, they want to know that the 
members opposite and the Minister of Highways and the 
Premier are hearing what is being said. They want to know that 
the Minister of Highways is prepared to do something about 
that added cost — that added damage to the roads. We haven’t 
heard anything out of the Minister of Municipal Affairs about it. 
They also need to be a part of this. It’s not just highways, it’s 
municipalities also. 
 
The members opposite, they also drive on pretty good roads 
because they drive down from Saskatoon — Saskatoon 
Northwest — drives down No. 11 Highway. It’s a little bumpy 
in spots but it’s not full of holes at least, and they are fixing that 
road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It seems that if you have a good number of NDP members 
living at the far end of the highway you can get your road fixed, 
but if you live on the fringes of Saskatchewan, forget it; you 
just don’t have enough MLAs driving those roads so they don’t 
get fixed. 
 
Seem to have struck a nerve there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
they’re a little concerned about this particular issue. They have 
a real . . . It gets under their bonnet, Mr. Speaker, when I 
actually point out the truth of these issues. 
 
The road between Regina and Saskatoon is getting some work 
done on it because there are a large number of MLAs who drive 
that road, including, including, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
member from Lloydminster. She spends a lot of time on that 
road driving back and forth, and I’m sure she’s been 
encouraging the Minister of Highways to actually fix that road. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — What is your point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened with 
great interest to the member and lately he’s concerning himself 
with the length of time it takes for the member from 
Lloydminster to drive to Regina. And that may all be very 
interesting, but none of it in my view is relevant to the motion 
that’s before us. 
 
What is before us is a substantial motion that speaks to the issue 
as to the recall of the Legislative Assembly upon adjournment. 
 
And the speaker was previously cautioned by the Chair in this 
regard to be relevant, yet I don’t see that relevance there. I think 
the speaker has a very clear obligation to tie what he’s saying to 
the motion before us. And the motion before us is very specific, 
very clear, and certainly doesn’t lend itself to the kind of 
ramblings that we’ve seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So therefore I would ask you to call the member to order and to 
ask him that his comments be relevant to the motion. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just in response 
to the point of order. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a well-known tradition in this 
Assembly that when we’re debating a motion, that members are 
to relate to the motion their concerns and address the motion. 
 
And as I’ve been listening to the members this afternoon, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the members have been following the motion 
very carefully. And while they’ve addressed issues of 
pertinence that are important to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, they have tied those comments directly into the 
motion and the reasons why this motion is not a motion that one 
should just take lightly — that there are some very relevant and 
pertinent issues that need to be addressed regarding the 
adjournment of this Assembly. 
 
And I think if you look back, and I’m sure Mr. Deputy Speaker 
has taken that time sitting in the chair to understand the rules of 
the Assembly, and just point out to the member that there is this 
long-standing tradition. We are aware of the rules and the 
motion and I would suggest the members have indeed been 
following those guidelines. 
 
And I think if we were to look back at tradition, we would find 
the member from Regina as well knows what the rules are 
because he has addressed those same kinds of concerns when 
he’s been addressing the Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I thank the members for their 
input into this decision. 
 
I also want to state to the member from Regina Victoria that the 
motion also not only deals with the recall of the session when it 
is adjourned, but also about the adjourning at the end of the day 
and it will stand adjourned. 
 
And I believe . . . I have been listening also as you state that 
you have . . . the hon. member from Cannington has referred to 
why he believes that this motion should not pass at this time 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

and why this House should not adjourn. And I believe he has 
been relating to the motion. So therefore the point of order I 
find not relevant. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
would also like to thank the member from Regina Victoria for 
the opportunity to take my seat for a few minutes, collect my 
thoughts, and come up with some more arguments. So I’d like 
to thank the member for that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the $450 million that 
this government collects, that’s not the only money it’s 
collecting for highways, for fuel taxes, for licensing fees. It also 
collects a large amount of money from resource extraction and a 
good portion of that money that they collect is related to traffic 
on our roads. When you haul a load of oil, when you haul a load 
of grain, when you haul a load of uranium, it has an impact on 
our roads. It also has a direct impact on the provincial coffers 
for the royalties that are collected from that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that is another reason why this 
House needs to continue sitting and why we cannot agree with 
the motion to adjourn the House today, to recess this House to 
some future point down the road at which we all know will be 
sometime next spring. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are lots of issues that need to be 
discussed. Those resource revenues that we’re collecting which 
amount to, last year I believe it was in the neighbourhood of 6 
to $700 million, some of those revenues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
should be allocated to the maintenance of our infrastructure in 
this province so that we can continue to extract those resources 
in an efficient and reliable manner. When you see an oil tank 
truck stuck in the middle of a highway, Mr. Speaker, because it 
sank up to its axles in mud, that’s not an efficient use. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are some of the examples of 
why this House must continue to sit, why the government needs 
to start coming forward with some programs that deal with 
these issues and not simply try to sweep them under the carpet 
to silence the opposition and to try and silence the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I talked about resources. And we’ve certainly seen a change in 
the resource industries in the last year in this province. And the 
government opposite has not yet addressed those revenue 
changes that have taken place. 
 
(1530) 
 
The fact that oil prices have dropped from $25 to $12 and have 
fluctuated in that 12 to $14 range ever since the Minister of 
Finance presented his budget, I think has some clear 
implications on this province. And the minister has failed to 
come forward at this time, during this sitting this fall, to explain 
what the government’s doing to protect the people of 
Saskatchewan from those drops in resource revenues. 
 
Again we need to hear that minister stand on his feet and 
explain that that’s why this House cannot be adjourned today; 
that’s why this session cannot yet be recessed, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 

The Minister of Finance needs to stand in his place and explain 
how his budget is possibly going to balance when oil revenues 
have dropped by 50 per cent; when grain prices have dropped; 
when durum has gone from $8 two years ago to $2 today. How 
is he possibly going to be able to balance his budget? 
 
It’s not just the revenues that are coming in, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, though, that we need to discuss here before this House 
is shut down. We also need to discuss the impacts on 
employment — the impact it’s having on small communities; 
the impact it’s having on people like car dealerships. 
 
I heard of one car dealership that has already in the last couple 
of weeks taken back a couple of — not a couple . . . eight leased 
vehicles in the last couple of weeks because they were leased 
out to people working in the oil industry, working on the 
drilling rigs. They’re not working so they can no longer pay 
those costs for those leases. That’s going to have a very 
dramatic impact on that car dealership. 
 
And that’s the ones that I’ve heard about. What about all the 
ones that have turned back their vehicles and yet have been 
quiet about it, haven’t said anything. 
 
Over the last couple to three weeks, my office has been 
inundated with people who work in the oil patch and who are 
now looking for unemployment insurance. And I’m sure some 
of my colleagues who also have oil and gas in their areas are 
facing the very same situation. 
 
And those that don’t have oil and gas have small farm 
manufacturing — small farm manufacturing that are laying 
people off. And those communities are in trouble. And this 
government is not doing a thing to address those issues. They 
want to rush out of here. 
 
The IBEW workers were prepared to go to work until this 
government locked them out. These are the guys who don’t 
want to even go to work. They want to shut this House down, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we believe that it’s wrong to recess this House. We believe 
that the motion presented by the Government House Leader 
today must be defeated. We must be given the opportunity to 
carry on debating the very important issues that face this 
province, not simply let the government members sweep it 
under the rug, put a cone of silence over it, and Merry 
Christmas! 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the shortfall in oil and gas revenues that 
are taking place right now are affecting the municipalities also. 
Municipalities are facing more and more traffic on the roads 
because of the closures of railroads, because of the closures of 
grain elevators. Their revenues are dropping because of the 
slump in the resource industries. And yet the people in those 
areas are expected to pick up the slack and to carry on. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they simply haven’t got the money 
to do this. They are looking to the government to start making 
up for some of the monies they have withdrawn from the 
municipal budget. This government has withdrawn millions and 
millions of dollars from the municipal budgets. 
 



2080 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

Oh, they promised — what was it? — $10 million a couple of 
years ago as 10 per cent of the gambling revenues. And all of a 
sudden, well we didn’t promise you actual cash; we’ll pay for 
some of the programs in your area — we’ll pay for 911. And 
then all of a sudden when 911 started to get implemented, well 
no, we’re not going to pay for that. We’re going to tack a dollar 
on every phone bill to pay for 911. 
 
So at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government 
weaselled out of their promises to the RMs to give them a share 
of gambling revenues. 
 
The drop in resource revenues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, isn’t 
affecting just oil and gas. It’s also affecting the mining industry. 
We’ve seen the Contact Lake gold mine close. Because 
resource prices were too low, it simply wasn’t economical to 
carry on operating that mine. 
 
Now we have another hundred or so people out of work because 
of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And yet the government fails to 
mention that fact. They’re not interested in dealing with that 
fact. They would rather recess this Assembly so that nobody 
can talk about it, so that the people of Saskatchewan aren’t 
paying attention to it. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s one of the reasons why I’m 
opposed to this particular piece of legislation, to this motion to 
recess the House. 
 
We had that debate yesterday on agriculture. But prior to that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, prior to the Minister of Agriculture’s 
overnight revelation that there was a crisis in agriculture, about 
a week ago he spoke in Saskatoon to the Saskatoon Chamber of 
Commerce, and he referred to protection programs, safety net 
programs that were available to farmers, so there was no 
additional need for any new government programs. 
 
There was programs like the gross revenue insurance plan and 
NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account). Now he may have 
been able to bamboozle the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce 
because they are not farmers. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture and the 
ministers of Agriculture before him, including and specifically 
the member from Rosetown when he was the minister of 
Agriculture, killed the gross revenue insurance program. They 
killed it dead. They killed it and stripped it of its money and 
that’s what the Premier used to balance his budget one year; 
$188 million out of the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) program is what they used to balance the budget and 
that was money right out of the farmers’ pockets. The farmers 
in Manitoba got their money, the farmers in Alberta got their 
money, and the farmers in Saskatchewan lost their money to 
this government. They took the money. 
 
I don’t know what the Minister of Agriculture was talking about 
when he was talking about the GRIP program, but perhaps he’s 
thinking of a new one. Maybe that’s why we need to keep this 
House in session, Mr. Speaker, why we can’t recess. Because 
perhaps that was a Freudian slip by the Minister of Agriculture 
and he actually has a new GRIP program up his sleeve. 
 
Well I’m looking forward to seeing exactly what that is because 

I remember prior to the 1991 election, the member from 
Humboldt was running around the province promising bigger 
and better GRIP. Well he “biggered” and bettered it right out of 
existence. The member from Rosetown, Darrel Cunningham 
when he was the minister of Agriculture, he got his 
comeuppance on that. Farmers in his area didn’t think much of 
his burying the GRIP program and they buried him politically. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Retired him. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Retired him — forceful retirement. And 
there will be, and there will be a couple of other Agriculture 
ministers that have dealt with GRIP that will also be forcefully 
retired after the next election. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Retired by whom? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — They’ll be retired forcefully, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The member from Yorkton wants to know 
who is going to do that. Well, who will do that will be the 
people of Saskatchewan. And their replacement and the 
replacement for those members will be Saskatchewan Party 
candidates for election. 
 
We see the government talking about health. We have the past 
minister of Health here yipping from his seat. Well I had an 
opportunity to see the new junior Minister of Health, the 
B-team minister, the new member from Saskatoon Eastview, in 
operation here a week or so ago. She came down to do a grand 
opening of a new health care facility in my constituency in the 
town of Redvers. 
 
And it was very ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the B-team 
minister would come down to do the ribbon cutting on this new 
facility for health care when the provincial government didn’t 
put a nickel into it. Want to take all the glory, but the local 
people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, had to fund every nickel in that 
hospital — $2.3 million — they went around to the people in 
the communities and collected money for them. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must not support this 
particular motion, why this motion to recess must fail when it 
does come to a vote. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are lots of issues that need to be 
discussed in this area in the province of Saskatchewan for the 
people of Saskatchewan. They want to know that somebody is 
listening and that somebody is hearing what they have to say, 
and they know that it isn’t the government. So they ask us to 
pass the message on to this government to see if that 
government will listen. 
 
Now I know that my colleagues also have people contacting 
them asking that they give the message to the government also, 
and I’d like to give them the opportunity at this time. I will not 
be supporting this motion. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I take pleasure in being able to stand in the Assembly 
this afternoon to raise a number of points in regard to the 
motion that has been brought forward by the Government 
House Leader. A motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which I think is 
somewhat appalling. To think that this government would act in 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2081 

such a manner as to call the members of this Assembly 
together, to gather together, for the single purpose of legislating 
a group of labourers in this province back to work. And 
especially when at the time the labourers, the only reason they 
weren’t working, or a number of them weren’t, were . . . was 
because they were locked out. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I would have to say it must 
have been difficult for the government due to the fact that over 
the years, and I don’t see that there will be a lot of change even 
in the future, that the labour movement has been strong 
components and supported the current government over a 
period of years. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we were debating the motion 
of back-to-work legislation on Monday evening I found it very 
interesting to note what we had a number of demonstrators 
around the Legislative Building I can recall. And while a 
number of individuals in this Assembly may not have been here 
prior to 1991, any that were here know exactly the type of 
demonstrations that took place — a lot similar to the one that 
was taking place in Ontario last week when the Conservative 
government was meeting or the Conservative Party was 
meeting for their annual convention. 
 
And I would suggest to you that the demonstration here paled in 
comparison. In fact it looked like it was almost a love-in rather 
than a real demonstration of anger against the government. And 
maybe it’s a reflection of that long-term allegiance to the NDP 
Party. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would have expected that even 
with the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) meeting in 
Regina this week, that they would have been here in this 
Assembly. And my guess is, if they were really concerned, they 
would have been as angry or disappointed as we are that the 
government would bring forward a motion calling for an 
adjournment of the Assembly until a call down the road by the 
Speaker of the Assembly upon the request of the government 
for the members to gather again. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fact 
that we have a motion — or a piece of legislation that we’ve 
discussed this before about fall sessions — this would be an 
opportune time for the government to show that a fall session 
can work and could be a very integral part of the legislative 
process in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we’re calling for and what we as a party have asked 
for over the period of years is nothing new. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the province of Alberta for example, the province of 
Manitoba for example, do have fall sessions. And what do fall 
sessions do? What do these two provinces do? These provinces, 
the governments in those two provinces specifically bring 
forward a number of pieces of legislation; they have a short 
sitting. 
 
And I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m sure all members 
of this Assembly find even when they’re talking to individuals 
in their own constituencies, the question is: what are you doing, 
aren’t you in Regina? At least I get that on numerous occasions 
as I’m walking and talking to individuals, well why aren’t you 
sitting in the legislature today? 
 
I think it would be a good time for us to show the people of 

Saskatchewan that there is a place for the legislature to 
function. That it’s not the place for the legislature just to 
function from a period of time, let’s say the mid-to-late 
February through to June, but indeed there’s a place for a 
session in the fall as well so that the elected members of this 
province could indeed sit down and effectively debate pieces of 
legislation that affect the concerns of the electorate in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1545) 
 
I would suggest that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the leader, or the 
Government House Leader, rather than calling for an 
adjournment could have suggested that here’s a good time for 
us to show some good faith and leadership and maybe bring 
forward some new ideas and some pieces of legislation that 
we’d like to address in the spring as the provinces of Manitoba 
and Alberta do. And then allow the elected members of this 
Legislative Assembly a period of time then to effectively go 
out, talk about the legislation the government’s talking about, 
talk about their direction they’re planning to go in the spring 
session so that we could come back and effectively address any 
concerns and determine whether or not the government is acting 
in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I’ve noted and as my colleagues have 
noted thus far, there certainly are a number of issues that the 
public in Saskatchewan are concerned about. My colleague 
from Cannington mentioned highways. And just for example, 
just a recent incident that took . . . that happened on Highway 
48, east of Maryfield. A constituent of mine had called; he had 
been trucking grain, he was on his way home and came upon an 
area of road that was very washboardy on Highway 48, and it 
just so happened he was meeting a semi-truck and that the 
trailer went out of control as a result of the washboard 
conditions. And he said we were just very fortunate that we 
didn’t have a head-on collision. Now he was quite concerned. 
 
And then that was bad enough. But two days later he was 
hauling some grain to the elevator only to have his tailgate open 
up going over the washboarded area and lost a significant 
amount of crop which had a very high value. In fact it was a 
crop that does have a decent return right now. So, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, he is concerned — and he is not just one of the 
individuals — but he is concerned about the highway conditions 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other irony is when you go across 
the Manitoba border, the province of Manitoba has upgraded 
their section of highway right through to Virden, to the point 
that is where, as a couple of constituents mentioned just 
recently — they’ve been in Manitoba — that driving back to 
Saskatchewan, just before they got to the Saskatchewan border 
there’s this big sign that says Saskatchewan Naturally. 
 
They thought to themselves, yeah, naturally we’re going back to 
the old, old trails that we used to see in Saskatchewan as soon 
as they hit the No. 48 that they were driving on. And they were 
wondering if maybe the sign or the billboard at the border 
should not be changed to just say Saskatchewan rather than 
referring to it naturally. It doesn’t really give us a good idea of 
what Saskatchewan has to offer. 
 



2082 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the idea of highways to debate in this 
Assembly, the members know that that’s a concern. They know 
that . . . I’m sure the government members hear it as well as we 
do that there are highways across this province — and we’re 
heading into the winter months — highways that need a 
tremendous amount of work otherwise it’s going to be a major 
problem. 
 
We were just talking about power the other day and the fact that 
a disruption in power when it’s 40 below would not be very 
pleasant. And the Premier used that as his argument for calling 
this session. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about issues that we could 
discuss, certainly health care is an issue that could be discussed 
— that the House Leader and the government members could 
be discussing. But I strongly believe that the reason for this 
motion is because the Government House Leader, the Premier 
of this province, and the government members certainly do not 
want to get into further debate on health care, especially when 
we’re arriving at the end of . . . we’re pretty well at the end of 
October and the Plains health facility is now closing down part 
of its operation. And I believe on October 30 they are going to 
be closing down their emergency ward. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hear about that on an ongoing basis 
because of the number of individuals that I’m aware of who are 
. . . deal with, provide ambulatory service in my constituency 
and surrounding areas. And their claims and the concerns 
they’ve raised time and time and time again is a fact that when 
they’re bringing a patient from south-eastern Saskatchewan or 
the southern part of the province of Saskatchewan, the Plains 
health care facility is a facility that’s easy to navigate to, it’s the 
quickest facility to get to, it’s the quickest facility to get an 
emergency patient to, and to have the medical attention 
addressed that that patient needs. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so to sit here this afternoon and 
having to be discussing an adjournment motion that says this 
House shuts down for a period of time until the government 
decides in its good wisdom that it’s going to call us back into 
this Assembly, is ludicrous. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we could be addressing areas like health 
care. But as I indicated earlier, I’m sure the Minister of Health 
and the Associate Minister of Health do not want to be talking 
about health care right now. Certainly they do not want to be 
talking about health care in view of the imminent closure of the 
Plains health care facility and the fact that there’s still ongoing 
construction at the General Hospital. And the Pasqua Hospital I 
believe has had most of the construction done. But there are 
certainly shortfalls in our health care system and health care 
delivery in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
To the point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that as I’ve seen and just 
received a notice earlier today from an individual, actually a 
grandparent in the very extreme south-eastern part of the 
province of Saskatchewan, who’s little granddaughter needs 
some special equipment because of a failure of her legs to 
develop properly. And the interesting thing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they can and they’ve chosen to go to Winnipeg to 
receive that procedure because they would have to wait in the 
province of Saskatchewan to get in and receive the medical 

attention that is needed. 
 
The unfortunate part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in making this 
choice, even though we have reciprocal agreements to provide 
services back and forth, even though it is much closer and much 
easier for the family to get to Winnipeg, the province of 
Saskatchewan is saying no, we will not cover that cost even 
though the cost if it was done here in Saskatchewan would be 
done for about the same amount of money. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is another area of concern. The fact 
that while we’re talking about an adjournment motion today, 
there’s a family has to deal with the fact that they have to pay 
out of their own pockets to provide a medical attention that their 
little daughter needs. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find that 
appalling. 
 
I find it . . . Someone says the government will argue that we 
don’t have a two-tiered health care system. That is almost a 
perfect example of the two-tiered health care system that we 
have in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the Leader of Saskatchewan Party has 
been going around the province of Saskatchewan for the past 
number of months meeting with district health boards, he’s run 
into a number of concerns that have been brought forward by 
boards. Some of the areas of concerns and certainly an area of 
concern that individuals have brought to our attention as a party 
since we were formed, the fact that in many cases boards are 
restricted by the type of funding that the Department of Health 
says to them. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the government’s concerned about 
their lack of legislation on the Table to debate, there certainly 
are enough other pieces of legislation that could be debated in 
this Assembly, pieces of legislation that I’m sure could be 
debated very effectively and would address some of the major 
concerns out there. Such as Bill No. 211, The Health Districts 
Amendment Act, 1998 which it calls for a motion or a Bill that 
we brought forward, our caucus has brought forward, which 
calls for block funding that allows health districts . . . 
 
And as the leader of our party has found, a number of boards 
have indicated that if they had the funding that was given to 
them, did not have any strings attached, that they would be able 
to apply that funding better and to meet the needs of the specific 
district. 
 
And I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure many members of 
this Assembly through the past number of months and even 
years have found that district board members have brought to 
their attention some of the problems they face because of some 
of the strings that the government has put to the funding that 
they send to district boards and the fact that it really impedes 
them in meeting the specific need of their district. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you might ask or someone might 
ask, well why would you talk about block funding? What’s 
wrong with having a few strings attached to funding? The facts 
are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you start tying strings to 
funding and start dictating where the funding should go . . . 
Let’s take for example the Pipestone Health District, the needs 
in that district may be totally different from the North-East 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2083 

Health District or some of the other health districts in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Maybe the needs in the Pipestone Health District happen in the 
area of acute care, but they can’t meet those needs because of 
the strings that are tied to the funding. Whereas other districts 
might have a specific need of home care or a specific need in 
the heavy care field. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s time the government 
recognize the fact that while they have created these boards and 
while on many occasions they continue to put the blame for 
problems within the health care area at the feet of district 
boards, it’s time they gave the boards a little more of an 
opportunity to have some direct say and involvement as to how 
they put the funding and apply the funding so that they can 
provide the services that are specific to their district. 
 
Another area that we’re hearing about — this is not coming 
from the boards and I can understand why; we’re hearing it 
from individuals regardless of party affiliation — the fact that 
people feel that if we’re going to have health district boards in 
our province that are supposedly accountable to the people who 
elect them, then it’s time that we had fully elected health district 
boards rather than partially elected and partially appointed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you talk about appointed boards, the 
perception — and I don’t think they’re wrong — the perception 
out there is that those board members who happen to be 
appointed feel compelled to follow the guidelines and the 
wishes of the government or the agency that would appoint 
them. 
 
And that’s why the public feels that if the district boards are 
given the authority or given the ability to provide a service to 
our community, then why aren’t we given the same opportunity 
to elect them totally so that we can have a direct say and direct 
impact as to the types of services that we feel the boards should 
be addressing on our behalf in the specific district that we 
represent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well, the government has, and the 
former minister of Health and I’m certain the new Minister of 
Health and Associate Minister of Health will talk about this as 
well, but I doubt we’ll get into a full review of the health care 
system. But the government has talked about a review of the 
health care system once we’ve had district boards in place for a 
number of years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, have we had that 
review? Have we had a real review? 
 
The government would argue, I know the former minister of 
Health would argue that on an ongoing basis he was reviewing 
the health care needs and how district boards were functioning. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would seem to me that the 
government’s argument that they’re reviewing the role of health 
district boards and reviewing health care delivery in the 
province of Saskatchewan, would seem to me that they 
themselves or their own department, their appointed officials 
are the ones telling them, yes the system is working right; it’s 
working just the way we designed it and it’s providing a service 
next to none; and not only in the province of Saskatchewan but 
certainly in Canada. 

I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I agree with 
the Conference Board of Canada — that if we’re going to really 
take a long term and sit back and take an overall view of health 
care delivery in the province of Saskatchewan, it’s time for a 
full-scale review. A review that is not impeded by government 
but indeed bringing in or appointing or putting in place a 
mechanism that allows for input by all the individuals involved, 
whether it’s the patient, whether it’s the caregivers such as the 
nurses who feel that they’ve been working under some very 
difficult circumstances and situations, whether it’s the doctors, 
whoever’s delivering that service, and certainly the district 
boards as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we’re going to have a true review, we’re 
going to take a broad look and determine whether or not the 
health care system or this wellness model as we see it today, is 
meeting the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think as the Conference Board of Canada has indicated, we 
need to take a full review. And not just the Department of 
Health telling us that they have reviewed the delivery of health 
care and it’s working well, but indeed someone outside of the 
department who can look at it objectively. And not just the 
province of Saskatchewan, but I would suggest, as the 
Conference Board of Canada has indicated, that this review 
would . . . 
 
And I see the member from Regina Victoria would like to 
suggest that that has nothing to do with the motion of 
adjournment. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order, order. Why is the 
member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The 
member is certainly wide-ranging in his comments on the issue 
before us. But from time to time it is incumbent on the member 
to relate his rather wide-ranging comments to the motion before 
us. And I don’t think that it’s sufficient for him to, whenever 
anyone stands up on a point of order, to say, oh but I was really 
meaning to relate it to the motion before us. 
 
So I think the Chair needs to listen carefully and must call the 
member to order if the member is not relating all of the 
concerns in the world before us to the motion before us, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
(1600) 
 
Furthermore I also have a concern about the rule of anticipation, 
Mr. Speaker. I just heard the member say, and call in his 
comments, for a review of the health care system. Now the very 
next item on the agenda is a motion by that member in which 
he’s calling for a full-scale review of the health care system. 
 
Now it seems to me that the member is anticipating items on the 
agenda. This motion before us is not a motion of adjournment 
per se. That is a separate issue. There is nothing to suggest that 
we can’t get to this next item on the agenda, which deals far 
more appropriately with the concern that he’s putting before the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So on two counts I really question whether the member is in 



2084 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I have listened to the 
member for Regina Victoria’s point of order very carefully. 
And certainly the point of relevance of debate is always a point 
that is in good order, whether it’s this debate or any other 
debate. 
 
In my experience this day, members speaking to the Assembly 
adjournment motion at the end of the day have been relevant to 
the motion in the normal manner in which the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly operates, and that is there is generally 
wide latitude for debate that must tie in to the motion. 
 
I thank the hon. member for Victoria for the point of order and 
recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I appreciate the comments the member 
from Regina Victoria has made as well regarding the 
adjournment motion. 
 
And in regards to his comments and the adjournment motion, 
the fact that certainly yes, there is a motion on the order paper 
in regards to a full scale review of the health care system . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. The ruling has 
been made from the Speaker’s Chair and it is inappropriate for 
members to comment further on the ruling as made from the 
Chair. With that caution, I invite the member from Moosomin 
to participate and continue with the debate. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It wasn’t my 
attempt to even address the ruling of the Chair. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the motion before us and 
the motion of adjournment, and the fact is the motion of 
adjournment calls for this Assembly — and that’s correct — it 
calls for the Assembly at the completion of the motion, and if 
this motion would be passed, that this Assembly, when it 
adjourns at the end of the day, would adjourn until the request 
of the government. And I appreciate that. And I know exactly 
what it means. 
 
They also, if you were to look at the order paper and for 
individuals who are not aware of it, the suggestion was made 
that once the motion was done we would immediately move 
into further debate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve been around this Assembly long 
enough to know that when a motion such as this is moved, it 
doesn’t necessarily mean that opposition members will certainly 
get to the area of debate that they would like to. 
 
I would love to get into the debate on the review of health care 
on this motion, and I appreciate that and I thank you for that. 
 
But in regards to the motion before us and that adjournment, I 
would suggest as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this motion as 
we have been pointing out, and I’m sure that the minister or the 
member . . . the House Leader, the Government House Leader 
could have come across to our caucus and asked us, if we gave 
you the opportunity to address some of the concerns that you 

have on the table, would it be possible to then bring this motion 
in and have an agreement to arrive at a conclusion at that. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, members of the Assembly know that 
a lot of times there is that debate back and forth, that there are 
those agreements that we can arrive at, that we can sit down 
with the House Leaders to sit down to arrive at agreements. 
Unfortunately, we weren’t given that opportunity and therefore 
it’s imperative that we point out why we feel quite strongly that 
the motion before us is an ill-thought-out motion at this time in 
view of the fact that there are so many areas for debate and 
areas up for debate. 
 
I’m certain as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in view of the fact that 
the SFL is meeting in the city of Regina right now — it’s not 
just the SFL; there’s a number of other groups that are meeting 
in the city of Regina — that members would just as soon, with 
the weather being as nice as it is with the sun shining and I’m 
not sure where the temperatures are, I understand it could be in 
that 20 degrees, to be very candid I would enjoy . . . much 
rather be outside right now rather than sitting in the Assembly 
debating some of these issues. 
 
But I have to let members of the Assembly know and certainly 
the ministers and the Premier of this Assembly know that while 
it’s nice outside, my constituents expect me to represent their 
views and to bring to the attention of government areas of 
concern such as the one I was just reviewing in front me, an 
area of concern with regards to the Workers’ Compensation 
Board. Or another area of concern that as members we face and 
a lot of times we can’t do much about it, but because we’re the 
individuals handy, employment insurance. And we all have our 
point on where the federal government is going right now with 
regards to employment insurance. 
 
But those are concerns. When people run into difficulties with 
areas such as EI (employment insurance) or Workers’ Comp or 
being able to get in for a health procedure or some of the other 
areas or the closure of elevators and the problems of highways 
in the province of Saskatchewan or as my colleague the 
member from Canora pointed out, the concern that students at 
the regional colleges have been bringing to my attention. And 
I’m sure all members of the Assembly have had those concerns 
brought to their attention, it’s imperative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that we indeed take the time to mention and bring these points 
forward to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I really want to say how much I appreciate this 
Assembly and the legislative process, the democratic process, 
that allows us to speak to motions, whether motions of 
adjournment, and point out areas where we feel that some of 
these motions may fail. 
 
And that’s what my colleagues and I have been attempting to do 
today, to point out the fact that this motion to adjourn sounds 
very good; it sounds very simple. But this motion in particular 
brings this Assembly to a grinding halt at the end of the day if 
some of these issues aren’t addressed ahead of time. 
 
We will not have another opportunity until a time in the future 
at the discretion of the government to come and address these 
questions, to raise these issues, to bring to the Minister of 
Health the concerns regarding the closure of the Plains health 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2085 

care centre and the fact that that closure is now more imminent. 
And I can appreciate why even the Minister of Health and the 
Associate Minister of Health may not want this Assembly to 
continue to go beyond the next few days. Because of the fact 
that, as we’re in the Assembly, as members of the opposition, 
it’s the opportunity for us to really hold the government more 
accountable. 
 
And that’s why it’s imperative and that we feel it’s important, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this Assembly be allowed to function 
and continue to address a number of the concerns as indicated 
earlier. 
 
There are a number of motions that are on the order paper that if 
we had the opportunity, we would love to debate. But I’m afraid 
that if the motion as it is before us, once that motion receives 
approval, which I would have to suggest it will because of the 
majority of the government, we are quite concerned that we will 
not have an opportunity then to move into other areas that are 
on the order paper. 
 
So that’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve been taking the time 
today to point out these areas of concern, the areas that my 
constituents are talking to me about — areas . . . the concern in 
the agricultural field. 
 
And I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a lot of members, 
government members, the Premier himself, and individuals in 
this Assembly who have worked in fields that have been 
directly linked to agriculture and are quite concerned about. 
They’re concerned because of the fact that a downturn in the 
agricultural economy affects everyone in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It affects the businesses in our communities. And that impacts 
. . . And I was pleased to hear about a week ago on an 
agricultural news bulletin the fact that even the Department of 
Agriculture — and I believe it was the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool if I’m not mistaken — one of their spokespersons was 
pointing out the fact that when we talk about farmers having 
difficult times, the general public are not aware of the fact that 
about 45 per cent I believe of the industry and the jobs in this 
province are directly or indirectly linked to the agriculture 
community. They’re linked to that farmer out who cannot pay 
his bills, and as a result maybe it’s the equipment dealer, or it’s 
the fuel dealer, or it’s the fertilizer or the chemical dealer is 
impacted. 
 
That in turn means that maybe two or three jobs in their 
employment then are laid off, and that impacts another family 
in a community. And it’s not just the communities that I 
represent; it’s the cities of Regina and Saskatoon as well. We’re 
well aware of it. The Flexi-coil for example, and it’s shut down 
having to . . . or cutting back because of the slowdown in the 
economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think we take this lightly. I don’t 
think we just take this motion lightly. I don’t think we just take 
our position in this Assembly lightly. I believe all members 
come here with a really, real strong feeling of trying to 
represent their constituents. 
 
And indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, bringing to the point and 

bringing to the attention of the Premier and his government, and 
to this government, the members opposite, that the fact that 
there are some major concerns that should be addressed. And it 
shouldn’t be the opposition always raising them. The 
government should be indeed coming forward with some new 
ideas. 
 
And that’s why I feel that this, this motion as it stands, is 
somewhat premature — that the government should indeed 
have taken the time to give the members of this Assembly and 
should have come forward with a plan not just calling us back 
to address a power shortage or the problems with power or a 
labour dispute, but also have taken some time to stand in this 
Assembly and give us an idea of where they intend to go to in 
the future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I certainly could go on in a number of 
other areas and raise concerns as to why I feel this motion 
before us is not . . . actually, should not have been brought 
forward at this time and that the government should have 
brought some forward for some new ideas. But I think, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it would be imperative for me to allow other 
members of the Assembly, and I’d certainly be willing to hear 
government members stand in their place, and address and tell 
us why they should . . . this motion should pass and it pass 
immediately. 
 
But I would like to give other members of the Assembly an 
opportunity to speak as well and address their concerns in 
regard to the adjournment motion. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I too rise with great pleasure to speak on the motion before us 
concerning the adjournment from this House without duly 
considering the affairs of the state of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that many individuals in this House 
have very good reasons why they may indeed want to leave. It’s 
a beautiful day out. And I’m sure many of us have things that 
we would rather be doing in our homes, our yards, our 
community, maybe even having one last game of golf. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, I understand that. I understand it very well 
because I too have a very good reason why I would rather be at 
home in Melfort than here. I have to tell the Assembly that over 
the course of the summer, our children Laurie and Michael in 
Calgary blessed us with another grandchild, Scott. And it’s a 
great pleasure for me to say that because as any grandparent in 
this province knows, you would rather be with your 
grandchildren than doing almost anything else in the world. 
 
And Laurie and Mike and Hayley, our granddaughter, and Scott 
are in Melfort as we speak. Two very, very beautiful 
grandchildren that I would like to share with everyone and I 
would like to be there with them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
that would be something that would be important to me. To be 
able to say to Hayley and Scott, poppa’s here, and let’s have 
some fun together. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s important that I am here in this 
Assembly today debating the issues before the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s the kind of commitment that we need to 
have to this province if we’re going to effectively deal with the 



2086 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

issues before this province. We can’t simply rush to 
adjournment after the one item that was important to this 
province was dealt with. We should have taken and should be 
taking the opportunity to deal with many issues that are in front 
of the people of this province at this current time. 
 
(1615) 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk about one issue a bit 
that I think merited more discussion, that would merit debate 
and discussion in this House. And I speak of the 1998 Fall 
Report Volume 1 of the Provincial Auditor. And I would like to 
compliment the auditor on the work that he has done in this 
report because I think as usual when the Provincial Auditor 
releases a report — this released on September 23 of this year 
so it’s very timely — he does an incredibly competent job of 
putting forward and in front of the people of this province the 
issues that they should be considering. 
 
And in this report the auditor, in his executive summary . . . 
And I’ll be fair in that I actually do quote more than just a very 
selective phrase or two that I think makes my purpose. And he 
says in his executive summary, he says, and I quote: 
 

I think the Government’s finances are improving because 
the economy of Saskatchewan has grown and because, 
during each of the past four years, the Government has 
spent less than it raised in revenues. 

 
And the provincial government said that, and I think it’s an 
important statement for us to be discussing. I think we should 
put it in front of the people and to have them try and understand 
what’s going on in terms of the trends in the provincial 
economy. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting when you 
analyze this and you put this whole thing in context, and you 
say these are the kinds of things we should be doing and talking 
about instead of adjourning, that these are some interesting 
things that happen.  
 
If a person would turn to page 22 and 23 of this very document, 
the Provincial Auditor has been kind enough to put in a very 
encapsulated form — on one or the two pages — the actual 
revenue and expenditures both of the General Revenue Fund 
and the activities in the Crowns which the Provincial Auditor 
has said is important to consider in their entirety, not just in 
isolation, where we talk about the General Revenue Fund at 
budget time and not the Crown corporations discussed 
separately when we feel like it or in the Crown Corporations 
Committee. But the people of the province should have a 
picture, a snapshot of what’s going on in our province’s 
economy in total. 
 
And so the Provincial Auditor points out on page 22 and 23 that 
in 1991, for example, taxes were $1.98 billion — and that’s 
very interesting. But you know what they are in 1998 — $3.116 
billion; an increase of taxes to the people of this province of 
$1.128 billion over that duration. And now that’s easy to 
understand how the Provincial Auditor can say in his executive 
summary that revenues have grown. You bet you they have 
grown. They’ve grown to the tune of over a billion dollars out 
of taxpayers’ pockets in this province. 

But there’s some other things that are interesting in here 
because it also says in 1991 the federal government by way of 
transfers was transferring to this province 1.6 billion; in 1998, 
that’s down to $675 billion. So it indicates that there is a great 
diminishment of federal transfers to our province over that same 
period of time. And another issue that we should be discussing 
instead of adjourning is: where is the federal government in 
their responsibility to our province? 
 
It says as well that natural resources went from $437 million to 
$802 million — an increase of $365 million from natural 
resources. 
 
In total, the revenue from general programs in 1991 was $4.9 
billion; in 1998, 5.5 billion. And therein lies the increases. 
 
But let’s look at the Crowns as well if we could briefly. If you 
take energy — which is Power and SaskEnergy — Insurance, 
Liquor and Gaming, and Telephone, if you add them all up, the 
revenue from those Crowns came to about $2.5 billion in 1991. 
In 1998, they’re $3.4 billion, an increase of $900 million. 
Another great cash cow for this government; taxes, and our 
Crown corporations, and a captive audience of the people that 
have to pay the utility bills. 
 
And so it’s pretty easy to understand how this government has 
been able to balance the budget and to live up to the comment 
that the Provincial Auditor made that over the past years it is 
raised more revenues than it has spent. That’s true. 
 
So where did the expenditures change? Well in Agriculture in 
1981, the government spent $800 million; ’98, $250 million. 
Health care has gone up from 1.6 billion to 1.7 billion — that’s 
an increased expenditure. Overall on expenditures we went 
from $6 billion to 5.8 billion. So you bet things have been cut, 
mostly agriculture. 
 
And so some of these areas again, are the areas that should be 
being debated in this House at this opportunity because it’s 
timely and it’s appropriate. 
 
The Provincial Auditor goes on in the very next paragraph to 
state, and again I quote, and he says: 
 

However, I also think that the Government’s finances are 
still fragile because its accumulated deficit and revenue 
demands are large when compared to the size of 
Saskatchewan’s economy, and because the economy of 
Saskatchewan is particularly vulnerable to changes in such 
factors as commodity prices, interest rates, foreign 
exchange rates, and the weather. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a whole change that’s happened in 
this province over the course of the last six months, and it has to 
do with items and issues as the Provincial Auditor clearly points 
out, are not something necessarily that we have control of, but 
have an incredible impact on our province and its economy. 
 
This spring we had very difficult weather where there was areas 
of this province were facing a severe drought, and happily in 
many areas of the province the rains came in time, but there still 
are areas of this province where they did not. And the farmers 
in those areas and the businesses in the communities that are in 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2087 

those areas are suffering tremendously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not a farmer. I farmed for 10 years in a past 
life and I have a real appreciation of what that’s like. But, Mr. 
Speaker — and I may be a little wrong about these prices — but 
it strikes me that peas, for example, last year were about $6 a 
bushel — $6 a bushel give or take. I’m told by my friends that 
now it’s about three and a quarter — almost half price. 
 
Last year I’m told that wheat prices were something in the order 
of $3.50 a bushel, initial price at the elevator. This year they’re 
about $2, again about half price. I’m told that barley was about 
a dollar sixty at the elevator, initial price; this year, 70 cents, 
less than half price. 
 
I’m not sure again exactly the numbers, but I understand from 
my rural friends that the price . . . the realized price for a 
finished hog is as well about half price of what it was a year 
ago. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am not sure that people understand 
the magnitude of what that means. It’s not as if everything has 
sort of been cut in half and relatively speaking it’s not a big 
deal. It means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all of the input costs, 
all of the costs of investment, all of the costs of equipment, all 
of the costs of chemical, all of the costs of raising your family 
and trying to provide the day-to-day needs to your family have 
stayed the same or gone up compared to last year, but the gross 
value of the product you produce has been cut in half. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is significant and a tremendous 
impact on this economy. It’s going to have tremendous impact. 
It started this summer when people started realizing how badly 
commodity prices were changing. And ever since, ever since 
that time we have been saying in every opportunity we had, but 
especially we should have been saying it in this House, that this 
is going to have tremendous impact. 
 
So what happened? The government said, well we’ve got to 
come together to deal with the issue and the problem in the 
Power corporation. And we agreed that it had to be dealt with 
because it was an important issue. 
 
And then right after that issue was dealt with, the government 
moved to adjourn the place on Monday, and we said no. We 
said no, and rightly we said no. 
 
And Tuesday morning we said that we have to debate the 
impact of what’s happening in the commodity prices on 
agriculture. And you know what? An hour later the Agriculture 
minister must have read our press release because he thought 
that was a darn good idea as well. And an hour later he finally 
woke up and said, well I guess since we’re here anyway, we 
might as well talk about agriculture. 
 
But if we would have agreed to the adjournment motion on 
Monday, we wouldn’t have discussed what happened in 
agriculture. The Agriculture minister wouldn’t have got our 
press release calling for an emergency motion and he wouldn’t 
have known that there was a problem. 
 
But finally, we had an opportunity yesterday to talk about the 
issues surrounding agriculture and to come together and 

unanimously vote in favour of a motion. We wouldn’t have 
been able to do that if the House had adjourned on Monday. 
 
Today we’re having an opportunity . . . today again, first thing 
up, adjourn the place; let’s go home. Well grandpa wants to go 
home, but I know it’s more important for us to be here and talk 
about the issues that are facing the people we represent than to 
go home. And I think the government should understand that it 
would be more important to stay here and debate the issues that 
are facing the people than to go home. That is important. It’s 
clearly, clearly of fundamental importance to us to understand 
what’s going on. 
 
And so the people on the front line right now, the people that 
are having an immediate, dramatic impact on their business are 
farmers. But farmers are businesses — businesses that all of us 
have contact with. Many of us have people that we know or 
family members that are either on the farm or in small business. 
 
And think about what would happen to your small business, if 
it’s a grocery store or a dry goods store or shoe store or a small 
confectionery store, any kind of a business you would like to 
put in your mind, and imagine that the total expenditures of 
your business stay exactly the same but the revenue is cut in 
half. What would that do to your business? 
 
Well I don’t know of any businesses that have a gross profit 
margin so lavish that they could stand that kind of an impact. 
They simply would be unable to continue in face of that. 
 
Well our farmers are facing exactly that circumstance. That’s 
irregardless of the quality of the crop; it’s irregardless of the 
impact of the drought or any other thing. This is solely the 
impact of the war of the European Common Market and the 
Americans in terms of the subsidy war and what it’s done to 
drive down commodity prices. That needs to be talked about, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so the Provincial Auditor talked about the vulnerability of 
our economy. Well how’s it going to affect it? Well I would 
suspect that there were a good number of farm people over the 
last number of years paid income tax. The income tax figures 
that the Provincial Auditor talks about don’t come out of thin 
air. They come from the fact people work and make profit, earn 
revenue, and then they pay income tax. 
 
Well if your revenue is cut in half and your expenses stay the 
same, there’s no profit to pay tax on. That’s going to have a 
dramatic impact on our province’s revenue picture. And so it 
should be being talked about. It should be being debated so that 
we can make the adjustments that we need in terms of looking 
where we're headed. 
 
The Provincial Auditor also said that there were other factors to 
be considered. He said that we are vulnerable not only to 
commodity prices but to interest rates. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess one of the good things that 
seem to be happening, if you follow the volatility in the world 
market right now and the impact of the Asian flu and the 
economy in Brazil and what’s happening in Russia, is that the 
American Federal Reserve is getting very concerned that we 
could be facing a worldwide recession and that the only engine 



2088 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

right now that seems to be having some strength in terms of 
being able to create the demand and the energy to prevent that 
from happening, is the American consumer economy. 
 
But even there, there is concern. And we’ve seen over the last 
few weeks two successive decreases in the Federal Reserve rate 
of a quarter point each time. And so in this exercise it may well 
be that there’ll be some easing of interest rates and that is going 
to have some positive effect on the situation for people that are 
borrowing money. 
 
(1630) 
 
But as everyone knows, for people that have modest 
investments and are looking for a return on their investments by 
way of interest to generate some income, it’s going to have a 
negative effect. And again, if you don’t earn interest income, 
you don’t pay tax. And so again it has a direct impact 
potentially on our provincial economy and we should be talking 
about it. We shouldn’t be in a rush to head home for whatever 
good reason we have. This government should be saying we 
need to talk about this, because we need to come together in 
some purpose to see what can be done in order to prevent the 
problems that seem to be happening. 
 
The auditor also pointed to foreign exchange rates and the 
whole run on the dollar. Well, that has its pluses and minuses as 
you well know, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On the positive sign a low 
dollar means that our commodity prices are more affordable in 
the world market. But that only is true, not in comparison to the 
American market, it only is true is if our customer’s economy 
and currency is also staying strong. It doesn’t do us any good to 
try to sell peas in Brazil if their currency is nose-diving way 
worse than ours. It makes our product even more expensive. 
And hence, it explains partially at least why the offering price 
in Canadian dollars is as low as it is for peas. 
 
The people of South America use peas grown in Saskatchewan 
for a major source of their protein. But if their currency is in 
turmoil, worse turmoil than ours, our prices become relatively 
more expensive. And so the whole issue of currency exchange 
rates are not only how our dollar compares to the American 
dollar but how other currencies fare in comparison as well, 
relative to the American dollar and to ours. And so potentially, 
while it always say well, woe is us because our dollar is low 
compared to the Americans, the real concern is what’s the 
comparison between ourselves and our major customers, the 
Americans being one of them. 
 
And so all of those things are issues that we should be debating, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’re not. We can’t if we adjourn. We 
simply can’t. It is impossible to have effective debate and 
discussion about these issues by press releases and by MLA 
reports in our own newspapers. It has to be done in this forum 
where people all across this province can watch and observe 
and listen and make intelligent judgments as to how these 
things are going to play out. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I talked a bit about how this is going to 
impact on our farm community but everyone knows that the 
general Saskatchewan economy is only a heartbeat away from 
agriculture. Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is it going to do to our 
towns and cities in Saskatchewan? 

Well I live in Melfort and I have a small business in Melfort 
and I have been involved with my colleagues in the business 
world in that community for almost 20 years. And I can tell you 
over those 20 years you could plot the success and relative 
prosperity of our business climate in those communities in 
direct relationship to how well the farm community was doing. 
 
Instantly — instantly — when we end up with a situation that 
the agriculture community has difficulties, instantly following 
that, the business community has difficulty and it starts out in 
rural Saskatchewan and it’s like a wave that builds into the 
cities. 
 
The cities are going to see the impact a little later than we will 
out in rural areas themselves because, if your income is cut, 
your gross income is cut in half and your expenses stay the 
same, you have zero — zero — discretionary income. 
 
You have little money to do and say, I think I would like to do 
this and this would be fun for myself and my family. This 
would be just a nice thing to do. The discretionary kind of thing 
that says let’s go out for a treat or let’s buy an extra piece of 
clothing or an extra sports article or any of those sorts of things. 
Let’s hang on to our vehicle for an extra year instead of 
replacing it. Let’s make the tires go an extra few kilometres 
instead of replacing them. 
 
All of those discretionary decisions that families have in the 
agriculture community are going to be deferred. They’re also 
going to defer the major issues, of course. They’re not going to 
decide to buy a major purchase of a cultivator or a tractor or a 
piece of agricultural equipment. They’ll say no, this year we can 
put on a new set of bearings, we can grease it up, tighten the 
belts, and we’ll make it go another year — discretionary 
decisions. 
 
If something happens where you have no choice you have to 
deal with it; that’s true. But the discretionary things which make 
up a huge percentage of the expenditure decisions of people in 
the province are going to be turned off or certainly turned down 
in a major, major way. 
 
And so instantly when this reality of where we’re going to be 
with commodity prices hit . . . our businesses started feeling the 
impact in terms of the downturn in their sales. And it’s been 
quoted on the media, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the impact. 
 
I’ve heard from implement dealers; we’ve heard from major 
short-line and local implement manufacturers, all of them are 
cutting back. All of them are cutting back on their production; 
all of them are cutting back and they’re laying off people. 
 
And now we have a situation that has a double impact 
potentially for the government. We have a situation where not 
only were the farmers are not going to pay income tax or taxes 
on their operation, we now have people that have been laid off 
because the next level up is cutting back. And why are they 
cutting back? Because they’re not selling things. If they’re not 
selling things at a profit, they too now, the next level, is not 
going to be paying income tax. 
 
And so again the impact on the economy of Saskatchewan starts 
to snowball and we should be talking about that. That is the 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2089 

kind of things that we have to get our heads around and really 
begin to understand what’s happening so that people of this 
province can understand and make adjustments. So we don’t 
panic. So we deal out of a position of strength, a position of 
looking forward instead of saying looking back and say what 
happened, of trying to understand the dynamics of what’s going 
on here. 
 
And the next step happens when the whole situation moves to 
the cities, in terms of the agricultural spending patterns that will 
happen. And of course we say well it is true that agriculture as a 
percentage of the total Saskatchewan economy has diminished. 
That’s true. And we have other sectors that are picking up the 
pace to some extent. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look briefly at that. My 
colleagues who are in the oil sector and things of that nature 
have talked about what’s happening in those areas. But suffice 
it to say is that, compared to where the projections of the 
Finance department were in the spring budget, compared to 
what has been happening in reality over this period of time, if 
you look at that we see a tremendous decrease in the price of a 
barrel of oil for example. And so what happens is that the oil 
patch, suddenly like the farmers, is going to lose a tremendous 
amount of revenue. And I doubt very much if their expenses 
have dropped off. 
 
So again you have a situation whereby revenue is down 
dramatically, there’s going to be a direct impact on the 
provincial economy, and we should be staying here talking 
about what that’s going to do to the provincial economy across 
the piece. 
 
I understand because of the Asian flu, that the prices that the 
Asian customers that we have, are bidding less for our potash 
for example. So in another major area of this province’s 
economy we potentially are going to see diminished commodity 
prices. The Provincial Auditor said that, that that is a thing that 
we’re very vulnerable to. Commodity prices are not strictly 
grain prices. They are prices across the piece of the things that 
this province has an abundance of. And so that happens. 
 
If we end up looking at the impact of what’s going on in the 
Russian economy, a tremendous, tremendous upheaval, and 
they are having a very difficult time meeting any kind of 
currency requirements. So they’re one of the major producers of 
uranium in the world, our single largest competitor I believe. I 
stand to be corrected, but certainly very significant. 
 
So what are they going to do? They need to generate American 
dollars. They need to sell something. And so they start 
discounting a product like that on the market. What’s going to 
happen? It potentially decreases the value that we’re getting out 
of the North from the uranium wealth that we have. All across 
the piece what’s happening in the economy is having an impact 
in a dramatic way, as we speak, on our provincial economy. 
 
And instead of talking about it, instead of dealing with it, 
instead of facing it in an honest and a concerted way, we want 
to bail out and go home. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that simply 
is not responsible. It’s simply not good enough. And you can go 
through the whole segment of what these commodity prices are 
and the impact that’s happening and we will see that this is 

happening in each and every segment of the revenue side of our 
province’s economy. And we need to deal with this. We simply 
must deal with it. And I think that we are neglecting our 
responsibility if we do not do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we look at all of these things we can say that 
there should be overwhelming willingness for this legislature to 
continue to sit. There should be overwhelming willingness for 
the government members opposite, instead of wanting to go 
home and rake the leaves and forget about what their 
responsibilities are, is to stay here and talk about what’s really 
going on, what’s really going on in our communities across this 
province. There are major, major issues out there that we 
simply have to deal with. 
 
And on the other side, we have situations that are creating an 
expense problem. You know, we end up now saying, well oil’s 
gone down, but aren’t we lucky natural gas is really high and 
expensive. Oh boy, are we ever lucky! Because going into the 
winter at the coldest time of the year where everybody needs 
natural gas, we’re told that we got to pay a third more for it. 
Thirty per cent I believe is how much the gas, the actual gas 
cost is going up. 
 
And so what they do then, they say for the average family what 
they do is they take the delivery cost and say, oh that isn’t going 
up. They’re taking the service charge and say that isn’t going 
up. And then they kind of package this in their phony-baloney 
little program called this review program and they say, oh but it 
only amounts to 10 per cent when you add all that together. It’s 
only going to be seven bucks for the average family. 
 
Well maybe it is going to be only seven bucks a month for the 
average family, but there’s going to be lots of families that pay 
more than that because who’s average? And that’s what’s going 
to happen. So we’re going to have an increase on the expense 
side. Never mind that revenue is going downhill big time; now 
we’re blessed with the fact that our expenses are also going up. 
 
And so it’s not exactly a real good deal when we say on one 
side gas prices are high. We forget they might be a good deal 
for government but it’s not necessarily a good deal for our 
families. And what we have to remember in all of this — and 
we get to forget it — even the Provincial Auditor, when he 
looks at these numbers, they get pretty clinical. You know you 
can be buried in all of this stuff, and you say, h’m, maybe this is 
a pretty good deal, maybe the government is doing well. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important to have that 
discussion and this document is very good in terms of putting 
things in a factual way. But that has to be taken in context of 
what is happening to our families. 
 
I remember in 1981, I believe, that the big thing was the family 
of Crown corporations. And we’re almost getting back to that 
again because we’re so proud of how our Crown corporations 
are doing. We’re so proud about the fact that the Crown 
corporations, as the Provincial Auditor pointed out, is making a 
whole bunch of money. I mean they made $900 million more in 
1998 than they did in 1991. That’s something really to be proud 
of — I guess it is. 
 
If you look at all of these issues I guess it is a good deal. But we 



2090 Saskatchewan Hansard October 21, 1998 

always forget that somebody is paying for it. We forget that 
those very people that are putting this money into this nice 
balance sheet are the people of the province. They’re the people 
we represent. And so when we talk about this, we can’t just talk 
about how proud we are of government as if we were some 
entity outside of the people we represent. We are the people we 
represent, and we should be close to them and understand 
what’s going on. 
 
And if I knew, if I knew that everyone was going to go home 
and talk to their constituents to really get an honest assessment 
of what’s going on, I might even be a little more forgiving 
about saying this House should adjourn. But where have they 
been the last while? 
 
Where have the government members been until Tuesday 
morning when they finally woke up to the fact there was a crisis 
in agriculture? And we were glad to support and unanimously 
agreed that there is a crisis, and that something needs to be 
focused and looked at by our federal Liberal government to get 
into the game here. Somebody’s got to be screaming from the 
rooftops about the impact of the subsidy war at the Common 
Market and the United States. 
 
(1645) 
 
What do we hear out of these guys? Nothing. Nothing. Our 
rural people out there are just craving for someone to stand up 
and say we understand, and within the limits of the things that 
we can do and the tools that we have at our disposal we’re 
going to be there for you. They know they’re not. 
 
I mean what we have is an Agriculture minister in 
Saskatchewan that wanted to go home on Monday, woke up on 
Tuesday morning to find a Saskatchewan Party press release 
calling for an emergency debate, and he says, oh my God, there 
must be a crisis in agriculture. And whoa, by gosh, I got the 
press release from him about 11:30. And I thought this was 
great. 
 
And I was really impressed even to see the member from 
Rosetown get into the debate. I remember him when I wasn’t 
even farming. He was the guy that took the GRIP program 
away from farmers. I asked him yesterday. I said, I’m a town 
kid; I don’t know exactly how the GRIP thing worked; why 
don’t you explain it to us. He didn’t say a word. Nothing about 
that whole issue. He wasn’t going to do it. The farmers know 
what happened out there. We should be talking about that today 
and to say, what’s going on here. 
 
And if we had gone home on Monday like this government 
wanted to, we wouldn’t even have known that there was an 
agriculture crisis, because these guys spent their whole summer 
doing something other than talking to their people. Had to be. I 
don’t know what they were doing. I mean, they were busy 
wondering what was going on, eh? 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that it is important that this 
Assembly remain in session to talk about these issues. They’re 
critical. They’re so critical, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we do that 
because it doesn’t just affect farmers. I’ve heard people say, 
well what do you guys know; you’re all rural MLAs; the people 
in the cities don’t feel the same way about this. Well just a 

minute, I think that maybe people in the cities are not nearly as 
naïve as this government opposite would like to think they are. 
 
People in the cities understand that the heart and soul, the 
lifeblood of Saskatchewan is rooted in agriculture. It may 
always be that. And members opposite who do represent the 
few rural seats that they hold know that people are saying that 
to them. They understand that. But it doesn’t get through 
because this government thinks its base is in the urban centre, 
and the urban centre doesn’t care what happens in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rural Saskatchewan is important to 
Saskatoon and Regina and Moose Jaw and Prince Albert and 
Yorkton. It’s critically important to our larger centres just as our 
larger centres are critically important to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
People in this province understand there’s a only a million of us 
in this great province and there is absolutely no sense in 
thinking that we can live without each other. And it doesn’t 
matter if you’re a person in Saskatoon or Regina that works in 
an office tower or a retail outlet or in a service industry or in a 
manufacturing plant that has nothing to do with agriculture. 
They understand that what happens to agriculture into rural 
Saskatchewan is going to have an impact on them very, very 
quickly. There might be a little drag time, that’s true, but it’s 
going to happen. And the two are going to come together and 
we’re all in this together. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to be talking about that. 
We need to be talking about that in this Assembly and we 
shouldn’t be going home. Shame on us for rushing home. We 
should be here in the government, by the procedures of the 
House, should have been bringing forward motions and 
legislation that could be debated, that could have dealt with 
some of the issues of things that are going on. 
 
They’re not going to just happen and become a problem or 
become a challenge in February or March when the government 
hitches up the courage to call the House again — it’s happening 
now. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, instead of dealing with it in 
hindsight, instead of looking in the rear-view mirror as this 
government only seems to be able to do, why don’t we focus 
forward for once. Why don’t we look forward and say, let’s be 
a little bit proactive. Let’s understand the challenges that are 
happening and let’s be a little bit proactive about what could be 
done. 
 
Let’s do that. Let’s create an environment where people are 
more capable of dealing with these issues. Let’s see if there’s 
any way that we can get . . . leave money in people’s hands so 
they can make the decisions that are necessary to affect their 
livelihood, and let them create the jobs instead of thinking that 
we’re the ones that can do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of our cities understand this; they’re 
just insulated from it a little bit. You can’t tell me that a person 
in the biggest law firm or the biggest accounting firm or the 
biggest computer firm in Regina or Saskatoon are immune, are 
immune from what happens in agriculture. You can’t tell me 
that it isn’t going to impact on the success of their business very 



October 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2091 

directly. 
 
You can’t tell me that the person that lives in Saskatoon or 
Regina or other larger centres, that works in the service industry 
or works in small manufacturing or any of the other of those 
areas, is not going to be directly impacted by what’s happening 
in the rest of the province in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And so we’re all involved in this. We should all be talking 
about it. We should all be coming together in this session and 
saying, what are we going to do — what decisions need to be 
made now in order to mitigate the severity of what is likely to 
happen in this province. Why aren’t we doing that? 
 
What are the members opposite so busy doing between now and 
March that we can’t stay here and talk about this? Why can’t we 
be talking about these issues? Why can’t we be sitting here and 
saying, let’s deal with these issues. I mean I understand, it’s a 
nice day, he wants to go home. Well I want to go home. I said 
that. I think I got as good a reason as anybody in this Assembly 
for wanting to go home. But it’s important for us to deal with 
this issue. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is simply a wrong decision to 
adjourn this House. It’s a wrong decision. And the only way we 
have as an opposition within the tools and the legislative agenda 
that there’s there, if the government refuses, if the government 
refuses, if I look on the blues today, what have we got? 
 
We got orders of the day, government motions to adjourn. 
That’s it — number one, let’s go home. There isn’t a number 
two or a three or a four or a five or a ten of things that could be 
done that potentially would be important to mitigate the severity 
of the issues that I’ve talked about, the economy of this 
province. All that there is on government motions is let’s go 
home. That’s it. 
 
But there’s a whole lot of other things that have been placed 
before this Assembly through the course of the session that we 
could be debating, and my colleagues have talked about a whole 
lot of them. Of issues and Bills and private members’ Bills, of 
ideas and concepts that we should be discussing and debating 
that go from number 1 to 36. 
 
There are 36 opposition private member Bills on the order 
paper that this government doesn’t even want to talk about. And 
what do we have from the government? We got one, and what 
does the one thing that it says? It’s interesting, because look at 
it. It’s on the page here that says government motions, orders of 
the day, government motions, let’s go home. That’s it. One 
item. Let’s go home. So . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Why is the member for 
Kindersley on his feet? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon we have 
a very special guest in the Chamber, Mr. Nicholas 

D’Autremont, the son of the member from Cannington. I 
believe Nicholas’s mother is in the Assembly somewhere too. 
She may be back at . . . not present currently, but she will be 
perhaps before very long. 
 
Nicholas has suffered indeed a tragedy as we all know in this 
Assembly. But just as at times we think it’s such a tragedy that 
we can’t carry on, Nicholas has showed us all I think a great 
deal of courage. And we should be congratulating him for the 
kind of courage that he has shown in the face of adversity. 
 
We all from time to time think we are pretty hard done by, but 
given the circumstances here, it makes us all feel pretty lucky I 
think to have our health. But at the same time, we can look at 
people like Nicholas for inspiration. And I think that that’s 
very, very important given the circumstances that he faces now 
and into the future. 
 
So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming him 
here this afternoon to the legislature and say, hooray for the 
young man that we have before us. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In light of 
our guest in the Assembly and in light of the time of the day, I 
would ask if we would be able to adjourn for the day. If the 
government would agree to that, I think it would be appropriate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Move to adjourn debate. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Okay. Thank you very much, then, Mr. 
Speaker. In light of the guest we have and the time of the day, I 
would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2061 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2061 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2061 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2061 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2061 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2061 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2061 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2062 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................2062 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................2091 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Closure of Plains Health Centre 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2062 
 Moosomin Girl Picked for Midget Hockey Team 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2062 
 Synchrotron Light Source Project 
  Whitmore.................................................................................................................................................................................2062 
 Athabasca Visit 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2062 
 Wadena Condominium Project 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2063 
 Humboldt Oktoberfest 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2063 
 Volunteer Recognition Awards 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................2063 
 Good News for Weyburn 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................2063 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Highways in Saskatchewan 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2064 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................2064 
 Possible Job Action at Regional Colleges 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2065 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2065 
 Wheelchair Buses in Saskatoon 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2065 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................2065 
 Benefits Under Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living Program 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2066 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................2066 
 Health Care 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2066 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2066 
 Supplements for Low Income Self- Employed People 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2067 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................2068 
 Bus Passes for Saskatoon Students 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................2068 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2068 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
MOTIONS 
 Substitution of Member on Non-Controversial Bills Committee 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2068 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................2068 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2068 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2075 



 

  Van Mulligen.................................................................................................................................................................2078, 2083 
  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................2078, 2080 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2085 
 


