





























































Hansard: June 05, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1659 
 June 5, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Gronlid, Tisdale, Ridgedale, and Melfort. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions to 
present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from the Melfort, Naicam, St. Brieux, and 
Tisdale areas. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, as well to present 
petitions, reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present this morning is 
signed by individuals from the communities of Melfort, 
Bjorkdale, Kinistino, and Love. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present this morning. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure the required level of service in 
radiology is maintained in North Central Health District 

and the priorities of its board be adjusted accordingly. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The community of Melfort, Mr. Speaker, are where the 
signatures are from. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions and these are signed by the people from the 
community of Rosetown and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding that fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens in the north-east concerned about the 
provision of radiology services in the north-east. People on 
this petition, Mr. Speaker, that have signed it are from the 
communities of Tisdale, Ridgedale, Nipawin, and Crooked 
River, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
an immediate action to ensure the required level of service 
in radiology is maintained in the North Central Health 
District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Everyone that has signed this petition is from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present to the Assembly this morning as well, regarding the 
North Central Health District and the level of service that 
people are concerned about in that district, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This petition comes from the Mistatim area of the province of 
Saskatchewan and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to rise 
again today on behalf of people of Saskatchewan to present a 
petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and 
providing adequate funding to the Regina District Health 
Board so that the essential services provided at the Plains 
may be continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has signatures on from the 



1660 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

communities of Assiniboia, Coronach, and Killdeer. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition this morning, and the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to address the issue of reducing 
the high cost of power rates in northern Saskatchewan. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Uranium City as well as Stony Rapids, and I so present. 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that we have petitions signed 
from all throughout the land. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this morning to 
present petitions on behalf of residents of the north-west 
concerned about the confusing and dangerous traffic situation at 
the entrance to North Battleford. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to relocate Highway 40 to east of the 
David Laird Campground in order to alleviate the 
congestion at the entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 

Your petitioners this morning come from Maymont, Cando, 
Loon Lake, and North Battleford. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in bringing forward petitions. These ones are 
from people throughout the province in their efforts to stop the 
closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are all 
from the community of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of the citizens concerned about the closure 
of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Fort Qu’Appelle and the city of Regina. I so 
present. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy 
today to present petitions on behalf of the folks from across the 
province. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray, Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
These folks come from Tompkins, Maple Creek, Regina, 
Medicine Hat, Shaunavon, Gull Lake, Cabri, Swift Current, 
Portreeve, and Hazlet, and all throughout the land. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to twin the Trans-Canada Highway; to 
save the Plains Health Centre; to call an independent 
public inquiry into Channel Lake; to have Workers’ 
Compensation Board reinstate pensions; to relocate 
Highway 40 to alleviate congestion at North Battleford; to 
allow Steven and Kimberley Walchuk to remain in the 
custody of grandparents; to reduce the high cost of power 
rates in the North; to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure survival of the Carrot River 
Hospital; to ensure required level of service in radiology in 
the North Central Health District. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to introduce a group of young 
students from the community of Theodore to you and to 
members in the Assembly. Visiting the legislature this morning, 
Mr. Speaker, are a group of grade 5 and 6 students from the 
community of Theodore — 18 in total. And I’d like to introduce 
their teacher, Valerie Jeske; and accompanying this group is a 
group of fine parents — Wendy Maleschuk, Barb Medvid, Dick 
Onslow, Shelley Kramer, and Cheryl Spezowka. 
 
I’m very pleased that you’re able to make it here so early this 
morning and I know you’ve had the opportunity to see some of 
the things in the Legislative Building. And I’m looking forward 
to meeting them shortly, at about 10:30. 
 
I ask all members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There 
are 24 grade 8 students from Wildwood School in your gallery 
and I’d like to introduce them to you and to all members of the 
Assembly this morning. Their teachers are Ms. Shannon Miko 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

and a good friend of mine, Honya Olson. And their chaperon 
today is Mrs. Elaine Wilkinson. 
 
Ms. Olson has brought many, many students to the Legislative 
Assembly and they’re always quite prepared when they come. 
I’d like everyone to give them a warm welcome today please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have the 
privilege of having a school group in today. They travelled all 
the way from Porcupine Plain so that means they got up very 
early this morning. 
 
There’s 24 grade 8 students here sitting in the east gallery, with 
their teacher Mr. Anderson. I look forward to probably the very 
good questions they’ve been waiting to ask me, so I will talk to 
you later in room 255. Welcome everyone. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Health Care Requirements 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
concerned about several events that have happened in the past 
few weeks. Last week a trio of tornadoes swept through 
southern Alberta. Two weeks ago a string of severe 
thunderstorms produced at least four tornadoes from 
Gravelbourg to Vanguard. Luckily, Mr. Speaker, there were few 
injuries and minor damage. 
 
Unfortunately, the people of Spencer, South Dakota were not so 
lucky. Only a few days ago a tornado destroyed 90 per cent of 
the town of 300. It killed 6 people, injured 150, and 18 of the 41 
people treated at hospitals had to be admitted. 
 
Why does this concern me? Because if five stabbings on any 
given weekend overwhelm the health care system in Regina, 
what would happen if a natural disaster were to occur? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not unreasonable to believe this could happen 
in Regina. A city of Regina emergency planner said tornadoes 
and summer storms threaten people in Regina more than 
anything else. The last severe tornado in Regina in 1912 
brought devastation. The tornado’s impact proved to be 
dramatic. It caused over a million dollars in damages, claimed 
28 lives, injured hundreds, and rendered almost 3,000 homeless. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have given dozens of examples this session of 
what long waiting-lists and bed shortages have done to people 
in Regina and Saskatchewan. The health care system is in crisis 
without a natural disaster happening. The solution is simple. 
The people at the Save the Plains rallies understand the 
problem. Simply put, we need more beds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan’s Economy 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 
pleasure to follow the Liberals who in themselves are a bit of a 

natural disaster these days. But I’d like to share with you some 
good news. 
 
For the past 61 days members on the government side have 
been true to form in terms of promoting the benefits of our 
strong economy for Saskatchewan people. The strength of the 
Saskatchewan economy is not limited to our major cities and in 
fact we see throughout the province good news — even in 
opposition ridings. 
 
Taking a look at the Shaunavon Standard, there’s a headline 
that says, “Southwest Saskatchewan turning into a little 
Hollywood.” Not surprising given that the member from Wood 
River is quite a stunt man in himself, often leaping before he 
looks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see this around the province — this kind of 
good news. And I have other good news for the opposition. 
Post-Secondary Education has recently put out a new book 
called the Job Search Handbook which will actually come in, I 
think, quite handy for opposition members as they prepare for 
their new life after the next election. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Regina South will 
recognize of course that he’s using the document that he has as 
an exhibit and I’ll ask that the pages remove it from the 
Chamber. 
 

Museum Month 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, June is Museum Month in 
Saskatchewan and I’m pleased to rise to pay tribute to those 
who work to preserve our heritage. I want to pay tribute in 
Museum Month to those who work to preserve our heritage and 
to bring it to life for our residents, especially for the young 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
However, this year could have been a very bad year for 
museums and art galleries in Saskatchewan. In January of this 
year, the Minister of Finance announced a new tax grab 
whereby donations of art to museums and art galleries would 
become taxable, and people who’ve made gifts of art to our art 
galleries for public enjoyment would have to pay the PST 
(provincial sales tax) on them. This would have been 
devastating to our museums and art galleries and would have 
guaranteed that donations to our museums and art galleries 
would dry up. 
 
I congratulate those who work in our museums and art galleries, 
the work they do to keep our heritage alive. And I also say with 
some relief that — it was with great relief — that the Minister 
of Finance thought better of this cheap tax grab and reversed it 
and cancelled it. And we are all grateful for that in keeping our 
museums and art galleries alive in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Building Independence Call Centre 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m delighted 
to tell you about the success of the Building Independence call 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

centre. This call centre handles inquiries related to the 
“Building Independence — Investing in Families” programs for 
low-income families with children in this province: programs 
such as the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement, family health benefits and the 
provincial training allowance. 
 
The call centre is open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. on weekdays, and 
on weekends from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 
 
In the first three months since this call centre was opened, from 
late March until the end of May, it received more than 5,000 
calls. But that’s not all, Mr. Speaker. Since the centre began 
accepting applications for the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement on Monday, June 1 — just four days ago — it has 
received more than 2,971 calls. And I’m sure that number is 
higher even now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in that short time, more than 1,000 adult applicants, 
representing more than 2,000 children in this province, have 
registered for the employment supplement. This supplement 
will play an important role in providing assistance for children 
in low-income families by helping families stay in the 
workforce and in assisting families to become independent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are pleased with the public interest in these 
programs. All of the Building Independence initiatives are 
extremely significant for this province. Through these 
programs, Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 

Young Hockey Players from Northern Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in tribute to 
great hockey players of northern Saskatchewan. These hockey 
players include John Young of Buffalo Narrows, Abe Apesis of 
Patuanak, Louis Gardiner of Ile-a-la-Crosse, and John Corrigal 
of Canoe Lake. 
 
And now we have a new star a rising star. A. J. Gardiner of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse is a 10-year-old hockey player and he has a great 
summer to look forward to. A. J. has made the line-up for the 
Triple A Hockey Club based out of Edmonton, Alberta. He’ll 
be playing with 14 other novice-age hockey players. The team 
is called AAA Western Canada Native Selects. A. J. plays right 
wing and his favourite NHL team is the Montreal Canadiens. 
 
A.J. was asked to a try-out camp at the Western Hockey League 
tournament, which is an annual event, held in Saskatoon for 
minor hockey players. The next stage was to attend the try-outs 
which were held in Hobbema, Alberta. He made that team but it 
was not easy, as there was 40 other boys who were all invited to 
compete for positions. Players come to try out from as far away 
west as Vancouver, B.C. (British Columbia) and The Pas, 
Manitoba. Players also come from the eastern provinces. 
 
It will be a busy, exciting summer for A.J. and his family 
attending practices, exhibition games, and tournaments in 
Calgary, Edmonton, and Red Deer, just to name a few. 
 
All of A.J.’s family, especially his parents, his grandparents, are 
all helping out with the fund-raising. The whole community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse has supported this fund-raising effort. We know 
A.J. will enjoy himself and will try very hard, and it will be a 
learning experience that will last him a lifetime. 
 
The family of Robbie Sr. and Joyce Gardiner wish to thank . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 

Michael Zerr Memorial Golf Tournament 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
inform my colleagues of a very worthy fund-raising event, 
which took place on the weekend. 
 
The third annual Michael Zerr Memorial Golf Tournament was 
held this past Saturday, May 30, at the Emerald Park Golf 
Course. The event is organized and hosted every year by Mr. 
Zerr’s friends and former colleagues at the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority. 
 
Mr. Zerr passed away suddenly in 1995 at the age of 40. He had 
worked for the Liquor and Gaming Authority for 15 years, 
filling the positions of planning analyst, properties manager, 
distribution manager, and as a regional manager for liquor 
stores and franchises. 
 
In 1996 the friends of Mr. Zerr started the Michael Zerr 
Memorial Golf Tournament. All proceeds from the tournament 
are placed in a scholarship fund in Mr. Zerr’s name at Campion 
College at the University of Regina. This year the 96 golfers 
involved in the tournament raised approximately $3,500 for the 
fund, bringing the three-year total to over $6,000. 
 
Scholarships are handed out to students with both academic 
achievement and financial need. The decision on the granting of 
the scholarships is made by Michael’s wife, Cecilia, in 
consultation with the Campion College staff. 
 
In addition, this year the Michael Zerr Memorial Golf 
Tournament had the opportunity to host a national hero, former 
Toronto Maple Leaf captain, Mr. Dave Keon. Dave Keon was 
my all-time hockey hero, Mr. Speaker, and fortunately for me I 
got to golf with him all day. So to all those hockey fans out 
there I’m now able to say that I played on the same team as 
Dave Keon. 
 
I’d like to congratulate all involved. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prairie Fire Rugby Team 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are two kinds of 
scrum. Both of them mind-numbing in their own way. 
 
The one involves being surrounded by the media with cameras, 
lights, and microphones. But there is another kind of scrum — 
more invigorating, more entertaining, more intellectually 
challenging, and more relaxing for me because all I have to do 
is watch. 
 
The second scrum of course is associated with the game of 
rugby. And because of the efforts of Mr. Karl Fix of Fix 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

Building Products, and several other rugby enthusiasts in 
Regina, we now can all see scrums, drop kicks, mauls, line outs, 
rucks, and even touch downs. 
 
Big time rugby has come to Regina. Tomorrow at 6:30 p.m. at 
Regina Rugby Park, in my constituency, I urge you to attend the 
third game of the season for the Prairie Fire, our undefeated 
entry in the Rugby Canada Super League. 
 
All members, but especially the member from Meadow Lake, 
will be interested to know that one of the stars of the Prairie 
Fire is joltin’ John Law, the president of SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation). John is also the Chair of 
the management committee, which also includes my brother 
Ralph as vice-Chair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prairie Fire is a welcome edition to the 
entertainment offerings of our city, and I wish all players, 
coaches, and management well as they move towards the 
national championships. Thank you. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this morning are for the Minister of Labour. Mr. 
Minister, last night in Labour estimates you indicated that your 
government is very close to getting rid of your union preference 
tendering policy — the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement). I’m glad to see that you’re finally adopting one of 
the policies of the Saskatchewan Party. Of course it’s three 
years too late, but better late than never I guess. 
 
Saskatchewan contractors have already suffered tremendous 
damage to their businesses as a result of this unfair policy, and 
taxpayers are out millions of dollars to pay off your union 
leader friends. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you getting ready to adopt one of the 
Saskatchewan Party policies — scrapping the union tendering 
preference policy and replace it with a fair and open Crown 
tendering policy? Will you admit to the Assembly today and to 
the people of Saskatchewan that your union preference 
tendering policy has been an absolute failure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I will admit no such thing. 
What the member fails to say in his lengthy question was the 
fact that the Devine government, his predecessors, had created a 
situation in the construction industry that had led the whole 
industry to the point of chaos, and a practical collapse of the 
whole collective bargaining system. 
 
And if they thought that this government was going to sit by 
and see the building trade unions in this province get crushed 
underfoot, they’re badly mistaken. 
 
The CCTA was the kind of lifeline they needed in order just to 
sustain existence, their existence, until the situation could be 
improved. And indeed some of the unions, some of the trade 
unions in the building trades failed to survive — failed to 

survive, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the CCTA, in spite of all the 
efforts that were made to keep them going. 
 
That government, that party’s predecessor, the Conservative 
government, created the situation; the CCTA helped to preserve 
it until we can get to better times. And those times are just 
around the corner. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, last night you 
admitted the reason that you brought in this unfair policy was to 
throw a lifeline to the unions in Saskatchewan. You may have 
threw them a lifeline, but you threw everyone else an anchor, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
You threw an anchor to the contractors, you threw an anchor to 
the workers, and worst of all, you threw an anchor to every 
Saskatchewan taxpayer in this province who was forced to pay 
millions of dollars in increased utility rates to pay for your 
policy. And for what? So the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
could pay off a few union leader friends. 
 
Mr. Minister, now that you’ve finally come to your senses and 
admitted this policy was an abject failure, can you tell us, how 
much did this policy cost, how much this unfair policy cost the 
taxpayers of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — This is a question where my learned 
friend has no idea what the answer is, and we have no idea what 
the answer is because there’s no way of knowing this; there’s 
no way of knowing this. 
 
We’ve heard the party opposite make the wildest accusations 
about it. The person that just laughed the loudest is the member 
from Kelvington or wherever she’s from — laughed the 
loudest. She herself has said — in press statements — wild 
accusations about the cost of this particular program. 
 
So far as we have been able to determine, it has not been a 
costly agreement at all. We are not able to identify any 
circumstance in which the cost to the taxpayer is greater than it 
otherwise would be. And that is the fact of the matter. 
 
Now all of this was necessary, and I want to repeat this because 
it’s so important, because the predecessor of that party, the 
Conservative government of Grant Devine, allowed spin-off 
companies to exist in this province for years and years. And it 
completely destroyed effective collective bargaining in the 
construction industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kenosee Youth Camp 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, your young 
offenders’ facility at Kenosee is out of control. In the past two 
weeks, seven escapes and two car thefts, and a high-speed chase 
that resulted in $10,000 of damage to two police cruisers and a 
stolen car. 
 
Mr. Minister, Kenosee area residents are afraid. They don’t see 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

you doing anything about it. No wonder people call it Camp 
Walk-A-Way. Mr. Minister, what are you doing to beef up 
security at your Kenosee young offenders’ facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we would hardly describe 
the circumstances out of control. We are very concerned, we are 
very concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the recent runaways from 
the Kenosee Youth Camp. We are extremely concerned about 
this and we are again reviewing all of the security arrangements 
at Kenosee. 
 
I can report to the House, Mr. Speaker, and report to that 
member that significant measures have been taken in the 
Kenosee circumstance to strengthen security, and folks in the 
community of Kenosee know this. We have added staff to 
night-time supervision. We have put new alarm systems into the 
camp. We have developed a community protocol now to 
telephone loop with the community and with the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police). 
 
I also want to reassure the member that those youths who have 
escaped are now in secure custody and they will have to face 
the consequences of their actions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If seven 
escapes in two weeks isn’t out of control, I would hate to see 
the situation get out of control. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is just one more example of how ridiculous 
the entire concept of open custody is. These kids are in the 
facility because they broke the law and nothing is done to 
actually keep them in custody. 
 
Mr. Minister, we all agree with the goal of rehabilitation but 
your first priority has to be protection of the public. And what 
are you doing about it? Nothing. 
 
 I see one of the young offenders is writing an apology. He 
should be writing an IOU for $10,000 for the damage that he 
caused. He should be doing community service and providing 
restitution until he pays it off. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to start taking this issue 
seriously? What specific plans do you have to improve the 
security in the young offenders’ facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have spoken to the 
member about some of the changes that have happened to 
improve security in open-custody facilities. To remind the 
member again, and all members, that a youth who is placed in 
open custody is placed there by the courts, having been judged 
by the courts to not present a risk to the community. 
 
In open custody the young people are involved in education, 
they’re involved in training, they’re involved in counselling, 
they’re involved in rehabilitation, and in some cases they’re 
involved in some very physical activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are we doing about the young offenders in 
Saskatchewan? We’re doing a number of things, a host of 
things. We have lobbied the federal government, and we’re 

pleased to see changes coming to the Young Offenders Act. We 
are building a community justice system . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now I’ve not been having 
a difficulty hearing the questions but I’m having some 
consistent difficulty being able to hear the answers being 
provided and I’ll ask . . . order, order . . . and I’ll ask for the 
cooperation of all the members to enable the minister’s answer 
to be heard clearly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we are building a 
community justice system which seeks to make youth more 
accountable to their victims and more accountable to their 
communities . . . in their community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want again to re-emphasize in this House that when we 
speak of young offenders in our province we are speaking of a 
small minority of the young people of Saskatchewan — 94,000 
Saskatchewan young people fit the ages covered by the Young 
Offenders Act. We have approximately 400 in custody, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s less than 1 per cent. Let’s keep in mind that the 
vast, vast majority of Saskatchewan young people are good 
kids. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hiring of Additional Nurses 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, last 
month we learned the NDP’s plan for making up with 
thousands of angry, overworked nurses was to buy off their 
union president. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that hasn’t 
worked. So the NDP decided to take another crack at buying off 
nurses by announcing 200 new nursing positions. Well, Mr. 
Speaker and Mr. Minister, that hasn’t worked either because 
most nurses in this province don’t believe you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s health reforms have resulted in a 
massive exodus of nurses from Saskatchewan because there are 
no full-time jobs. Mr. Minister, you are asking nurses to work 
on a casual basis — no set schedule, no set hours, no 
opportunity to plan for holidays, family events, no stability. 
And now suddenly we are asked to believe the NDP has 
suddenly seen the light. 
 
Mr. Minister, where are all the new full-time nursing positions 
you promised? How many new, permanent, full-time nurses 
have you hired since you made your announcement two weeks 
ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
Minister of Health, as a member of this legislature — as I have 
talked to members of the nursing profession in my community 
and across the province — they are, and the citizens of 
Saskatchewan are, absolutely delighted to see the injection of 
200 new front-line nurses in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I tell you, Mr. Speaker . . . I tell you, Mr. 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

Speaker, what they’re not delighted with. It’s the position of 
that party identified by its leader in his bid to lead that 
Conservative Party when he said, when he said, Mr. Speaker, to 
the people of Saskatchewan — his cure for any health care 
ailments in Saskatchewan would be to reduce the services 
covered by medicare, to drop elective surgeries. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like that leader some day to come before 
the press and explain just exactly which procedures if he were 
government — which will be a long time from today — if he 
were government, which procedures would he drop? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, the truth is that even if the NDP promise of 200 nurses 
is not just a smoke and mirrors promise to help win the 
Saskatoon Eastview by-election, there are very few nurses left 
in Saskatchewan to hire. And that’s what we’re being told on a 
daily basis. Your NDP health reforms have chased most of our 
nurses out of the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, two weeks ago you promised 200 new nurses. My 
question is simple. How many new, full-time, permanent nurses 
have been hired? Mr. Minister, will you now admit that health 
districts are being forced to ask their existing nursing staff to 
work overtime and to offer casual nursing staff more hours? 
Will you admit that very few, if any, new full-time nursing 
positions have been hired and that your promises of 200 new 
nurses is pure fiction? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the purest fiction is — if 
anyone thinks that the party that put this province $15 billion in 
debt — has any credibility in public policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 200 new health worker positions are being 
established. As we meet this morning, districts across the 
province are assessing where those positions are best going to 
be utilized. 
 
It has been stated regularly by the Minister of Health: he and 
this government has recognized the pressure on the front-line 
workers. We recognize also the need to train and encourage 
more people into the nursing profession so the Department of 
Health, the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association), SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), and 
Post-Secondary Education are working together to create 
educational opportunities to graduate more nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are providing that service to the people of 
Saskatchewan because this government and this party is firmly 
— firmly, firmly — convinced of the benefits of medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, six weeks ago I told this 
Assembly how Margaret Bintner had become a victim of the 
health care system. Mrs. Bintner waited six months to remove 
blood clots from her leg. She finally underwent surgery but only 

four days later was released from hospital to make room for 
another patient. Only three hours after being released, she 
suffered a stroke. 
 
I can now tell the House that after Mrs. Bintner was moved to 
the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre she fell and broke her hip, 
her condition deteriorated, and only days ago, she passed away. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health: Mr. Minister, what do 
you have to say to Margaret Bintner’s daughter who joins us 
today in the Legislative Assembly here and feels that her 
mother was abandoned by the health care system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with every member in this 
House we would extend our deepest sympathy to the Bintner 
family — of course that’s what we do. Mr. Speaker, I can’t 
make any specific comment on any specific medical practice or 
issue that is not in my purview, it would not be in the purview 
of the Minister of Health. 
 
What I can assure that member and I can assure all the members 
and the people of Saskatchewan — this government is 100 per 
cent committed to building the best publicly funded, publicly 
accessible medicare system and health care system not only in 
Canada but on the continent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, Meryl Bintner won’t tell you 
that the health care system killed her mother, but she will tell 
you that the system certainly contributed to her death. She feels 
the 6-month wait for surgery was unacceptable. The pressure 
physicians were under to make her mother’s hospital bed 
available for the next patient was unacceptable. And the lack of 
proper staffing during her mother’s stay in hospital was also 
unacceptable. 
 
It’s one thing for a senior to pass away when their time is up; 
it’s quite another though when the process is speeded up 
because the system has failed. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you finally going to accept some 
responsibility, or are we once again going to hear you blame 
someone else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this government takes very 
seriously its responsibility for the provision of health care for 
the people of Saskatchewan. That responsibility is twofold, Mr. 
Speaker, it is to provide the fiscal and financial resources. In 
this year’s budget, more resources are being provided to health 
than ever before in the history of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have — as we have just discussed — very recently provided 
200 new front-line positions. Mr. Speaker, I read in recent press 
coverage, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, the doctor in 
charge saying that we’ve gone a long ways, we’re going a long 
ways to meet Saskatchewan’s doctor shortages, particularly in 
rural Saskatchewan. That’s one side of our responsibility. 
 
The other side of the responsibility of the Department of Health 
is to work with our health districts, to work with our health 
professionals, our doctors, our nurses, our LPNs (licensed 
practical nurse), our people at the very front lines. To work with 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

them as best we can to ensure the highest quality medical 
practices are available in this province and that they’re 
supported and we work with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we hear the minister and 
the government doing a lot of talking but we see very little 
action. And that’s the reason that Meryl Bintner has joined us 
today to try and convince you that changes have to be made. 
 
There must be something done to address the fact that people 
are waiting too long on waiting-lists. People are being rushed 
out of hospital too soon, and our nurses are being run off their 
feet trying to care for too many patients. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you make a commitment to address these 
issues, or are you going to continue to sit by and watch as 
Saskatchewan people become victims of the health care system? 
And will you at least listen to Meryl Bintner’s concerns and 
suggestions after question period. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if I’m the only 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), but I happen once 
in awhile to watch Pamela Wallin Live. Some weeks ago Ms. 
Wallin interviewed three nurses from three jurisdictions in 
Canada. They each told a similar story about the pressures at 
the front line — not just in Saskatchewan, but in British 
Columbia, in Newfoundland, in Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I watched that program, do you know what it 
told me? It told me that we have a nation with a federal 
government that is stepping away from its responsibility for the 
provision of health care. You can see that — they have taken $7 
billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since we’ve come to government, we’ve had to 
almost on an annual basis, back-fill precious health care dollars 
that have been ripped from this province and every province by 
the federal Liberal government. 
 
We’ve had to do that and at the same time, reform and 
restructure our system so that it best preserves medicare and is 
best suited for the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a national government that has 
abandoned, abandoned its responsibility to medicare in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Dangerous Goods Route near Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents have 
voiced a great deal of concern about the deteriorating condition 
of our rural road system. In fact the Minister of Highways 
confirmed yesterday that her department has received hundreds 
of damage claims from people whose vehicles have been 
damaged. But you know the situation is really bad when a 
dangerous goods route becomes a dangerous route itself. 
 
Madam Minister, you’ve just received a photo of the dangerous 
goods route just west of Moose Jaw. This photo shows a 
semi-trailer unit which is stuck in the mud and had to be pulled 

out by a front-end loader because this section isn’t paved. 
Madam Minister, you tell me: is this acceptable? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I 
want to say again . . . what we have recognized is that we have 
put together a strategy for Highways and Transportation that 
was released last year which involved a number of issues. Part 
of that was of course more money being spent — $2.5 billion. 
Additional money was put in last year’s budget — $30 million, 
and additional money in this year’s budget — $20 million. And 
we are working throughout this province with local 
governments, with stakeholders, and so on, on the many 
challenges that the transportation system is having to face. 
 
But the one player that is missing in this whole scenario — the 
delinquent player — is the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, with the emphasis necessary, 
again I’ll say: this is the dangerous goods route west of Moose 
Jaw — it’s not paved, and when it rains, it turns into a mud bog. 
 
As a result, this route becomes hazardous for any dangerous 
goods carrier, emergency vehicle, or school bus, which travels 
this section of road on a regular basis. What we have now is a 
recipe for disaster, and like it or not it’s only a matter of time 
before there’s a real serious incident on this road. 
 
Madam Minister, what commitment will you provide today to 
pave this section of road so the dangerous goods route is not a 
danger to travel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, I want to take 
this question on behalf of the government. I want to take the 
question on behalf of the government because I want the 
legislature and the journalists and the public to clearly see 
what’s happening here. 
 
The member from Arm River of the Liberal Party gets up and 
says spend more money in health care. Notwithstanding the fact 
that there’s an over 5 per cent increase in this year’s budget for 
health care — the highest health care expenditure in health care 
in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. Up gets the 
member from Thunder Creek and the member from Thunder 
Creek says, spend more money on highways. 
 
What is his leader doing out in the Saskatoon Eastview 
by-election? Spend more money on health care, spend more 
money on highways, reduce taxes, do not have a deficit, lower 
the debt; and anybody who can do that and credibly and 
responsibly take that view, I’ve got a bridge that I can sell them 
in Regina, in Saskatoon, pretty cheaply. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Special Care Facility in Humboldt 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, St. Mary’s 
Villa, a special care facility in Humboldt, has been forced to 
halt level 4 admissions — those physically and mentally 
incapacitated persons who require the most care. And why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because they are wrestling with a $79,000 deficit. 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

This year the district provided St. Mary’s with a 1.96 per cent 
funding increase, which is far from what is needed to cover, 
increased costs and a 1 per cent wage increase for employees 
and registered nurses. 
 
My question is for the Minister of Health. Here is another 
example of how some of those most in need of special care are 
not getting it. What is your assessment, Mr. Minister, of why 
health districts such as Central Plains are facing deficits and 
forced to turn away those citizens who need help so 
desperately? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again on behalf of the 
minister, I’m unable to comment on the specifics of the 
Humboldt nursing home or the Central Plains budget. I do know 
this, that each district in our province this year received new 
funding dollars. 
 
Is there enough, is there enough, is there ever enough, Mr. 
Speaker? As the Premier just pointed out, the demands of the 
public treasury from the public, from the members of the 
opposition are enormous. Is there enough? There would be 
more, there would be more if we weren’t paying $2 million a 
day in interest — 2 million a day every day in interest payments 
— on the debt that that party put onto the province of 
Saskatchewan. There would be more if we had a federal 
government that participated more fully both in a national roads 
program and in health care funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say to the member in terms of the specific 
issue in the Humboldt community, I’ll pass this inquiry to the 
Minister of Health, and he will provide, I’m sure, more detail. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the mere 
1.96 per cent in funding increases to St. Mary’s Villa was 
discussed by the administrator of the villa who stated, that this 
small increase doesn’t cover inflationary cost and the 1 per cent 
wage increase to staff and nurses. She also states that according 
to the special care home guidelines, they are understaffed by 
nine full-time positions. The budgeted deficit will have to 
include plans to expand staff by two, four-hour positions. 
Because these positions are a priority, they simply provide for 
basic services such as feeding patients. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you agree with the assessment of the 
administrator that the inadequate funding for these individuals 
in greatest need can only result in one of two options — placing 
them in acute care hospital beds or forcing them into privately 
paid for care homes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, since coming to 
government in 1991 we have faced two challenges generally in 
health care. One is to renew and restore and reform a system of 
health care that’s going to suit us well into the 21st century. A 
part of that has been recognizing that the demographics of our 
province are changing that we have an ageing population. 
 
We have therefore in this province built, Mr. Speaker, — I 
think which is the pride of Canada — a home care network 
unlike any other. That reserves, therefore, to the more intensive 
care for those who need heavy level care, the institutional 

settings. Again there’s been change in the institutional settings 
where there have been new beds created, new institutional beds 
created across this province for long-term care. 
 
The other thing we’ve had to do is to accomplish all of this with 
a diminishing source of federal funding. And so every year 
from Liberals we’ve received less and less and less and we’ve 
had to find more and more and more from our own budget 
process and from the people of Saskatchewan. Again I say to 
the member in regards to the specifics of the Humboldt 
circumstance, I’ll pass this information to the Minister of 
Health and the department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much, Speaker. If you notice 
in the east gallery there’s a group of very bright, 
enthusiastic-looking students sitting up there. These folks are in 
today from Schell School in Holdfast. 
 
We have the grade 5’s and 6’s, Mr. Speaker, along with their 
teacher Lynn Ledingham. Lynn, would you stand please. Now 
Lynn is famous not because she’s a teacher in Holdfast — but 
maybe because of that too — but because her sister sits opposite 
us here today as in the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
So later on when I meet with the students, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be 
inviting the minister to join us, and hopefully that she won’t say 
anything too wrong or too out of sorts that I’ll have to correct, 
but I’ll invite her down anyways. 
 
Along with the students today and Lynn are some chaperons. 
We have Brent McLellan. Brent, would you stand please; Ron 
Harms — Ron; Loretta Lowe; we have Joanne Measner; we 
also have Louise Schroeder; and we have Jackie Bradley. 
 
Oh, and the member from North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, just 
indicated to me that of course I should have known that, that 
Mr. McLellan, Brent, is a cousin to the member of North 
Battleford, so maybe I’ll invite him to the gathering too. Mr. 
Speaker, maybe you’d care to come. Maybe everybody wants to 
go. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that the Assembly give them 
a nice warm welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, with leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you. I too want to introduce to the 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

Assembly, and to clarify a few facts in my introduction, my 
older sister from Holdfast from Schell School and the students 
that are come here today. And I just wish them a very warm 
welcome and certainly I hope I can get to join them for a quick 
visit but I know that I’m also up for estimates but I wish you a 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Presently 
attending with me then, my official is Bernie Churko, just to the 
left of me, executive director of logistics, planning and 
compliance. Other officials will be joining me shortly. 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I 
notice today in QP (question period) again you referred back to 
your $2.5 billion commitment, and you’ve done that a number 
of times in this House. And it’s been brought to your attention 
that within the first two years you’re $80 million short of what 
you had said you were going to put. 
 
By you referring to that again today, I’m beginning to think that 
you must plan on catching up that money very shortly. And it 
just crossed my mind that with the election year probably being 
1999, can we expect you to put that extra $80 million into 
highways which would see the budget next year be $330 
million? Can we look forward to that because you keep 
referring to that number, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, the number is 
$2.5 billion over 10 years and we will certainly be living up to 
that commitment. As of last year we added $30 million; this 
year we added $20 million. We’re doing a gradual wrapping up 
of our budget, and when we go through our budget processes, 
the Treasury Board processes again, we will expect more 
dollars being put into Highways and Transportation. 
 
But I cannot tell you exactly what dollars will be there next 
year. But at the end of a 10-year period there will be an average 
— add it all up, divide by 10 — it will average out to $250 
million per year. It will meet the commitment of $2.5 billion. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Madam Minister, once again then 
what that’s going to do is leave you in the last year of the 10 
years probably with putting about $500 million into highways. 
 
Number one, I don’t believe that your government will be 
around at that time because that will be about eight years from 

now, you’ll be long gone. It’s just another one of your 
announcements, such as hiring of the nurses, that is great when 
you announce it but you never back it up with funding and 
actually hire the nurses or put the money into highways. And 
it’s too bad because our highway system is in drastic need of 
these extra dollars. 
 
Madam Minister, as the lady from Estevan was in here last 
week or a couple of weeks ago, and was in again last 
Wednesday, I would like to read you a part of The Highways 
and Transportation Act. And I’m sure you’re well aware of this, 
but I’m just going to read part of it and then we’re going to get 
into what you agreed and didn’t agree to do with these people. 
And part of the Act says: 
 

9(1) The minister shall maintain the roadway of all 
provincial highways in a state of repair commensurate 
with: 
 
(a) the type and amount of traffic that the particular 
roadway may reasonably be expected to accommodate; and 
 
(b) the maintenance that is reasonably possible for the type 
of roadway and for the extent of improvement existing on 
the roadway. 
 

And it goes on and on. But then it goes on, Madam Minister, to 
say: 
 

(3) The minister may, before or after the commencement of 
an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the 
recovery of damages, agree to pay to any person an amount 
that may be recoverable by that person pursuant to 
subsection (2). 
 

And I guess what I’m asking, Madam Minister . . . because on 
two different occasions you said you would meet with these 
people and you did and gave them the impression that you were 
going to try and work with them and come to some agreement 
that would be satisfactory to all.  
 
And I believe what has happened now is that these people are 
very unhappy because it’s falling once again through the cracks 
of our no-fault instead of going under your responsibility which 
is Department of Highways, where I believe the Act says very 
clearly that you are responsible. No-fault should not be coming 
into the picture at all here. The Department of Highways and 
you, Madam Minister, are responsible — do you not agree? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I’d just like to introduce that 
my deputy minister. Brian King, has now joined me, sitting to 
my right. 
 
Okay, a couple of comments on the questions that were just 
raised to me — when we talk about the dollars that we’re 
putting first into the Highways and Transportation system, I 
think we’ve definitely identified that more dollars are needed 
and good planning is needed. Certainly you could put more 
dollars in faster and have most of those dollars eaten up by 
inflation. 
 
Even in talking to road builders, talking to local governments 
that was one concern, is that you want to build it up gradually, 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

know that it’s sustainable, and know that . . . and you won’t be 
changing the course in which you’re going. 
 
Second on a more specific issue — that claim is being handled. 
It’s being handled through our officials; we take these things 
very, very seriously. Again, there are different options there but 
working through SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) is 
one of the ways in which that claim can be handled especially 
when there’s an injury involved. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. Madam 
Minister, the people that were involved — Brenda Bod being 
the lady that was injured with a 10-pound piece of flying 
pavement that may have come off one of our highways and 
went through her windshield is not very happy with what is 
happening. 
 
And I believe they’re in the process right now of starting or 
looking into starting legal action and I was hoping that this 
could be probably solved without going that route to the 
satisfaction of everyone concerned. But evidently that’s not 
going to happen. 
 
Madam Minister, I have something that’s actually out of SGI 
but because we are not going to get the opportunity to question 
about it — it’s about farm plates and farmers using our roads 
and our highways. And it was somewhat surprising to me to 
find out that as a farmer gets a number of farm plates on his 
farm, that there is a point where you will be charged an extra 
premium to have that many. 
 
And that seems totally ridiculous in this day and age when 
farms are becoming bigger and bigger and we have water 
trucks, fuel trucks, the list goes on, we have half-tons; there’s 
just no end of it. We have welders on service trucks. Some of 
our bigger farmers may end up with 10 vehicles with farm 
plates on. 
 
Now I realize, Madam Minister, this is partly not under your 
portfolio. But we are not going to get the chance to ask this 
question probably anywhere else and I wonder if you could 
explain to us why there is a maximum set on this when farms 
are increasing in size constantly. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, as the question was put 
forward it isn’t under our department, but we will take notice of 
this and get information to you on it. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Good morning, Madam Minister. Had the 
misfortune this weekend as I do most weekends, to have to 
drive on 312. So I have a couple of questions relating to 312. 
The first one is, what exactly is in the plans for keeping 312 
from falling apart, for this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on the stretch of highway that 
you’re talking about on Highway No. 312, the dollars that are 
putting forward on that piece is to go towards intensive 
preservation. My understanding that there is, you know, a 
stretch that needs some work on it. That’s being identified and 
certainly work will be done on it. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Okay, you mention there were some dollars 
set aside for that. How many dollars are going into the repair on 
that for this summer? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on the kilometres there, again 
it will depend — we don’t have the specific numbers — but it 
will be somewhere between 5,000 to $20,000 per kilometre on 
the area that needs the intensive work. And so again, depending 
on just what is involved in that particular repair, that’s the 
amount of dollars that would be spent. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. One of the comments that came 
from the floor while you were looking for that answer was, is 
repair possible. And I think when we look at the stretch on the 
west end of 312, let’s say from the Laird corner where that joins 
up with Highway 12, that’s an excellent stretch. But this other 
stretch has gone to the point that repair is more just a very bare 
patch job at best. 
 
And I’m wondering what is the date that your department has in 
mind to do that stretch up properly and have it the same quality 
as the part from the Laird corner through to Highway 12. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, Mr. Chair, any time something 
that is identified for intensive preservation, this can mean some 
major reconstruction there. It depends again on what will be 
done on that particular piece, but it’s significant work that will 
be done. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, but that wasn’t the question that I 
asked. I know to do anything on that highway . . . and there’s 
some bad pieces and some terrible pieces. I think you’re 
addressing the terrible pieces and that’ll take significant work to 
get those even passable. 
 
But my question is: what is the time that you have in place, 
what year, that that stretch all the way from the Laird corner 
probably through to Wakaw, — but I would say from the Laird 
corner through to Highway 11 — is all going to be done to the 
same quality as the rest of it is, which is good. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay to be more specific then on that 
particular part of your question is again that will be budget 
related. They will be looking again at volumes, the kind of 
traffic in the area. Also part of that area planning — setting the 
priorities and all of that — will come into that if that piece is 
identified then as high on the priority list to be worked on. 
 
And so at this time I wouldn’t be able to, I guess, give you 
information on when that will be done. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Murray: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Murray: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my thanks to the 
minister and the member from Rosthern for this courtesy. 
 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

It’s always a pleasure to have young people visiting our 
Assembly here, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a particular pleasure when 
they come from a neighbouring province. So I am very 
delighted to introduce to you and to my colleagues, seated in 
your gallery, 10 students from Swan River, Manitoba. 
 
They come here from Riverdale School. They are in grades 7 to 
9. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Pat Barkman, 
and chaperons Lowell and Rita Koehn — I hope I’m 
pronouncing these names correctly, my apologies if I’m not — 
and Dale and Rhonda Wolgemuth, and Andy and Connie 
Miller. 
 
They will be visiting with us in the gallery for a while and I ask 
all members to join me in extending a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
thanks for coming here today. 
 
Now we have I guess a brief that was presented to you and your 
department from the Frenchman Valley Rural Development 
Co-operative. And that’s one of the things I’d like to go through 
here today, Madam Minister. And really there’s quite a number 
of municipalities and towns that have been involved in the 
south-west in bringing forward this brief. 
 
And I guess before we get into their points of view on the brief, 
I’d like to perhaps have you bring us up to date as to your 
response to this brief. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, yes, I had an opportunity of 
course to meet with the Frenchman Valley development 
co-operative when they came into the legislature here. And then 
since that time, from that meeting, the one thing that we had 
committed to was that we would have further meetings with 
them. So officials have met with them on, my understanding is 
May 27, and again talked about the process which we’re 
working on and priorities identified in that area. We are also 
working with the south-west transportation planning committee 
so all of that area is being involved in understanding how the 
department is doing the process, but also to get their input. 
What has been decided at that time also is that we would 
continue to meet on an annual basis, certainly looking at the 
input that they were giving on the priorities for the area. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, can you tell us today 
what your department is prepared to do. Now I know you’re 
talking priorities and such, but really if you take a drive into the 
south-west, and you’ve been down there recently. I don’t think 
one has to really sit back and say we now have to priorize the 
roads or rate them or anything. In fact they all need a great deal 
of work. And so I’d like to know from you so I could pass it on 
to this group, exactly what you’re prepared to do, what funds 

you’re prepared to commit, before we start talking about what 
you’re going to priorize. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, part of what was going on 
also with the meeting is that . . . I mean the budget has been set. 
The dollars being spent in that area, there are significant dollars. 
We don’t have the exact number for that specific whole 
south-west area, but what we’ve done in meeting with them is 
talked about the dollars that are being put into the system and 
also getting their feedback on how they would see some of 
those dollars being spent. 
 
Now there are a lot of dollars going into intensive preservation 
and other road work in that area. I can get back to you though 
on the specific dollars and projects. I don’t have them all here at 
this time. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, have you and your 
department received a number of calls say on the mess of 
Highway 13. Would you be able to tell us exactly — you know 
that stretch of highway that I raised in question period a week 
or two ago — there was a stretch of highway where in fact 
people were getting their vehicles wrecked. I think we sent 
pictures across to you of a vehicle that was pulled into . . . you 
can’t even call it a pothole because this thing covered ditch to 
ditch and about 25, 30 feet in length and it was, oh I guess 
about 8 inches deep. That’s not a pothole. 
 
You know what are you doing with that stretch of highway? I 
know it’s about 12 miles of highway and you know the problem 
with that stretch of highway, it was Department of Highways 
vehicles that did the damage. They’re restocking I guess gravel 
pits or piles and instead of doing it when the roadbed was 
frozen, they did it when the frost is out and they’ve done all this 
damage when no one else is being allowed to drive on these 
roads. 
 
So shouldn’t that be a priority? And shouldn’t some proper 
amount of money and effort be put into fixing that stretch of 
road? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, on the highway that’s been 
identified here, Highway No. 13, we have I guess recognized 
some significant problems there. We have certainly identified I 
think around 29 kilometres that will receive intensive 
preservation. And so dollars will be being spent there, that has 
been identified, and there will be work done on that stretch. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, on your ’98-99 
construction projects, now you recognize that that stretch of 
highway is in seriously bad condition, but nowhere in here do I 
see Highway 13 as a priority of your department. 
 
Am I to assume that these construction projects are worse than 
that stretch of highway you know, whatever it was, 30 
kilometres that you talked of? And could there possibly be 
worse stretches of highway? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Well, Mr. Chair, the 29 kilometres is 
identified under what we, on our part, called intensive 
preservation. And that has been identified for significant work 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

on 29 kilometres of that piece. Now it’s not a piece of highway 
that is having reconstruction or an upgrading say to a different 
level of highway. But this piece of highway is identified as one 
of the major pieces of work that is being done under intensive 
preservation projects. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Perhaps, Madam Minister, you would like 
to tell us exactly what that means to have your intensive 
preservation. What all does that include? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, intensive preservation, as 
I’ve identified before, can be anywhere in the amount of 
spending between 5,000 to $21,000 per kilometre. But what that 
will mean will be different for different pieces of road. But it 
can mean a reconstruction if there’s total failure on a piece of 
road that that piece can be totally reconstructed in short 
sections. It’s more than just going out and say fixing a more 
minor repair than what we would call ordinary maintenance. 
This is intensive work to repair the road up to a good level of 
service. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, shouldn’t this then — 
the preservation resurfacing — shouldn’t Highway 13 have 
shown up in your own document if you’re going to be 
somewhat intensive? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, there’s two lists of how we’d 
go about spending the dollars, and one is under capital 
construction which is where you are upgrading a road to a 
different level of service — major work, or a new road is being 
built. This, under intensive preservation, is bringing back the 
road to the same level or to a condition that the road would be 
acceptable at — it’s bringing it back to its level of service. So 
that reconstruction and paving can still happen but that happens 
under intensive preservation. You’re not changing the level of 
road to a new level of service. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, have you travelled 
Highway 13 from say, Assiniboia to Shaunavon, prior to this 
damage being done by your own department vehicles? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I have travelled the road, I 
travelled the road right across to Eastend fairly early this spring. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Then, Madam Minister, you feel that’s 
adequate for the people of south-west Saskatchewan . . . to 
travel that road. If you’ve gone across that road — and I assume 
you did; you didn’t fly down, you drove down 13. And you’re 
saying that you’re prepared your department’s prepared, to fix 
that road up to the condition it was before this other damage. 
And you drove that road — you had to have known that it was 
already a terrible disaster. 
 
We have ruts in the highways down there that if you put a level 
across it; you’re going to see six, seven inches where the truck 
tires have been going. And you’re saying well that’s adequate 
and we’re going to put it back to that state. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I think as I’ve said previously 
that this has been identified for intensive work and it will be 
brought back to a very safe, very acceptable condition, and that 
we have committed to on a number of kilometres there in our 
Highways budget. 

Mr. McPherson: — Well in your Highways budget, would it 
not be showing up if you’re going to do 13 without being 
pushed into it, without the people writing letters that I’ve been 
sending to you recently of chunks of pavement going through 
grills and windshields and ripping off gas tanks. I mean 
wouldn’t it have shown up in this construction project 
document and preservation resurfacing list? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, as I had stated before, is 
that intensive preservation is work that is done, and if it’s a 
secondary highway, it will be work that will be done, to bring it 
back to a level of good, acceptable driving and road conditions 
at that level. 
 
Other kinds of projects that you’re talking about on surfacing 
and . . . those are upgrading projects or projects in which you’re 
either adding — like in twinning projects — you’re adding new 
stretches of kilometres or you’re doing a major upgrade of the 
highway or road system in that area. 
 
Intensive preservation is bringing back the road system to an 
acceptable level — the kind of service that that road has been 
designated for — and this is a secondary highway and that’s the 
type of work that will be done. 
 
Now intensive preservation though can involve some 
resurfacing, can involve rebuilding depending on the work 
that’s required for the piece of highway. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Are you unable to give me the specifics 
then of what is going to be done on that stretch of highway? 
Because what your department, what you have done in the past, 
is dump gravel into the holes and people are finding this 
unacceptable. 
 
It’s one thing to have, you know, 10-pound chunks of pavement 
ripping off gas tanks or going through windshields, but beyond 
that, you know people are continuously getting windshields 
knocked right out of the vehicle. Is your department paying for 
those? 
 
I mean you can’t . . . Madam Minister, it’s unacceptable to the 
people of this province, and especially south-west 
Saskatchewan, when you say you’re going to bring it back to a 
certain level when that level was so unacceptable before and 
you were getting briefs and letters and bills in the mail. Surely 
you’ve got to see the point. 
 
You’re from the southern half of this province as well, and I 
know you and I have discussed this some years ago when one 
of your former . . . or one of your colleagues was going to 
gravel a lot of the highways in south-west Saskatchewan. And I 
know you were as upset at the time as was I. 
 
But for you to say well basically what we’re going to do is just 
do patching with more gravel and somehow people will find 
that acceptable — well they won’t, nor should they. 
 
That, Madam Minister, is why you see so many municipalities 
and towns — let’s have a look — there must be 40 — 40 
jurisdictions that are saying they find this unacceptable. And 
really when you take a look at, you know, your government 
saying we’re going to do so much in economic development 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

and there’s value-added processing. I mean, ask the minister 
that’s sitting behind you. What chance is there really of having 
value-added processing in agriculture if you’re going to leave 
the highways in the state they are? 
 
Ask another minister who’s in charge of Tourism. What chance 
is there that the horseshoe region and all tourism projects that 
are being worked on in the south-west can flourish if in fact all 
you’re going to do is more gravel? 
 
You don’t even . . . your government doesn’t even have nerve 
enough, as the member from Rosetown who used to be the 
Highways minister — at least he said we’re going to gravel 
stretches of, I don’t know, 60, 70 miles at a time. You’re doing 
it in chunks of 50 feet at a time. How would you find that 
acceptable? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, first of all, I think there’s still 
a misunderstanding of what I have said. Regular maintenance 
on a road would be somewhere around the $1,000 per kilometre 
mark on a . . . especially these thinner surfaced highways and 
some of our secondary highways in our system. 
 
When we talk about intensive preservation, we’re talking about 
bringing the surface and the road back to a condition which it 
was like when it would be new — into good condition. It’s not 
to bring it back into bad condition. We’re going to spend 
significant dollars from anywhere between $5,000 to $21,000 a 
kilometre to bring that surface, that road back to good 
condition. This is not some minor work that’s being done. 
 
And so I just want to make that very clear. Once it’s identified 
for intensive preservation there’d be work done. It might be on 
short sections of reconstruction. That’s to bring it back to good 
condition not back to a bad condition, as has been stated. 
 
And there may be places in this province too — on some of this 
when we’re doing road reconstruction and some patches that 
have been bad — that have been put into gravel for a short 
period of time. Some of that’s for stabilization and then it can 
be finally resurfaced in time. 
 
And so again to the member opposite, that major work is being 
done on those kilometres that he has identified. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, well we wait with bated 
breath I guess for you to get that machinery out there and start. 
Could you tell us what the cost is per kilometre to go onto a 
highway, such as what we have between Assiniboia and 
Shaunavon on 13 for resurfacing? Or in fact if you’re going to 
rebuild and resurface, do you have a list of those costs? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, I hope I have this answer 
or the question clear. If we’re talking about reconstruction into 
up to say a higher level of highway or road — the example 
being the one at Avonlea which qualified through some CAIP 
(Canada/Saskatchewan Agri-Infrastructure Program) funding 
for major upgrading — that upgrading would cost somewhere 
between $100,000 to $150,000 per kilometre. Again that will 
vary somewhat depending on the road conditions, the soil 
conditions, things like that in each area. 

I am just going to want to notify the Chair and members 
opposite, that I was wanting to take just 10 minutes — but I’ll 
have another minister sit in — that I will be saying hello to a 
school group and then I will be back again to complete my 
estimates. But another minister will sit in for those few 
questions and it will be the Hon. Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Should we just wrap it up sooner? I see we 
have another minister here and perhaps he’s more willing to 
help do something on the highways in the south-west. We have 
to assume he will. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have some other highways, and I guess it’s 
most appropriate that you’re filling in for a few minutes 
because when we take a look at some of these agriculture 
producing areas in the province — let’s take Val Marie, very 
intensive, you know, for cattle operations, for farming 
operations. And not only that, but we have the Grasslands 
National Park. And if you’ve been down to Val Marie in the last 
few years, you’ll know what I’m talking about when I say this 
stretch of highway is every bit as bad as 13 if not worse — it’s 
unbelievable. 
 
And I’m not sure how far along your government is in the trade 
corridors that are being proposed or talked about, but Highway 
No. 4 coming up through Monchy straight up to Swift Current 
is one of these trade corridors, north-south trade corridors that’s 
being talked of. And on average, I’m told, there’s as many as 58 
semi-trailer units a day going up this highway. And I was down 
there just recently for a meeting in Val Marie and it was 
absolutely unbelievable the condition of that highway. 
 
And yet when I look at these construction projects, I don’t see 
that highway anywhere on the 1998-99 construction projects. 
So perhaps, as with Highway 13, there is something that you’re 
going to announce here today that isn’t on the list. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, I want to respond just 
briefly on behalf of the Minister of Highways while she steps 
out. 
 
But the member’s questions are very good questions in terms of 
the specifics of what we can do. And as you know, the 
Department of Highways, with the number of highways that we 
have in this province, is doing a fantastic job really of keeping 
the highways, the volume, in the shape that they are. There are 
some highways of course that need work and you’re identifying 
that. 
 
But I guess what I want to ask you — question is are you saying 
that the amount of dollars that we’re spending on highways is 
not adequate? I mean is that what you’re saying through the 
questioning? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Obviously, Mr. Minister, that’s what it 
comes down to. 
 
Now I know earlier today that the Premier who is sitting here 
listening today was saying you know the Liberals want to spend 
more on health care and they want to spend more on highways. 
Well, yes, we do. You know, the truth of the matter is we do 
because what’s out there today is unacceptable. 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

That’s not saying that we’re saying bankrupt this province the 
way these Tories did for a number of years. What we’re saying 
is perhaps we don’t go ahead with the $300,000 Jack Messer 
severance, or you don’t go ahead with the $62 million in New 
Zealand with the SaskTel venture, or 30-some million in 
Guyana, or the projects you have in Europe, you know. So you 
don’t let on to this House that you’re hands are tied. They’re not 
as tied as what you have the people believe. 
 
But start looking at what the people within the borders, the 
boundaries of Saskatchewan need and deserve. And I’m sure 
you must get as many calls as we do from people asking you to 
prioritize whether or not you should be doing projects within 
Saskatchewan versus around the world. 
 
And you know we take a look at some of these stretches of 
road, and you’re asking me do I think money should be spent on 
Highway 4. My answer is I don’t think you have an option, I 
think you must spend more. 
 
You know, your government is . . . well you’re blowing a lot of 
smoke about what you really are doing about branch-line 
abandonment. It’s absolutely ridiculous, I agree that these 
branch lines, especially in the south-west where we don’t have 
any highways, should be abandoned. They shouldn’t be. They 
shouldn’t be. 
 
And myself and the member from Thunder Creek a couple 
years ago before it was sort of the issue to be hammering on, we 
were meeting with federal ministers to try and prevent this. I 
don’t see that kind of action from your own government. It’s 
not there. There’s a lot of smoke about what you’re doing. But 
what do the people see? They still see the branch lines going. 
 
You’re saying as a provincial government you didn’t have 
enough power, you don’t have the ability to take some action, 
but although the branch lines are going so goes the highways? 
Well that can’t be of course. Highway No. 4 — more money 
spent on it. 
 
How would you ever be able to look the business people of this 
world in the eye and say sure, we’ve got north-south corridors? 
You come up from the States, it’s a very good highway system 
— and you hit the border crossing in Monchy, south of Val 
Marie. And you’re saying we’re serious about doing business in 
the world and you’re going to go on a chunk of highway like 
that? That’s impossible. 
 
You know you’ve got to take a lot of other things into 
consideration. You went out there, your government went out 
there, and you’ve continuously closed hospitals. Well if you’re 
going to not give the services, whether it’s bussing and 
hospitals or schools, then at least you’ve got to give people a 
highway system so that they themselves can get the services, go 
somewhere and receive the services. 
 
Of course you should spend more money. It’s absolutely 
ridiculous. 
 
I would invite each and every one of the cabinet ministers, take 
a trip, and it would be so great if you would come down — 37 
south of Gull Lake would be a great place to start. And that’s 
where a fellow had told me he put a level . . . he actually had a 

board and a level taped to it, and he laid it across the tracks that 
are being created in the road. And there were 7 inches. That 
means on Highway 37, south of Gull Lake, you can bottom 
your vehicle out — rip gas tanks off and such. 
 
Turn and head down 13 for a ways and you’ll go across the 30 
kilometres of road that were completely demolished by 
highway trucks. And the one for which I’ve sent pictures across 
to the government where the holes were 8 inches deep and it 
was my truck parked in the hole. It was absolutely unbelievable. 
 
And then turn at Cadillac and head south down Highway No. 4. 
I really encourage you to do this and just see for yourself if in 
fact you could ever, ever admit that this is a north-south 
corridor route. Would you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s nobody 
that’s going to disagree with the member opposite about the 
need to have all the roads in top shape. But if the member 
opposite doesn’t feel that the $219 million that we’ve allocated 
in our budget for highways is adequate, then my question to 
him would be how do you feel about the adequacy of the 
federal government allowing the rail lines to be abandoned. 
Putting even more pressure on our roads at the same time they 
give us zero money for national highways programs — and 
we’ll get about $6 million this year out of the CAIP program. 
 
In turn, how do you feel about the adequacy of the federal 
government when you’re talking about the north-south 
corridors, north-south corridors, where the U.S. (United States) 
government is going to put about 90 per cent into their 
corridors, federally, and they’re going to put a $200-and-some 
billion operation into their highways. 
 
My question to you, sir, is that if you don’t think that the $219 
million that we’re putting in is adequate, then what do you think 
we should do? You and I as a group for Saskatchewan people, 
with the federal government who are putting in zero in a 
national infrastructure — the only G-7 country that doesn’t 
have a national infrastructure program — what are you prepared 
to do? 
 
Are you prepared to sign a letter, are you prepared . . . or table 
your correspondence with the federal government to put 
pressure on Ottawa to come forward with a national highways 
program so that we might meet the needs of the people that you 
talk about down in your area. 
 
Now you can sit here all you want and criticize the government 
but in terms of spending a billion, seven on health care, a billion 
on education, which is almost 60 per cent of our budget, besides 
putting 219 million into highways, I’m not sure how your 
solution of spending more and keeping the books balanced and 
providing services is going to work in Saskatchewan without 
the national assistance of the federal government. 
 
And it just isn’t for Saskatchewan. It’s for every province in 
Canada so that we can develop our economy similar to the way 
the U.S. is with a national infrastructure program. 
 
So my question to you is if you don’t think 219 is adequate 
from Saskatchewan, do you believe that the federal 
participation — maybe you should listen — do you believe — I 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

want an answer to this — that federal participation in the 
highways in Canada and in Saskatchewan in particular is 
adequate? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, on several occasions, on 
several occasions, I’ve stood in the House as the critic of 
Highways — behind me, the member from Thunder Creek — 
and we publicly stated that yes, once the federal government 
have their debt problems in control and the same breathing 
space that the people of this province allowed your government 
to have, yes, they should be putting in a more fair share of 
monies into our highway system. I agree with that. 
 
But now let’s talk about you and your government because 
you’re saying 219 million . . . well what was it a year and a half 
ago? It was really 162 million — 39 per cent of what you 
collect in fuel tax and licence revenues, 39 per cent was 
returned back into our highway system. 
 
Now you bumped that up a little because of the campaign of the 
Liberal caucus to get some twinning of the highways done in 
this province because we just don’t find deaths on our 
Saskatchewan highways acceptable. And you’ve put in a small 
amount of money. It was a start, and we publicly congratulated 
your government for that small start, wishing it was more but 
realizing that there are some constraints. 
 
But to sit in here and stand in here as you are and say 219 
million is very significant . . . Have you made it publicly known 
that you’re pulling in about half a billion dollars in fuel tax 
revenue and motor vehicle licensing fees? 
 
So what have you . . . I don’t think you’re, even though you’ve 
thrown in — what? — Another 20 million bucks, I don’t think 
you’re any more than the 39 per cent, 40 per cent of the budget. 
 
So the question back to you, sir. Do you feel it’s fair — with the 
sorry state of Saskatchewan highways today — that 40 per cent 
is an adequate amount? And I would further by saying, is it 
better to take the extra monies — say 62 million spent on 
providing cable TV in New Zealand — do you think it’s better 
spent in New Zealand or on Saskatchewan highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member stands 
in his place and talks about . . . he says yes, well I agree the 
federal government should be putting more money in. But the 
fact of the matter is, this member is a Liberal member of a 
Liberal caucus for the Liberal government in Canada. This 
Liberal government . . . And he just said that when the books 
are balanced in Ottawa . . .  
 
Well it is public knowledge that they had to hide a couple 
billion dollars in the millennium fund because they had money 
left over. 
 
It’s public knowledge that the Liberal government in Ottawa 
put a 1.5 per cent tax on fuel as a debt reduction tax. Federally, 
right across Canada, with our Minister of Highways and 
Transportation and other ones — they’ve called for that money 
to be put into a national highways program. You know how 
much money that would put in? Five hundred million dollars — 
it would mean $30 million to Saskatchewan. 
 

Now I mean the member can stand in his place and criticize, 
and I understand that’s his job. But I’ll tell you; the federal 
government has balanced their budget. The federal government 
has a cent and a half debt reduction tax on fuel that they’ve still 
collecting even though they’ve hidden 2 billion in the 
millennium fund. 
 
So you can stand there and criticize us all you want. All I’m 
saying is, if you ever had the opportunity to be transformed 
back into the real life of government, which I know that you 
won’t have, you would understand and you do understand — 
you do understand, I know you do — that the money that we’re 
putting in is being used very well. 
 
I travel roads all the time in this province as you do. I can 
remember clearly last year . . . a number highway, a No. 52, 
from Ituna to Yorkton in the spring, it wasn’t in very good 
shape and everybody would agree to that; there was holes in the 
road. But you know what? The program went ahead, the 
highway was repaired, and when they got the construction units 
in there the highway was in good shape at the end of the year. 
 
(1145) 
 
But you can’t stand in your place and just say, well you guys 
are doing it all wrong, and without one scintilla of evidence on 
the paper that you’ve written — I challenge you. You come into 
the estimates, surely you have the letter prepared because you 
must be aware that we were going to ask you the question. Read 
it out, okay. And then read the answer to the letter . . . and then 
read the answer to the letter that you sent to the federal 
government. 
 
You see it’s easy to criticize. But you know the Highways and 
Transportation department have done a fantastic job of 
maintaining the roads with the dollars that we can afford to give 
them. We have $350 million roughly of tax coming in from 
fuel. We put 60 per cent of that back in. 
 
And you can go to your numbers of the licensing and other . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, you can play the numbers 
game. I’m sorry. You can play the numbers game but the fact of 
the matter is, that Ottawa takes in about $4 billion a year of fuel 
tax across Canada and they don’t put anything back in. 
 
Now all I’m saying is, you can stand here all day and tell us 
how bad the roads are. You know, we know there are some 
roads that aren’t good. Are they being worked on? Absolutely. 
Is there a plan in place to do the best we can for the roads that 
need the most work? Absolutely. Are we spending money 
frivolously by having . . . in fact the road builders say don’t 
throw money too fast to this problem because you’re not going 
to get the roads built as efficiently as possible. 
 
So all I’m saying is you read the letter you sent to Ottawa, then 
read the response you got back from Ottawa, and then sit down 
and maybe afterwards you can step outside and tell the world, 
the press, that the real problem — is not in Saskatchewan or 
Manitoba or Alberta or B.C. or any other province — the real 
problem is that there’s no national highways program. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, I will . . . I see it’s Madam 
Minister now, now that he’s gotten you into some trouble. I will 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

respond to what we have done as a caucus and the minister has 
asked what have we done? Well there have been thousands of 
signatures on petitions that went around this province asking for 
twinning projects, asking for money for highways. 
 
I see the minister now is stepping out because he doesn’t want 
to hear the truth, but the fact of the matter is these petitions that 
we have brought forward on numerous occasions into this 
House, did not say we are asking the provincial Government of 
Saskatchewan alone to do anything about the twinning of 
highways. In fact they state that we want governments at all 
levels, there’s other petitions calling on provincial and federal 
governments to cost share, and we have been . . . we have 
headed up that petition drive. 
 
So to say that we have done nothing, that’s most unfortunate. In 
fact your government likes to do nothing more than play 
politics with the issue. And that’s what you’re doing, because 
we have called on our federal government in more than one way 
and on more than one occasion to be part of our national 
highway program. 
 
But you know to further this one more step you, yourself . . . 
It’s not like we’re calling on the federal government to help put 
Highway 13 or Highway 4 or Highway 37 into proper shape. 
No, we’ve always talked about a national highway — Highway 
No 1, Highway 16, all right. And you are — you are getting a 
response from the federal government. I don’t know where 
that’s at right now and I’m sure that you would like to share that 
with us. 
 
But the fact of the matter is in your jurisdiction . . . And the 
minister before you made mention that 60 per cent of the fuel 
tax money that you collect in this province goes back into the 
highway system. Well take a little drive around this province 
and see if you would find anybody that’s going to believe that. 
 
It is 39 per cent of the monies that go back, and that study was 
done by, I believe, by the university right here in Regina for the 
Saskatchewan automobile association. And if we’re going to 
put those figures up against your political figures, I think we’ll 
believe the Saskatchewan automobile association each and 
every time. 
 
Because, Madam Minister, because one doesn’t have to sit back 
and wonder who’s telling the truth. All you have to do is take 
an hour out of your busy schedule, anyone in this province, and 
take a drive any direction and I think the answer is clear. You’re 
doing nothing. You’re letting this highway system fall around 
your ankles in this province — you’re doing nothing. It’s about 
time you got a hold of your department; go into that cabinet . . . 
go into cabinet and fight for what should happen, something for 
rural Saskatchewan. Do something with these highways. 
 
You talk about the projects that are going to happen and yet 
none of them are on your list. South-west Saskatchewan was 
completely shut out . . . South-west Saskatchewan was 
completely shut out of your construction project list. And now 
you stand in here and say, oh yes, well we’re doing intensive 
work. Intensive is right. You’re doing intensive politics to avoid 
the issue. 
 
So I guess it comes back to what I asked of you the other day in 

the rotunda, and we both were doing press on this issue. If 
you’re not going to put money into the highway system, if you 
refuse to do that, if you allow the highway system to go into 
complete ruin, will you at least stop the ridiculous advertising 
that your Crowns are doing, your monopolies are doing? 
 
It’s not like people have an option where they’re going to get 
some of these services. Quit that advertising and place a real ad 
in the newspaper with a phone number or an address where 
people can send their bills when they get 10- and 15-pound 
chunks of pavement flying through their vehicles. And you 
should ask them to send their bills in — provide them with a 
phone number or an address where they can send their bills. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Wouldn’t it be cheaper to just fix the 
roads, Glen? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well I think the member from North 
Battleford is right. Shouldn’t we just fix the roads? This is a 
safety issue. Don’t you feel you have an obligation to the 
people of this province to do what’s right? They sure feel you 
do. 
 
You know we’re not even asking for some of the roads such as 
Highway 18. I mean we’ve really come up with different levels 
of highways here haven’t we; 13 is a major highway route 
across this province and you can’t get that one fixed; or the 
trade corridor highways like No. 4 or 37 or wherever that’s 
going to go. 
 
I know you were recently in the South-west and you made I 
guess what you thought was significant announcements of work 
being done on — the member from Cypress Hills would know 
— what is that, Highway 18? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, correct. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Highway 18, Frontier-Claydon area, and 
he’s raised it with me different times and we’ve talked about the 
highways in the South-west. And you were mentioning a few 
thousand dollars to fix up miles of road. And the people that 
brought forward this brief that we talked of earlier — the 
Frenchman Valley Rural Development Co-operative brief — 
they’re sitting back saying, you know those kind of numbers 
you’re throwing out there, that’s maybe the money required to 
mow the ditches not fix the highways. 
 
Madam Minister, I think you’ve got a lot to answer for. And 
each and every day, like I say, we’re getting letters, we’re 
getting bills. Will you at least accept all of the bills? I see it was 
on the news last night that the claims are going down. You 
know why the claims are going down; because not everyone 
knows to bring their bills forward to a MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) and have it raised in question period and 
embarrass you and your government into paying these bills. 
 
But look at some of the letters that are coming into our office all 
the time, you know, the bills. And you should just 
automatically, through shame, stand up and accept those things. 
What are you going to do with it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As I have said 
previously, we have put a plan together, a transportation 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

strategy together. We’ve also put dollars to that strategy. We 
have said 2.5 billion over the 10 years, we’ve added dollars last 
year, and we’ve added dollars this year. 
 
And you know we’ve got everybody in this province working 
with us on that through area planning, the stakeholders, and the 
municipal governments. Because there are many challenges. 
And the challenges that we’re facing in this province, which I 
am not ashamed of, but the opposition should be ashamed of — 
of the kind of question that they ask — is where is the Liberal 
government, the federal Liberal government and what they have 
done to this. 
 
The delinquent player has been the federal government. But 
they’ve not been totally delinquent because most of the impact 
that we have felt has been the responsibility of the federal 
government. 
 
Right now we talk about the rural system, the member opposite 
talks about the rural system. Well to me — highways and roads 
— we don’t spend a lot of dollars in our major urbans on those. 
That whole system is in rural Saskatchewan. And the 
importance of this system is certainly met with the economic 
development and the tourism industry throughout this province, 
and we’re working on all of those pieces. 
 
But I would call upon the member opposite, when you talk 
about petitions that have come in, talk about pressure. I haven’t 
seen those petitions being delivered to the federal minister 
that’s responsible here in the province, the only federal minister 
that we have in the federal government, to Ralph Goodale. 
 
We have seen with the deregulation of the system of 
transportation . . . We are seeing branch lines being pulled out 
when there’s a major grain transportation review going on. We 
have seen $400 million with the Crow benefit annually gone out 
of this province. We’re seeing $240 million of a fuel tax being 
taken out of this province by the federal government. 
 
The dollars that we have put back in has been close to 
somewhere around the 70 per cent dollar mark — 70 per cent of 
the kind of road tax that we’ve taken in through fuel tax in this 
province. 
 
As a provincial government we’ve put a plan together that has 
planning in it, it has more dollars in it. But like I’d say again, is 
that we need the federal Liberals, the federal government, 
which is responsible for a tremendous amount of the challenges 
are that we’re facing — branch lines being pulled out — and 
again no dollars coming back to a national highways’ program 
as was said earlier. 
 
All the provinces met . . . federal provinces . . . 
federal-provincial territorial meeting where they identified 1.5 
cents on a litre to come back for $500 million. Add $300 
million, that gives us $800 million being matched by the 
provincial governments — $1.6 billion to go into a national 
highway system. 
 
If those dollars could get targeted back to help build the 
national highways in this province, we’d have more resources 
to build the rural infrastructure on the secondary highways. 
 

When we look at vehicle damage claims, certainly we have 
been responsible for some of those and those have been paid. 
But we have to consider there’s over 700,000 registered 
vehicles in this province, over 7 billion vehicle kilometres 
travelled. So I do believe we want to reduce the number of 
claims, but we certainly are headed in the right direction. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, the people in rural 
Saskatchewan don’t think you’re headed in any direction but an 
election loss over the neglect that you’ve given to everyone, 
whether it be in health care or highways. 
 
I’ll read a letter that . . . I hope that you have received a copy of 
this letter because these people are asking for a response 

 
In June of 1997, my mother (Shirley Murchie) and my two 
young children were travelling from Cypress Hills to Swift 
Current on #1 Highway. The section of highway near 
Piapot was under construction. There was no Department 
of Highways flag people working. Some sort of sweeper 
was being used which created a dust storm, reducing the 
visibility to nil. A semi-trailer truck stopped because he 
could not see anything. A van ran into the semi and my 
mom ran into the van. 
 
Because my mom had slowed down, nobody was seriously 
hurt. We have never heard a word about why there were no 
flag people. My mom’s caution, which saved lives, has 
been rewarded by an SGI deductible and now an increase 
in her driver’s licence. The Department of Highways’ lack 
of caution, which could have killed three members of my 
family, has never been held accountable. 
 
I would (like) an explanation of this situation. 

 
I’ll send a copy of this letter over to the minister so she can 
respond to this family. But I think this is indicative of what’s 
happening out there, is that people want to know, people would 
like to know why it is that their drivers’ licences are going up, 
their deductibles are going up, and they’re putting up with 
absolute misery on these highways. 
 
Take some responsibility, Madam Minister. Next week I guess 
we’ll deal with a few more of these. One of my colleagues has a 
question for you, but I would like to have a copy of that letter 
back if I may. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, we have just 
received this copy now. It was one that was just written on May 
25, so we will certainly look into this, and we’ll give an 
appropriate response. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one short 
question to the minister. Minister, yesterday in question period I 
raised an issue about a gentleman from Bladworth who had 
some damage sustained to his vehicle on Highway 44. Could 
you give me some indication as to whether you’re going to be 
settling that claim with the gentleman or what have you done to 
date with that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, we will be looking at that 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

claim, as we do any that are brought to our attention, or when 
people have let our department know or our Highways people 
know. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, that accident 
occurred some time ago and I’m just wondering if you could 
give me some idea as to where that claim is. I mean have you 
looked at it? Have you addressed it? There were no flags; he has 
witnesses. To me it’s a cut and dried case. I don’t think the 
claim is that big, but it’s big to this labourer in my constituency. 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I haven’t seen it yet but I did 
ask my officials to look at that yesterday. So when it comes to 
my attention, I mean, it’s certainly going to be reviewed. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
I’ve just got a couple of quick questions. I’m just trying to 
verify some numbers that I believe you had stated, and you 
were talking about the minor claims and that you’d had 202. 
And correct me if I’m wrong, but you said that 94 had been 
paid out for $31,000. 
 
But then you went on and you were talking about major claims, 
and I wonder if you could give me the number of major claims 
we have on the go and could you give me a rough guestimate of 
how many dollars we could be talking about? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair on that our department is 
saying that we’ve never had . . . somewhere in between maybe 
two to five maybe get dealt with in a year. And it hasn’t been at 
any time . . . the financial amount has never been such a 
concern that we’ve had to have a contingent liability worked in 
through our budget process. 
 
So it hasn’t been a major factor, but there have been . . . there 
are sometimes legal suits that are against the department. They 
have ranged somewhere between two to five. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well then 
maybe if you can’t give me the exact amounts that are revolving 
out there, what would be, say, in the last couple years, what 
would be the highest major claim that you’ve had against the 
Highways? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — These are very serious ones and very 
rare that do happen. And there was one settled I guess in about 
the last year, a year — that happened years ago — and we 
would have to get back to you on more of the specifics. That 
one, the pay-out was about half a million. But that was one that 
was resolved just now, then I said it happened years ago. 
 
Right now, presently, we don’t have any major ones that are 
being brought forward. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I don’t need 
an answer to this because I’d just like you to bring back next 
week, when you are in estimates, some materials, perhaps the 
list of the claims that we’ve been asking for I guess in question 
period. But total number of claims . . . could they show which 
stretches of highway those claims are coming from and the total 
cost instead of us revisiting this in depth next week. Just — I 

think you and your officials know where we’re going with this. 
Bring that information by way of a sheet next week. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move we report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair: — Before we start I would ask the minister to 
introduce his officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chair, with me today to my left is 
Terry Scott, the deputy minister for Ag and Food; Ross Johnson 
behind him, budget officer, admin services; beside Ross is 
Sandi Kennedy, legislative assistant, admin services branch; 
and to my right is Stan Benjamin, executive director of planning 
and development for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 
minister and his officials here this morning or this afternoon 
now. 
 
Would you be able to outline for us here this afternoon the 
extent of the damage caused by the recent frosts in the 
province? Have you got some figures that you can provide to us 
this afternoon in terms of types of crops damaged, number of 
acres, the areas? Also along with those sorts of estimates, if you 
can provide us with some dollar figures. 
 
We’re getting a lot of calls from people who feel that there’s 
been some serious damage done to their crop certainly. Have 
your department officials and yourself attached some estimates 
to the total costs that these recent occurrences might have 
caused to farmers in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes. We have 2,294 requests for 
adjustment . . . from about 2,294 contract holders. We don’t . . . 
we won’t know the number of acres until the weather warms up 
a bit and the plants start to get some vigour back in them from 
the heat. We really won’t know; farmers won’t know. 
 
So while we have people ready to adjust, and there’s some 
going on — there’s some re-seeding going on — as far as the 
dollar figure, that is really . . . we are not able to determine that 
at this time. 
 
I just might add, the 2,294 this year . . . in the last six years: ’94 
we had 2,283; ’95 we had 2,910; ’96, 1,118; ’97, 1,622; and 
’98, 1,922, so it’s not wildly out because every year we get frost 
in Saskatchewan in some areas and some people have to 
re-seed. 
 
So while it is of real concern to us, it’s not like double any year 
we’ve had or anything like that. So we’re keeping track of it 
and we’re certainly going to be monitoring it in the future. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. 
Minister. Although you say it’s not considered more than what 
you’d usually have in the way of claims, was I to understand 
this was specifically frost-related claims when you said that, or 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

is that all claims by this point in time? Would you be able to 
just clarify that? 
 
And was I also to understand that you can’t at this point tell — 
that you’ve had claims from 2,294 contract holders — but you 
can’t tell me a total number of acres that that actually would 
represent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, the 2,294 is . . . many farmers 
themselves at this point in time don’t know for sure if they can 
put a claim in until the crop grows. If it’s a severe condition and 
you’ve got, you know everything turns yellow or black, then 
it’s pretty obvious. 
 
But as you know from being a farmer, some fields, just the low 
spots got it, and you know you’ve got to determine whether 
you’re going put a claim in, or whether it’s worth putting a 
claim in, or just working the low spots up and planting barley or 
oats in it that can produce. There’s a number of options that you 
have. 
 
So the farmers don’t know in many cases exactly if they’re 
going to be in a claim position but they’ve put a claim in 
because they think they probably do. The extent of it, meaning 
the number of acres, will be determined within the next 
probably few days, I would say, if it turns warm. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister, 
certainly there will undoubtedly be a certain number of these 
acres that have been affected that perhaps won’t require 
re-seeding; they’ll re-grow certainly. 
 
But there’s going to be a significant set-back to these crops in 
terms of a delay in maturity. The way this weather has started 
out in terms of our growing season here, and as unpredictable as 
the weather can ever be in our province, have you got some 
contingency plans in mind in terms of what could be an 
eventual flood of insurance claims this fall? And at the other 
end of the growing season if we run out of growing room at the 
other end because of the delay in maturity? 
 
I know there’s been a significant problem in years gone by in 
terms of the time that people are required to wait until 
adjustments are done on crops that they’ve claimed for. It’s 
caused significant problems in terms of the management of their 
operations. It certainly has eventually lead to cash flow 
problems as well. 
 
I don’t have to remind the minister that although you might not 
consider this an inordinate number of claims by this time of 
year, you have to put it in the context of the fact that farmers 
have just come off of a year where it hasn’t been all that 
profitable for them. I think you probably could tell me the 
figures — you might have them at hand or your officials might 
have — in terms of the drop in disposable income to farmers in 
this past year, or net income. And maybe you might be able to 
provide that to us here just to further highlight what should be a 
very serious concern. 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — We’re not downplaying this issue at all. 
All I’m saying is that we believe that we have, because of the 

numbers in other years, we have adjusters; we’ve got 150 
adjusters available today. The adjusting process will not delay 
the farmer re-seeding. We can call in adjusters from Manitoba 
and Alberta if we have to. You can leave check strips. There’s a 
number of things that we accommodate the producers for, 
ensuring that they can re-seed as soon as possible. 
 
And I don’t argue with you in terms of what the potential is. 
Yes, net farm income is projected to be lower. We know that. 
The prices are low, the futures are flat on the commodities side, 
out quite a ways — that’s a separate issue, that’s a serious issue 
— but a separate issue from what we’re talking about . . . the 
claims for re-seeding. 
 
Now, as you know, I can recall having a barley crop 8 inches 
high hailed out 100 per cent in the middle and it’s probably the 
best barley crop I ever had. We’ve had a burn off of cereals. 
And these things are all worries to farmers. But what I’m saying 
is we can’t jump the gun. We’re on top of the situation as good 
as anybody could be, and the farmers certainly aren’t going to 
be delayed in their re-seeding because of crop insurance’s 
actions. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the 
minister. Some of your comments, of course, will be leading me 
on to what my next topic will be. But just before we leave this 
particular topic, I have to further emphasize that there are 
pockets of severe damage in the province — frost related. 
Certainly when people talk averages, you’re not always, not 
always highlighting the significance to the individual producers 
that might be severely affected here. And also we have to 
recognize there’s a lot of producers out there in this province 
that aren’t insurance — crop insurance contract holders — and 
there’s going to be a severe impact on them as well. 
 
So certainly it’s something that we have to have some 
contingency plans in mind for. But when you mentioned that 
you realize the net incomes of farms are projected to be 
dropping, it certainly does get into the whole aspect of farm 
input costs. The cost-price squeeze that we’ve talked about in 
years gone by has become quite severe, for the reasons you’ve 
outlined, with some of the grain prices taking a turn for the 
worst as they have. 
 
Now I know we’ve had conversations in days gone by where 
. . . Well for one example, you took a trip to Quebec City, I 
believe it was about a year ago now. It was maintained to us 
that there was going to be an active discussion surrounding 
escalating farm input costs at that meeting. And subsequent to 
that that there would be some further actions perhaps involving 
all provincial ministers of Agriculture, and certainly in 
conjunction with the federal minister as well. 
 
You know what our position has been on farm input costs in 
this province, that we feel that there could be an active role 
played by the provincial government and federal government as 
a watchdog, trying to use the power of your office to influence 
manufacturers of farm inputs to consider that it’s not all 
necessarily coming up roses on the farm and that there’s a 
necessity to try and curb any increases in farm input costs. 
 
Certainly since, well since I’ve stood and spoke with you in the 
House — one glaring example of increase in farm input costs 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

could relate to the cost of farm equipment and equipment parts. 
There seems to be no end to the increases with respect to that 
sector. 
 
I would just like to know what the minister has done and 
intends to do in the next while with respect to trying to use your 
influence to reduce farm input costs in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. I have the 
realized net farm income, ’94, ’97 here, which shows that 1997 
realized net was $680 million for Saskatchewan which was 
about in line . . . well almost double 1996, at 393. We had 701 
million in ’95 and 722 in ’94, so the trend line is down. 
 
The worst part of this is the projection for 1998 is only about 
300 million, which is back down to where it was in 1996. So 
that is not good news. And we understand that, and we 
understand the concerns that you have and that the farmers 
have. 
 
The federal government of course has been saying that they’re 
not going to be involved in ad hoc programing. We went into 
the NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) with crop 
insurance and NISA, and will continue to deal with them to 
make sure that we maintain our $600 million fund from Ottawa 
for Canada, and that we retain our 35 to 33 per cent of that. 
 
When you talk about input costs, I agree with you 100 per cent. 
And being in this position we try to do something about that, 
which is an issue which is very, very difficult to do anything 
about. What we’ve done, there’s two lines. First of all, I took 
this issue to my first federal-provincial meeting. That was two 
and a half years ago. Since then, we’ve had two meetings; every 
year it’s been on the agenda, and it’s on the agenda again. 
 
And where we are now? We’re going to be getting a report from 
the working committee of deputies. Now I don’t know what that 
report’s going to say, but we’re going to be discussing that in 
Ottawa . . . in Ontario this summer at our annual meeting. 
 
Because my position is that an individual province can’t do 
anything. We can monitor and chirp, but we really can’t do 
anything as good as a national body — monitoring prices to see 
if there’s any price fixing or gouging of that kind, just so the 
companies know that somebody’s watching. Because we get the 
feeling, as I think you do, and farmers, that nobody’s watching 
the store right now and prices can be charged — whatever the 
market will bear. 
 
Now the reason it’s difficult is because this is the free trade, 
free market system. You price your product, and, if people buy 
it, you may want to increase it to see if people still buy it; or if 
they don’t buy any, they decrease it. So that report’s in 
progress. It’s slow, I admit that, but these things do work slowly 
on a federal-provincial basis. 
 
The other thing that we’re doing is doing what we can 
provincially. Historically we’ve broadened the exemption on 
the tax base, the E&H (education and health) base, to a point 
where the PST exemption on farm machinery, fertilizer, repairs, 
pesticides, etc., saves farmers $127 million because they’re 
exempt. 
 

An exemption on fuel tax — diesel and gasoline rebate — 
another $116 million that’s a benefit to the producers. Now 
traditionally we don’t talk about these things because they just 
have been going on for a long time. And I know myself as a 
producer, I don’t think that government is doing anything for 
me . . . but in terms, that is the tax that they’re exempted for, so 
it’s a benefit to them. 
 
The other thing that we’re doing among some of the other tax 
exemptions, one of things that we did was to reduce the crop 
insurance premium by 33 per cent, because we had control of 
that. And we worked with the federal government because it’s a 
Canada-Saskatchewan program, and saved the farmers of this 
province about $35 million annually, year to year, year over 
year, in terms of their crop insurance. And that’s a long-term 
sustained benefit. And I might say that that’s probably the — as 
far as I can remember — the biggest reduction, sustainable 
reduction, in an input cost in this province. 
 
So what we’re doing is we’re talking to the federal government 
to see what can we do to be the watchdog for the input costs. 
We’re exempting fuel tax; we’re exempting all the PST on farm 
machinery and farm inputs basically. So while the problem 
remains, it’s not from a lack of exempting taxes. 
 
The problem remains because there isn’t enough margin to keep 
people on the land by farming the way we are today because of 
the prices. So we understand and we’re trying to do what we 
can on our side. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the 
minister. You raise another point in terms of trying to keep 
people on the land. Have you’ve got some statistics here which 
would tell us just at what an exponential rate we’re losing 
farmers in this province. Because I’m concerned, as all of my 
colleagues, when you open up newspapers in this province and 
you see probably a record number of farm auctions, probably 
unprecedented. Certainly the number of active farmers in this 
province must be dropping dramatically. 
 
And when you mention certain exemptions, such as E&H and 
fuel tax exemptions, there hasn’t been, and correct me if I’m 
wrong, but has there ever been an increase in that fuel tax 
exemption? And is there any active consideration being given to 
that, given that on a per unit basis now — although any 
exemption is welcome — it’s not nearly as significant as it once 
was when farm units used to be quite a bit smaller. So is there 
any active consideration being given to increase that fuel 
exemption on a farm unit basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chair, the decline in agriculture . . . 
I have the numbers here basically back to 1906. But just to put 
it in perspective. There’s been . . . from 1936, we peaked at 
142,000 producers. In 1996, because this is the ’96 latest Ag 
stats book . . . we’ve had 56 . . . basically 57,000 producers. 
 
But if you look at the trend since let’s say 1990 . . . ’71, that’s 
about 25 years ago, the last 25 years, we’ve lost almost or just 
over 20,000 producers. And you know, every year it can 
average a thousand producers a year over the last 20 or so years 
— removed. 
 
So the statistics show that and we see that in our rural areas. 



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

And one of the things that we want to do to try to reverse that 
trend is — and what we’re doing to reverse that trend is — to 
try to add value to the grain that we grow out there because 
we’ve had a grains mentality for many years. If we can do that 
successfully and I say we are, especially in the area as hogs for 
a good example — because of the dramatic increase, we’re 
putting families back in. 
 
In my area, the Watrous constituency, I think I can show you 
areas from Lanigan, Leroy up to Watson, back to Humboldt 
where there were farmhouses empty and town homes empty. 
And right now they’re moving buildings in. Humboldt’s got a 
housing building program, Leroy’s got a program where they 
can build in . . . bring in mobile homes. 
 
So that’s why this government has taken the position of Ag 
2000, which we put out just about 10 years ago now. 
 
And it’s working. I mean we’ve got a long way to go. We can 
do poultry industry, we can . . . I mean, the beef industry is also 
growing and will be growing much more because we can’t pay 
a buck a bushel. Not to get political, but the federal Liberal 
government was forcing us to pay a dollar a bushel to haul our 
grain basically from main lines because the branch lines are 
shutting down. 
 
So we saw this coming, we knew we couldn’t reverse the trend, 
so then we said well what’ll we do about it? And what we do 
about it is keep the population in rural Saskatchewan but have 
them in animal husbandry which is adding value to the grain. 
And if we can continue that process on, by having processing of 
those animals, we gain even more. 
 
So that’s the . . . that’s how we’re trying to keep the population 
up and reverse this 1,000 . . . minus 1,000 trend. Now the 
farmers will continue probably to decline, but the population 
will increase. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the minister, 
averages of course again don’t always necessarily reflect what’s 
happening, well certainly most recently. Over the last 20 years 
we’re losing an average of a thousand farmers a year. But what 
have we lost for the years 1991 through to . . . well I guess if 
you add most recent statistics being 1996 — if I could have 
those. 
 
Also, in fairness to the minister, I don’t think he heard my 
additional question I tacked on there with respect to fuel tax 
exemption in the province: if there’s any active consideration 
being given to increase that exemption? 
 
Given that, as you say, probably the number of farmers or farm 
units is not increasing, you may have some additional 
employees working on particular farm units because of 
intensive livestock. But the fuel tax exemption as it exists today 
is certainly not as significant an exemption as it was at one 
time, given the size of these farm units and the fact that they are 
needing assistance regardless of the scale. Is there any 
consideration being given to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I can give you . . . just for the sake of 

brevity, I was using general terms. I can give you exact 
numbers. And this is available in the stats book and you can 
look it up yourself. 
 
But just for the record, in 1971 we had 76,970 farms. Five years 
later — I’m going to round these off — we had 71,000 farmers. 
That’s about a 6,000-drop in that 5-year period. From ’76 to 
’81, we went from 71 to sixty-seven three. That’s another 
6,000. So from ’81 to ’86, another five years, we’ve reduced the 
exodus to 4,000. From ’86 to ’91, again it was just about 3,000. 
 
So the trend is the numbers . . . since we’ve taken over 
government in ’91, I think because of the Ag 2000 and the 
value-added program, the exodus is decreasing a little bit — the 
number of farmers — because of the diversifications. Not just 
what government’s done, but because the producers themselves 
are going into other grains, from spices to, you know, on the 
grain side, to exotic animals on the other side. 
 
So the exodus has dropped. From ’91 to ’96 we were about the 
same. So that’s more specific. It doesn’t change the fact that 
people are leaving and we want to make sure they stay here, and 
I’ve explained to you what we’re doing to have them stay. 
 
As far as the fuel tax exemption, you were wondering if we 
would be increasing the fuel tax exemption. Well I don’t think 
so. 
 
The problem is this: if you add up the dollars that the 
government and basically the taxpayers contribute to 
agriculture, you can add it up to nearly $400 million annually. It 
depends what you put in. But it’s a large dollar. 
 
And the fact of the matter is the margins aren’t changing. The 
numbers, while there’s some reduction in exodus, it’s still not 
good enough simply because the margins aren’t there. And 
what we have to do it as a farm community . . . because I’ve 
worked all my life, farm life, lobbying to get the margins 
bigger. I can admit to the world that I haven’t been very 
successful, because if you look at the trends the input costs 
follow the price of the grains.  
 
And so we don’t need to argue about getting the grain up, we 
need to argue about getting the margin up. And I haven’t been 
very successful nor have any of us really. So then if you’re not 
being successful there, you don’t quit, and you continue to try 
to get the margins increased by whatever method we can. But 
you also have to sit down and say okay, how do we farm within 
that margin? 
 
And that’s where Saskatchewan farmers have the challenge 
facing them today. How do they farm within the margin? 
Because you know we could give more fuel tax — we could 
broaden the exemption again. I think one of the things that isn’t 
exempted is farm grain trucks. We could even broaden the tax 
exemption to include farm grain trucks or anything else that we 
could use on the farm. 
 
But do you know what? The problem wouldn’t change simply 
because it’s not enough. The government can’t exempt enough 
to keep farmers farming within the margin. So that’s why we’ve 
got to work on input costs. That’s why we’ve got to work on 
different methods of farming whether it be co-op farming, 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

corporate farming, leasing equipment, custom farming, 
whatever works for the group of people to keep the population 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So you could argue and criticize us for whatever, but I maintain 
the taxpayers of this province don’t have enough money to 
broaden the base to keep farmers farming. That is what in 
conjunction with many other things, keeps them on the land. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the 
Minister. I’m pleased to see his acknowledgement of the fact 
that, well — just due to the ingenuity on part of a lot of 
producers — that is really what’s kept as many on the land I 
guess so to speak as we do have despite the decline. The 
diversification that’s going on — although provincially, 
federally there’s some assistance that may have been available. 
A lot of this is of course . . . the producers themselves are at the 
front of all of that. And I think you’ve acknowledged that as 
well. 
 
I don’t have too many more questions here for you, Mr. 
Minister, this morning. But if I could in terms of farm input 
costs, you’d have to admit that the cost of credit services for 
farmers in the province is a significant one: being able to obtain 
credit, to operate their farms, to acquire capital equipment, 
additional lands, and maintain operating loans. These are 
significant dollars that are being rung up in terms of costs to 
producers in the province. 
 
In light of the fact that I’ve had a response from your 
government recently that in fact none of you have taken the 
time or had the inclination to even make a formal response to 
the federal task force — that’s chaired in fact by a Regina 
resident — on the banking industry on financial services in this 
country. And my understanding is that his report is going to be 
perhaps completed by September of this year. Would it not be 
considered prudent by yourself and your department officials to 
consider making a formal submission to that task force on 
behalf of producers in this province, being that farm people, 
agricultural producers, are significant consumers of credit 
services in this province. 
 
And if I could have you go so far as to make a comment, do you 
feel that the so-called megamergers, the consolidation of banks 
in this country is going to lead to better service for agricultural 
producers. Because I maintain to you that there’s a lot of 
farmers out there that don’t think it will be anything good come 
from that in terms of better service provided to them, more 
accessible credit from these banking institutions, and at a more 
reasonable rate. 
 
So I’m about to take my place, but I’d certainly welcome 
comments from you in this regard. It’s a very important issue to 
farmers across this province. As we speak, there’s a lot of 
farmers that are counting on a crop to come in this fall under 
what has started out to be a rather shaky start in terms of 
weather. We hear reports on a regular basis that things are still 
dry. In fact we get your weekly report across here as well, 
which we appreciate, keeping us posted on soil moisture 
conditions, crop conditions in the province. There’s a lot to be 
worried about in that regard. 
 
So with respect to credit services and the availability of such 

and the cost of such, if I could have your comments on that and 
your commitment that you might actively make a submission on 
behalf of the agricultural producers in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Two points I’ll make on your statement. 
We’re actively considering whether or not we should make a 
presentation. The debt numbers in Saskatchewan — total farm 
debt, December 31, 1993 to ’97, have risen from 4.4 in ’93 to 
5.1 in ’97. That’s total farm debt. 
 
Now that is a trend line up there but not a significant increase. 
So servicing that debt certainly is a problem. That’s why we’ve 
always worked on trying to get the prices up — to service the 
debt. That’s the theory. But again, it’s the margin that’s not 
there and how do we service that debt within the margin that we 
have to work in. So it’s one of the concerns. 
 
As far as your question about the mergers, it’s a very difficult 
question to answer but I’ll answer it this way. The world trend 
is for megamergers and Canada is not going to be isolated from 
that. The trend also is for more and more banks to be moving 
globally. We’ve seen Rabobank out of the Netherlands set up an 
office for the first time in Toronto — huge, huge credit union 
type bank. There’s a number of U.S. banks that are moving up 
into Canada. So the mergers are going to continue. 
 
What we have to be concerned about is that there’s still enough 
people . . . companies around to compete. Because it’s the rate 
of interest to service that debt that’s important and I think that’s 
what you’re talking about. How do we make sure there’s 
enough competition around to maintain a competitive interest 
rate? And that’s the angle that we would come from too because 
you’re not going to stop the mergers. You can jump up and 
down and scream and holler whether you like them or don’t like 
them; but the fact of the matter is, if you look at these things 
around the world, the trend is to not stop. Whether they will be 
stopped is, I guess, something to be determined in the future. 
 
So we also have to remember that we are fortunate in 
Saskatchewan that we have a credit union system that will be 
here and is working here on behalf of Saskatchewan producers 
— to maintain their presence, to maintain their viability in this 
very, very, much rapidly changing world. And so there’s also an 
option there. And they will be there to compete with the banks 
no matter how many banks there are; they’re always going to be 
there as a competitor. So we have an advantage that way. 
 
So while this is a concern, we have to be focusing on viewing 
the world to make sure there are enough competitors to keep the 
rate as low as possible. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And to the 
minister, I appreciate your comments. I would encourage you to 
make an active submission to this task force, and certainly the 
very essence of a submission of that nature would be to 
encourage additional competition in the banking industry. It 
would do nothing but benefit producers in the province 
certainly because that, of course, is our concern. If these banks 
start consolidating there isn’t additional competition available 
to provide producers with, let’s say, better options than what 
they have as they exist today. Because I think there’s a lot of 
producers out there that don’t feel that current services are 
adequate to meet their needs, to allow them to expand, to try 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

and grow their businesses. 
 
And I’d also be very interested in the outcome of your . . . this 
summer’s meeting with respect to the ongoing efforts to look at 
the overall picture of farm-input costs. And developing 
strategies of trying to maintain a watchdog role if you want to 
call it that in terms of making manufacturers aware that 
governments at all levels are making a point of being aware of 
farm input costs on behalf of their producers. 
 
I’ve shared with you correspondence I’ve had with a number of 
farm input manufacturers in this regard and I’d certainly 
welcome it if you’d share any of the same with myself, 
anything that you’ve undertaken. And we certainly would be 
supportive of any efforts to try and further the cause of keeping 
our producers in a viable position and beyond that — beyond 
viability — in a position to grow their businesses as I say. 
 
So with that, I’ll take my place and I’ll thank the minister and 
his officials here this morning, or this afternoon. 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I will thank you for your questions. Just 
to say that upon returning from the federal-provincial meeting, I 
will supply you and the official opposition with the 
recommendation that has been put forward and any input you 
might have into helping us there would be appreciated because 
it is an important area. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to yourself and your officials. We have a number of 
subjects that we wanted to discuss with you today in 
agriculture. These of course being a wide range of topics that 
are of interest to farmers and ranchers across this province. 
There are a number of issues that are of a very important nature 
to them and not only them but to the economy of this province 
and the well-being of many people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, before we get into the bulk of our presentation on 
agriculture, I wanted to bring to your attention, and I hope 
you’re aware of the impending concern, with regard to a fleet 
assessment program that SGI is implementing with regard to 
farm vehicles. Are you aware of this, Mr. Minister, that SGI is 
going to now be assessing farmers on the vehicles that they use 
in their farming operations, if they have five or more vehicles 
within their fleet of farm vehicles? 
 
Now as you know in many, many farming operations in 
Saskatchewan it doesn’t take very much to get up to five 
vehicles. This means, incidentally, farm-related vehicles and/or 
trailers. 
 
So if you’re a mixed farm in Saskatchewan and you have a 
half-ton and you have a fuel truck and you have a truck for . . . a 
couple of grain trucks and a trailer or two, a stock trailer or 
something of that nature, a flatbed trailer, a fifth-wheel trailer. 
As you know, many producers would have five or more 
vehicles falling into this category pretty easily. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is happening here, it appears to us, is that 
SGI again is looking towards the agriculture community as a 

source of revenue for them. And it is of great concern that they 
would be assessing some sort of fleet assessment penalty 
towards agriculture producers in this province. 
 
As I said, it doesn’t take very much of a farm these days to have 
five vehicles or trailers on an operation of relatively modest 
size. I find it strange that they’d even want to call it a fleet. 
When you think of fleet, you think of something like 
MacDonalds Consolidated or Yanke Transfer or something of 
that magnitude. You certainly don’t think of a medium-sized or 
small or large mixed-farming operation or straight grain 
operation, for that matter, in Saskatchewan. 
 
So Mr. Minister, we’ve had a number of concerns coming 
forward from agriculture producers. I have one letter right in 
front of me here from SGI to a farm down in the south-east part 
of Saskatchewan, informing them that they operate a fleet of 
five or more commercial vehicles and that they are now under 
review from the fleet assessment program management and that 
their insurance premium assessment could increase effective 
July of this year. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, this is one of those areas that you and your 
administration do have some control over in terms of costs. And 
this is an increase in costs, not a decrease in costs, to farmers in 
this province. 
 
I would appreciate your comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I appreciate your question. I’ve looked 
through the information that I’ve received, though I’ve looked 
at it before, and I wasn’t aware . . . I’m not aware of the fleet 
assessment. So I appreciate you bringing it to my attention, and 
yes, I’d appreciate a copy of it. Because we as the Department 
of Agriculture and Food are always concerned about the input 
costs, just as we were talking a few minutes ago to your 
colleague about. 
 
So what I will say is that we will certainly, because I have not 
heard of this and I appreciate you bringing it up, we will review 
that to see if that program will result in greater costs to the 
agriculture community. 
 
And I can give you my assurance that I will be diligent in trying 
to work towards an end that will not see any increases. And 
maybe it won’t. I mean I don’t know enough about it to even 
really comment on it. So I appreciate that. I’m sorry I can’t 
answer your question but I’ll say I will get the answer to you in 
written form if we finish these estimates before I get it. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that. I 
don’t think when they’re talking about reassessing them, they’re 
talking about it going down; I think they’re talking about it 
going up. The letter seemed rather ominous, to say the least, in 
terms of what was going to happen to their insurance and plate 
registration costs. It would appear to us that it is something that 
your department should very, very carefully review with the 
minister responsible for SGI — to get a hold of them and twist 
their arm a little bit on behalf of farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
As I said, it doesn’t take too much of an operation in agriculture 
these days to have five vehicles or trailers. And the last thing 
we need in a time when many farmers are faced with re-seeding 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

costs faced with an impending drought in lots of areas, facing 
lower grain prices. Cattle prices now are under a little bit of 
pressure as well, hog prices — all of the areas in terms of 
commodities that farmer producers put forward to the . . . put 
towards our economy — all are under pressure and the last 
thing we need is another increase from your government with 
respect to that. 
 
Mr. Minister, moving on to the next subject that I want to 
discuss with you was the whole area of grain transportation. 
There’s lots of concern, as you know; you and I have spoken 
privately on a few occasions about grain transportation and the 
thoughts of farmers in that area. 
 
I see in today’s issue of Agriline — I think you’re familiar with 
that publication — Friday, June 5, 1998: 
 

The Canadian Transportation Agency will not make a 
decision on the Wheat Board service complaint against the 
CP by June 30 as scheduled. No estimated date was 
announced. Hearings were winding up in Ottawa; closing 
arguments began yesterday and wrap up today. 
 

It is again one of those kinds of things that farmers are 
concerned about. They constantly are told by . . . particularly — 
and I’ll direct first of all my attention to the federal government 
— particularly by this federal government to hurry up and wait. 
It seems to be a constant battle with this administration 
federally, to try and get some resolve to the situations that 
farmers are faced with here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Goodale as you know, Mr. Minister, has been promising for 
a long, long, long time that the transportation system here in 
Saskatchewan, the problems associated with it, were going to be 
addressed. Every time we turn around it’s delay, delay, delay. 
 
I wonder at times whether Mr. Goodale is capable of making a 
decision. It seems that the farmers of this province, I think, feel 
the same way. We are finding many, many producers calling 
and writing to us very frustrated with the fact that there is no 
action whatsoever on these kinds of things. 
 
It just seems to go from study to study to study, from delay to 
delay to delay. The minister saying, well when we get through 
this we’ll be in a position to make decisions. When we get 
through the Estey report we’ll be in a position to make 
decisions. When we get through these latest hearings with the 
Wheat Board and the CP (Canadian Pacific) we’ll be in a 
position to make some decisions. And yet the decisions are 
delayed and delayed all the time. 
 
So I hope, and I think you do, share frustration in those areas, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
As you know, approximately a week ago I think it was, we 
raised the whole concern about grain transportation and Mr. 
Estey reporting. His report was going to be going before 
Collenette here in the last few days. It hasn’t been made public. 
Incidentally, I wonder whether or not you have received any 
knowledge as to what his preliminary report contained. 
 
But again it was a situation where even the former Supreme 
Court justice, Mr. Estey, is saying that the farmers want to see 

changes and they’ve come forward with ideas, ways of 
addressing the transportation complaints and concerns that they 
have. And already he’s saying that he’s doubtful that we will 
see any political change here in western Canada. There doesn’t 
seem to be the resolve to make any changes. 
 
And that should be of great concern. I don’t know what would 
prompt Mr. Estey to say that unless he’s had discussions with 
Collenette and Goodale and they have indicated to him that they 
don’t expect any changes. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you might want to comment at this 
point and also share with the opposition and the farmers of 
Saskatchewan whether you have had any kind of “heads up” 
from the federal government — Collenette, Goodale, whomever 
— as to whether they’re prepared to move on any of the 
recommendations that Estey is putting forward. Or do the 
farmers of Saskatchewan: are they to believe that Mr. Estey’s 
comments are correct, that we are not going to see any change 
because there is no political will in eastern Canada these days. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well while there are things that you and 
I disagree on, I certainly agree with you on this issue in terms of 
the delays because it’s very critical that we have some action. 
 
Now just to make a few points. We of course keep analysing 
what the federal government’s doing and it’s fairly easy to 
analyse nothing, so that’s where that’s at. 
 
The Estey report, as you say, is simply . . . there’s no 
recommendations on what Estey reported to Mr. Collenette a 
few days ago. We understand what this so-called report is — 
and the people are calling it a report — is a report of the 
applications to him, of the presentations to him, an analysis of 
those and a review of those, that he’s passing over in condensed 
form to Mr. Collenette and the federal government. And that 
phase two of the Estey report will be actually his report and 
recommendations that will come. 
 
Now what concerns us is when they come, because as you say, 
things are being delayed greatly. I mean the federal 
government, they say they don’t want to have anything going 
on while the CTA (Canadian Transportation Agency) is 
reviewing the appeal from the Wheat Board that we are 
involved in. It’s another delay tactic because it’s two different 
issues. I mean, you can separate the issues. 
 
What we were saying on behalf of farmers . . . we were 
interveners in that CTA case with the Wheat Board simply 
because all we’re saying is that look, there was $65 million lost 
to producers. It wasn’t the producers’ fault. If CP is vindicated 
by the CTA, that’s fine by us and good for them. Then we 
should go on to see where the problem lies because it is not 
going to carry on, in my books, that the farmer keeps paying 
these bills and somebody else is creating the bill. 
 
So that’s why we intervened — not to pick on the railroads but 
just to say okay, is there fault here? If no fault’s determined, 
let’s go on to see where the fault is because it’s not the farmers’ 
fault. 
 
Unfortunately the federal government is dragging its feet 
tremendously on these issues. And we say to them, if you’re 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

going to drag your feet, if you’re going to — we say you’re 
dragging your feet — then let’s put a halt to the abandonments 
so that the lines at least are there. And if you halt the 
abandonments till Estey reports, then if the CTA drags out and 
Estey report drags out, at least we have a rail collection system 
that is there for use. 
 
And we’ve made also some number of recommendations. And 
one of the main recommendations that we have made through 
the Minister of Highways and Transportation and Ag and Food 
jointly with other provinces is that you have to have 
competition. Because you can’t assume that because one 
railroad says this line’s not viable . . . pick whatever line they 
want to abandon, that’s it’s not viable. 
 
The way to determine viability is to have someone else, many 
other people, be able to access that line, and that means joint 
running rights. Because you’ll determine viability when two or 
three or four people say no, we don’t want this line. Then I will 
assume it’s not viable. 
 
(1300) 
 
But what’s happening is the federal government are allowing 
lines to be abandoned before any test of viability — only on the 
word of one company. 
 
So these are . . . and there are number of other things that we’ve 
talked about. We have to have in a joint . . . in a system where 
you have branch lines you have to have a regulation that 
determines the sharing of the tariff from the point it accesses the 
rail on a branch line, for example, or short line, to port. What 
part of that tariff does the branch line get to maintain their 
viability as opposed to the main line carrier so they can 
maintain their viability? 
 
These things have to be settled out because if you don’t decide 
what a tariff rate is, then the branch line is held hostage by the 
main line. They can just set their rate. Of course they can just 
jack it up to kill the branch line. 
 
So all these things, the frustration that we, I think, share with 
you, if I’m hearing you right, is that the federal government are 
sitting idly by watching the deterioration of the system, putting 
no money into the infrastructure, and not giving any indication 
that they really have a plan for the future of a national 
transportation policy. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well it is certainly a frustration that we do share 
with you, Mr. Minister, and farmers share with you I’m sure as 
well. We don’t see action taking place in this. We’ve seen a 
change in the transportation, great changes in the transportation 
system in this province and in western Canada as to where 
subsidies and all of those kinds of things are going to go and 
have gone in the past and certainly into the future. 
 
I’d like to explore that with you a little bit — the whole idea of 
joint running rights. I know you’ve thrown that out a little bit 
and we have given kind of tacit approval to it because we’re not 
quite sure what you have in mind in terms of all of these things. 
As you said, I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan, the farmers 
of Saskatchewan, will be interested in what your proposal is in 
this area, Mr. Minister. 

Are we just simply opening it up, deregulating it completely, 
and anyone that has a locomotive and a few cars can put them 
on track and away they go running their own little railway? Or 
how are we . . . I assume that there is going to be some 
coordination of this by someone. I don’t know who you have in 
mind, perhaps existing authorities in that area, or what exactly 
your thoughts are. I think before we’re prepared to give you 
complete support in that area, we want to know what you’re 
talking about with respect to joint running rights. 
 
I want to also, Mr. Minister, talk about the viability of some rail 
lines and things of that nature. At this point let’s deal with this 
whole area of joint running rights. Do you have some kind of 
proposal for at least a discussion paper that you can put out, 
provide us with as to what you’re talking about? Have you 
distributed anything to farm groups in Saskatchewan as to what 
your thoughts are in this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Sorry for the little delay. I was just 
getting an update on the activities because we’ve carried out a 
number of activities to research the joint running rights issue. I 
had one of the department people go to Australia just recently to 
study their changes down there. They found out that one area of 
Australia went to a common carrier as they call it, where I think 
four or five companies were allowed to run on one rail bed. 
 
What they found was that there was a cost saving to shippers of 
40 to 50 per cent, depending of course on the length of the line. 
The longer the line, the more cost saving was there. But 
certainly that little example showed a great return. There’s other 
areas in the U.S. that we’ve looked at with competitive lines 
and the costs to shippers. We know that in countries like 
Britain, there are many lines that are used . . . many companies 
using lines. In fact they’re going to a different system again. 
 
So I guess to make a long story short, we’ve got analysis 
ongoing. We’re collecting information . . . I know the 
university, Dr. Richard Gray at the University of Saskatchewan 
has done a study on transportation. We commissioned Travacon 
to do a study on joint running rights. 
 
So what we’re trying to do is build . . . While we haven’t gone 
formally out with any recommendations, the process as I see it 
is that we have to convince the federal government that this is 
an option that they’ll seriously consider. When we convince 
them of that, we’ve got all the information ready. We hope to 
have. It’s not like we’re compiling it now, but we hope to have 
the information ready to make a good presentation as to . . . and 
maybe some recommendations at how it might work. And we of 
course work with the Department of Highways and 
Transportation on these types of things. 
 
So I think that we’re preparing ourselves well. What we have to 
do is have all members of this House and farm groups and 
farmers in this province, lobby Ottawa to say that you can’t 
deregulate in a non-competitive environment — deregulation in 
a non-competitive environment. You look around the world. 
Look for the Burlington Northern just south of the border — 
$52 a tonne for grain. Our rate is 32 roughly, in a comparable 
location. That’s 20 bucks a tonne. They’re deregulated, 
non-competitive. 
 
If we were deregulated and non-competitive as we are because 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1685 

the rail lines don’t run into every elevator, only one line for the 
most part, then we can be prepared to pay higher rates. The 
joint running rights idea would mean allow deregulation to 
continue, but really what you’re doing is reregulating 
competition. And that’s what we need. 
 
So we appreciate your support on this issue. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You’re familiar I’m 
sure with the West Central Road and Rail group in west-central 
Saskatchewan and their drive to look at the viability of a short 
rail line in that area of Saskatchewan, and there are many others 
that are looking at similar types of things here in the province, 
as you know. 
 
Rail-line abandonment is a part of this whole transportation 
problem that farmers are faced with. The problem that I am 
hearing from not only West Central Road and Rail but other 
groups that are proposing these types of things, is that the rail 
companies and the rail lines and the elevator companies, there’s 
a problem with how these things are done. 
 
You can’t go and look at a branch line in its entirety to look at 
the viability of a short rail line opportunity. Because what 
happens typically is, and what has happened certainly in 
west-central Saskatchewan is the rail company piecemeals these 
things off. And I’m sure you know what I’m talking about when 
I say piecemeals these things off. They take a part of . . . they 
take perhaps the extreme end of the rail line and they close a 
part of that, making it such that that rail line opportunity 
becomes less viable. They take another little strip of it 
somewhere else making it a little less viable all the time and 
selling it off for salvage in the meantime. 
 
So what happens, in effect what happens is that rail line in its 
entirety as a branch line and short rail-line operation may have 
been very viable, but after a series of downgrades of that line, 
shall we call them, after a series of selling off a small, little 
portion sometimes right even smack dab in the middle of that 
line — there’s been examples of that or at the ends of it — it 
just makes it less and less viable. 
 
They sell off the track for salvage. The elevator companies 
come in. They close the elevators. They smash them down 
quickly. It’s becoming increasingly obvious as to what kind of 
game they’re playing with respect to this as well. They come in 
and close these elevators down, and in a very short period of 
time they demolish them, making it such that in a couple of 
years you kind of even forget that they’re even there any longer. 
And what happens is it makes it such that the rail-line 
opportunity, a short rail-line opportunity that was there 
disappears because of the fashion that they’ve been sold off, 
piecemealed off in the past number of years. 
 
And we are already seeing that happening on that west-central 
road and rail designated area out there. And they’re already 
slated for closure the extreme west end of that branch line 
taking off a considerable amount of traffic from there that 
would normally flow into that area. They will be closing 
probably the subdivision heading down — I think it’s already 
abandoned — down to Lacadena in that area. 
 
It’s a pretty good way of doing it if you want to close a line 

down. There’s no question about that. And it seems to a lot of 
people that there is . . . I don’t know, I don’t want to call it 
collusion, but there’s certainly an effort by both the rail 
companies and the elevator companies to see that these things 
are done in a coordinated strategy at least. And that is very, 
very disturbing to farmers. 
 
First of all, they choked the grain supply off in terms of cars, 
then the elevator has less of a handle, then the argument for 
abandonment is even stronger, then the idea of closing that 
elevator becomes even stronger, and eventually the whole 
system sort of collapses around the fact that you can’t haul to a 
plugged elevator. And you can’t get cars because they don’t 
want cars on that line because the history of the line is such that 
not as much grain is being shipped off of that line. I’m sure 
you’re familiar with everything I’m talking about in this 
respect. 
 
And I think the farmers of Saskatchewan have got it all figured 
out as to how this little effort works, and they’re very, very tired 
of it. And they are of the opinion that . . . I think they are of the 
opinion that someone in a position like yourself, Mr. Minister, 
and the Minister of Highways and Transportation here in 
Saskatchewan is going to have to step in and address this 
situation. 
 
I think farmers, farmers are looking at this and they are saying 
to themselves, if they are going to abandon a branch line, make 
them abandon it in its entirety or not. That’s some of the things 
that they are telling us. If they are going to close elevators 
down, make them set that elevator up and make it available for 
purchase rather than just bulldozing the thing down. 
 
If they are going to make . . . put lines up for salvage, make 
them available in their entirety, as I said, rather than just simply 
piecemealing off a piece of it at a time. 
 
Those are some of the things that we are hearing about, and I 
see my colleague and friend from Rosetown-Biggar nodding his 
head in approval. It might be . . . I’m sure it scares him as much 
as it scares me the fact that we have some common agreement 
on something for once. 
 
But the fact is, is that farmers on all sides, political stripes, 
right, left, in between, are talking about this issue and are very 
concerned about it; that the forces outside of their control are 
moving and seem to be conspiring a little bit against them in 
this area. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d be interested in your comments at this point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well thank you again. I understand and 
agree with what you’re saying. The problem that we have here, 
and I think . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do something about it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, well you say do something about it. 
And that’s the frustration, as I think you know. It’s easy to sit in 
opposition — I was there for five years myself — and it’s easy 
in opposition to just point your finger over there and say, do 
something. 
 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

And so we are doing something. The Minister of Highways and 
Transportation has been out to many, many meetings. The west 
central committee that you talk about have met with them. They 
work with the Department of Highways officials. 
 
And that selective abandonment, as you speak of, is very . . . is 
the most critical aspect we have, and that’s why we are writing 
letter after letter, right up to the Premier’s level, to the Prime 
Minister, saying stop the abandonment until we can get the 
Estey report in, hopefully with recommendations of how we can 
maintain the system with the most benefit to everyone — to the 
farmers, to the grain companies, and the elevators. Because you 
have to have them viable. You need viable railroads, but you 
need viable farms too. So you need this report in. 
 
(1315) 
 
Now it’s really popular to beat up on the railroads and the 
elevator company. And I think that they do have some corporate 
responsibility to the people of this country. But the reality is, if 
they have a direction . . . if a company has a direction from a 
boardroom, they simply find people to carry out that direction. 
And you know what? The thing that will stop the direction is a 
federal government with enough courage to stand up on behalf 
of the people of this province and this country and say, no, 
here’s the rules that you’re going to work under. Because the 
railways and the elevator company are simply working under 
the rules — or the railways with federal legislation are simply 
working under the rules that they’re given by the federal 
government. 
 
And there is no desire, it appears, on the part of the federal 
Liberals to make any changes. Now maybe they’ve abdicated 
their responsibility. We know they’ve abdicated their 
responsibility in highways and infrastructure funding. We know 
they’re . . . in agriculture we’re trying to maintain the safety net 
package, and so far have done that but we’ve had to argue a lot 
to keep that. 
 
In terms of the participation of the transportation community in 
Saskatchewan, the federal government is simply abandoning 
that — totally abandoning it. Now you say we should do 
something. Well we are, as I said. We’ve got letters, we’ve got 
lobbies, we’re working with the people on the ground. And all 
we can do is continue to do that in terms of trying to keep the 
system intact. 
 
But the main way to do it is, I think, the approach we’ve taken. 
Look at joint running rights as an option to determine viability. 
Because you will agree, and I think any farm will agree, if 
nobody wants to run the line because they can’t make money on 
it, then the line won’t be there. They’re not saying keep lines 
that aren’t viable. They’re saying these lines are viable but you 
need some commitment there. 
 
So we’re going to continue that. The Minister of Highways is 
on a daily basis, their department’s working on this issue. We 
have a section in our Ag and Food, a transportation section that 
works. As I said, we’ve sent people around different parts of the 
world and we’re collecting information to try to put forward to 
the federal government some options. I think we need a 
concerted effort from all of western Canada. We have received 
that in form of the Estey submission. Every province, every 

province’s Agriculture minister, every province’s 
Transportation minister have signed on to this. 
 
Unfortunately the federal Liberal government doesn’t want to 
hear. I asked the member from, I think, Wood River to table his 
correspondence on highways just a few minutes ago. And the 
answer, well he couldn’t do either. 
 
So we have to have a little bit of cooperation here, and I don’t 
know other than keeping pounding on the federal government 
— and we’re going to figure out how to do that — any 
strategies that you might employ we would welcome. 
 
And we’re going to keep pounding them to try to, on behalf of 
the people of this province, ensure that we have a transportation 
system that is viable and that can haul grain out very efficiently 
to keep our customers. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you say that you 
need a concerted effort I couldn’t agree with you more. We 
have always said, in opposition here, that we would be prepared 
to help in whatever areas we could to convince the federal 
Liberals that there is a very serious situation here. We would 
certainly call on their Liberal cousins here in Saskatchewan to 
speak to the issue as well. 
 
They’ve been as you know, Mr. Minister, they’ve been very, 
very absent from the discussion surrounding this whole area of 
grain transportation. They seem to be very much of the view 
that they’ll just let things unfold and old buddy Ralph will look 
after it. But I’m afraid that the farmers don’t have all that much 
confidence in Ralph nor the provincial Liberals here in 
Saskatchewan to look after their interests in this area. 
 
What farmers are saying to us is instead of having barn raisings 
like we used to have, now in rural Saskatchewan we’re having 
elevator burnings and they’re a little bit tired of it. There is 
nothing, Mr. Minister, you’re telling us, there is nothing in a 
legislative fashion, even if it perhaps results in a jurisdictional 
problem with the federal government, that you can do. 
 
You aren’t prepared to fight them in terms of presenting some 
legislation even if it results in court challenges to that 
legislation in dealing with the issue, Mr. Minister. I’m a little 
bit surprised frankly and a little bit alarmed that there isn’t 
something that the provincial government can be doing to help 
in this situation other than their writing a few letters to Goodale 
or Collenette. 
 
I think the farmers are looking for an action plan from your 
administration, rather than a number of letters that they never 
even see going to Mr. Goodale or Mr. Collenette, on this sort of 
issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn my attention now a little bit to 
another area of concern that farmers have in grain transportation 
— a little bit unrelated but certainly an area of grain 
transportation. You have been talking about a concerted effort 
and a coordinated effort and trying to do what you can to help 
farmers in times of need when it comes to grain transportation. 
 
One of the concerns that come to the floor quite frequently 
when you talk to farmers about grain transportation is the fact 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

that they don’t have control over the grain transportation system 
in a lot of areas. And as product is moved to market, whether it 
be the West Coast or the Great Lakes or Hudson Bay or 
wherever, there are from time to time people in the chain that 
allow the process to break down. 
 
And I’m talking about the kinds of things like strikes, the kinds 
of things . . . work slow-downs, all of those kinds of things. It’s 
been a source of frustration for farmers for a long period of 
time. 
 
We’ve seen, not recently perhaps, but we’ve seen lots of 
occasions in the past when there’s been slow-downs at the 
Lakehead or at the West Coast. Longshoremen refusing to load 
boats, grain handling unions refusing to handle, all of those 
kinds of things . . . working to rule, all of that kind of thing. It 
results in substantial demurrage charges frequently, all being 
charged back to someone who has no control over the system 
whatsoever, Mr. Minister — the farmer. 
 
And the farmers, I think, are saying to us that there should be 
something done to address that problem. They see it as a 
situation that if they are not responsible for the slow-down or 
the breakdown in the transportation system, why should they be 
the ones that are held responsible in terms of paying? 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, you do have a role or you could play 
a role in this type of thing by pushing for and supporting the 
farmers’ push for a change in the way grain transportation is 
viewed, making it such that it is considered an essential service; 
or essentially outlawing strikes along the system in an essential 
service environment; or saying to the rail unions and to the 
government in Ottawa that if the system breaks down and if it 
isn’t the fault of agriculture producers, they should not be the 
ones that are charged the demurrage charges. 
 
Perhaps those demurrage charges should be charged against the 
person, the people responsible for the breakdown in the system. 
Farmers have no control over it. They’re tired of paying the bill 
for somebody else’s decisions to break down the system. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you support a call to make the grain 
handling system in this country an essential service? Or at the 
very least would you support the call that farmers have in 
western Canada to charge the cost of demurrage charges and 
work slow-downs, loss of sales, all of those kinds of things, 
against the people who are responsible for those breakdowns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I think I’m being very clear on the 
record saying that, not much different than what you’re alluding 
to, that there has to be accountability in the system. Mr. Estey, 
in one of our conversations, basically put it: where is the 
liability, who has the liability? And I think that’s the question 
that you’re putting forward. And we agree. 
 
And some of the things that we’ve done, for example, is taking 
intervener status on the Canadian Wheat Board’s appeal to the 
CTA against the railroads saying that there’s $65 million, 
roughly $20 million, just over $20 million demurrage and about 
$45 million of lost sales that someone has to be responsible for. 
 
And you know, I hope you have our support on that. In fact I 
would have liked to see maybe your caucus or your party take 

an intervener status as well on behalf of the farmers with the 
CTA, with the Wheat Board . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You 
asked for intervener status with the Canadian Wheat Board 
application? Okay. Well I appreciate that. I didn’t know that. 
 
That’s one of the things that the united front approach hopefully 
works. Because as I said, we’ve worked with every province in 
western Canada and achieved an agreement to present to Estey 
for options. 
 
But there has to be accountability. And this is where, as far as I 
am concerned, that it doesn’t matter who stops the system, they 
have to be responsible. They have to be responsible. And they 
have to shoulder the liability. 
 
The question then becomes though — and this is where it gets a 
little bit dicey — is do you then take away the rights of 
collective bargaining to accomplish that. Or do you leave the 
collective bargaining rights in place with the understanding that 
they have a liability if they go out on strike. 
 
And I’ve talked to the unions about this. I’ve been in 
Vancouver and talked to them, this very conversation. I said 
you can’t expect western Canadian farmers to sit back and say, 
well we’ll just wait till your strike’s over, however long it’ll be, 
and then the grain will move. Because they won’t stand for that 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Exactly what I was going to 
come to. 
 
And they responded that they understand that. But they said that 
the western Canadian producers have to understand that we 
have a cost of living out here that is different in Saskatchewan. 
They first start saying, you know, the money that we get isn’t 
lucrative and that we have to maintain our right to be able to 
feed our families. We do that by having the right to strike to 
make sure that the working conditions are right, to make sure 
that they have a fair wage and can carry on the activities. 
 
So I’m not disagreeing with you because I’ve been very blunt 
with them saying they have a liability, responsibility, but also at 
the same time I can’t say that we should take away the right to 
legal action . . . or to strike action. If they go on strike though, I 
think they have to have a responsibility for any losses that are 
occurred with that. 
 
And this is where the federal government comes in. This is 
where the creation of a national transportation policy should be 
invoked or should be put in place. We should create this. We 
see absolutely no desire on the part of the federal government to 
create a national transportation policy. All they’re doing is 
deregulating and letting it fall apart. 
 
And as a result of that we can’t keep up with the road repair. 
Other provinces can’t keep up with their road repairs. And 
we’ve got trucking costs, we’ve got elevators being closed 
down, lines closed down. 
 
So I think we’re not too far apart on this except for the fact I 
don’t think we should remove the right to strike, but in there put 
in the responsibility. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes indeed we did 
make a presentation to the hearings in Saskatoon with respect to 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

this and we did call for essentially what you are calling for: 
more accountability in the system, making those people who 
have the system break down pay for the system breaking down 
rather than the farmers being responsible for it. 
 
Yes I certainly agree with your assessment that the federal 
government has a role to play in this. We in this legislature have 
a role to play in this, Mr. Minister. All members of this 
legislature have a role to play in it. 
 
I see the provincial Liberals have been absolutely silent in this 
whole debate surrounding grain transportation, being satisfied 
to act as lap-dogs for Ralph Goodale in this area rather than 
sticking up for the people who elected them in large measure in 
their constituencies, the farm population, who in many of their 
constituencies are facing the same kinds of things that all rural 
Saskatchewan is — a rail-line abandonment, the difficulty to 
move product, seeing the same sorts of things as other areas. 
 
(1330) 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s Goodale doing about it? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Goodale is doing absolutely nothing about it as 
this point, Mr. Member, and we have certainly . . . the farm 
community has continued to be concerned about it. 
 
What we are doing about in the Saskatchewan Party is taking 
intervener status. What we are doing about it is calling for 
action. What we are doing about it is saying that the farm . . . 
there are a number of things in terms of the grain transportation 
system that need to be addressed, and that includes rail-line 
abandonment, that includes elevator closures, that includes 
looking at your proposal for joint-running rights. All of those 
things are contained within what we believe needs to happen. 
 
What are the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan doing about it? I 
have heard nothing coming out of the mouths of any one of 
their members with respect to this issue, as I said, seemingly of 
the view that Mr. Goodale will look after the situation. I have a 
great deal of concern about waiting for Mr. Goodale’s action in 
this area because there doesn’t seem to be anything coming 
forward. 
 
The next area that I want to address, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, is the whole area of concern that farmers have as an 
immediate concern, and that is the situation in terms of 
cropping difficulties that we are experiencing this spring. 
There’s significant numbers of farmers in Saskatchewan that are 
looking at re-seeding. There’s concern about crop insurance in 
the re-seeding benefit. 
 
Perhaps even of more immediate concern, well as of immediate 
concern anyway, is the condition of pastures in Saskatchewan. 
What’s being done in terms of that, Mr. Minister, to address the 
cattle feeding needs of cattle people across this province? They 
are certainly of concern. 
 
I was down and some of my colleagues were down in the south 
areas of this province here last week, I guess it was, and they 
are indicating to me that they have had little or no rain 
whatsoever, and they are extremely concerned about the 
situation relative to their cattle herd. They’ve built over the 

years . . . things have been a little bit better in terms of cattle 
prices; they have been rebuilding their herds after periods of 
similar circumstances — drought in the early ’90s — rebuilding 
their herds back up. 
 
Now we see that they are in a position to . . . where there are 
very poor pasture conditions, I think your department has on a 
regular basis monitors the conditions of pastures, and I’m sure 
you would indicate to the cattle farmers and cattle ranchers 
across this province their concerns are very justified. 
 
I think what they’re looking for is some coordination from your 
department to get cattle to locations that have adequate supplies 
of feed or to transport feed to their area, coordination with that 
respect. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s deal with the whole question of pasture. First 
of all, is that something that you are moving in to provide some 
positive benefit to the cattle people of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I just want to start out by responding to 
your comments on the last question about the grain 
transportation. And I agree. 
 
I don’t know that we should be too hard on the provincial 
Liberals though because I think they are in a bit of a pickle 
having only five members and probably . . . or five MLAs, or 
six I guess it is, and probably no funds to carry on another 
election. They maybe are at the mercy of the . . . of Mr. 
Goodale and his federal crew. 
 
But that tells us, that tells us two things: that the provincial 
Liberals have a decision to make for their future; and also tells 
us that the power that the . . . and the concern that the federal— 
or lack of concern — that the federal government, federal 
Liberals have for this province. 
 
So while I understand your dislike of their response, they are in 
a bit of a pickle, I think, as far as their future is concerned. So 
we shouldn’t be maybe too hard on them. 
 
Some of the things that we’re doing, and this is a very serious 
problem that we’re running into this spring, in descending 
order, probably pastures first, feed for next winter, and then on 
the crop side. What we’ve done is we put out . . . we’ve 
consolidated our programs and put it out in the form of a 
bulletin to all the agrologists’ offices across the province where 
people can go and find out what we’re doing. 
 
The pasture management is such that we run about 60 or 70 per 
cent capacity, so that allows us some flexibilities in terms of 
keeping cattle there as long as possible. What we try to do is 
keep them there over the breeding season if possible to ensure 
that the cycles are continued for the cows and that they’re 
closed before they have to be transferred off the land . . . or off 
the pasture. And so the department’s working very hard in 
trying to accommodate that. 
 
Also we have the feed grain and forage listing services. Now 
this used to be in Saskatchewan, and I understand now that 
we’re expanding this to Alberta. 
 
There’s the farm dugout pumping assistance program. This is 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1689 

Sask Water Corporation’s assistance program. We have 
PFRA’s (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) rural 
water program. We have the accommodation drought effective 
livestock on Crown . . . accommodated on Crown land, looking 
at cutting hay and where we can find hay maybe in parkland. 
We also have the tax deferral on drought and due sale of 
breeding stock. 
 
I don’t want to read all of this out but there’s a couple of pages 
of programs that we have here that are available to producers. 
And what we’re trying to do is accommodate. Crop insurance 
for example, we’re looking at programs where if you have to 
grow green feed for hay, we might be able to say that that’s 
classed as summer fallow for the following year. All these 
things are being developed. 
 
We don’t know the extent of the problem so far, but we do 
know that there is going to be a shortage of feed. Because even 
if it rains now, the hay crops aren’t going to be near what they 
would be — in fact probably less than 50 per cent, maybe less 
than that. 
 
So we think that we’re doing everything we can short of making 
it rain. And the farmers or the cattle producers of this province 
are doing what they have to do. And in the short term, I think 
everybody’s satisfied that as much is being done as possible. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With respect to the 
whole area of re-seeding here in Saskatchewan, as you know 
there’s significant amounts of concern in that area. Perhaps in 
some areas, it’s early to assess that. It’s difficult to assess 
sometimes. You know as well as I know that lower land in 
lower areas is most likely to be affected. Sometimes the 
decision is difficult as to whether you re-seed the whole field or 
just look at portions thereof. 
 
Agriline of today is reporting that there could be up to as much 
as 250,000 acres affected. That’s a huge number of acres 
affected here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. The cost of 
re-seeding is of concern, but in addition to the cost of 
re-seeding, the costs that have already been incurred by the 
farmers of Saskatchewan in seeding the first cost, and of course 
the substantial loss in potential crop by having to re-seed is very 
real for the farmers of this province. 
 
The crop insurance program, while the costs have been reduced, 
also the coverage levels for many farmers have been reduced as 
well. And that is of great concern to them — the premium being 
reflected in lower values, crop insurance values to the farmers. 
So there has been some progress perhaps made in that area. On 
the other hand, farmers are still very, very concerned about the 
fact that substantial areas of this province are going to be 
undergoing re-seeding in the very near future. 
 
As you know, Mr. Minister, many of those areas have very 
limited cropping options to re-seed with. Lots of them have put 
down identity preserved products, identity preserved types of 
crops, canola particularly. And you just can’t go back in and 
re-seed any old thing that comes to mind because of the 
chemicals that have been used at this point. So there’s the 
concern about availability of supply of seed. 
 
I wonder if your department is making any efforts to coordinate 

or bring in seed supplies if necessary, or at least coordinate 
efforts to move in that direction. And are you looking to 
provide any coordination for chemical supplies for things like 
flea beetles, grasshoppers, all of those kinds of things? 
 
Mr. Minister, the situation is beginning to be quite serious. As 
I’m sure you’re aware, it has been reported recently, just this 
morning in Agriline, that there may be up to that kind of 
re-seeding that may have to be done in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Just a couple of . . . There’s a number of 
questions there and if I miss one please feel free to come back. 
 
I wanted to start out though by maybe correcting you — not 
being too confrontational — but your reference to the reduced 
coverage in crop insurance. I’ve heard this in the past where it 
was insinuated that, oh sure, you dropped the premiums by 33 
per cent over two years but you also dropped the coverage. 
 
Well the coverage did drop, but it was nothing to do with any 
changes that the government made. The coverage dropped 
because of the price difference, and all the coverage is 
determined by a formula in which the price of the grain is 
included. And because the price of grain is going down, the 
coverage went down. The actual yield per acre went up about 5 
per cent. 
 
And so I just wanted to clarify that because we have no control 
over the fact that the formula we have to use because of the 
actuary in the program, we have to use the price that’s put 
forward basically through the federal government. I think it’s 
the Canadian Grain Commission is where it comes from 
originally. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Agriculture Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Or Agriculture Canada I guess finally. 
So I just want to clarify that. 
 
Now in terms of crop supplies, we have enough seed, canola 
seed, available to do about a million acres. Where there could 
be a shortage is you went to Polish — Polish canola — that 
only constitutes about 5 per cent of the canola seeded, and 
therefore those seed supplies are not in abundant supplies. 
 
Flax is also a problem but being whatever day it is — the 5th, I 
think, of July — there isn’t going to be a whole lot of flax 
seeded from here on in the reseeding programs; you’re taking 
quite a chance. 
 
As far as the cereal grains are concerned, we’re led to believe 
that there is enough, an abundance of supply to re-seed. 
 
In terms of the insects, I talked to, I think he is, the president of 
the Saskatchewan Aerial Applicators Association yesterday. I 
ran into him at the ConAgra terminal opening at Nokomis and I 
asked him about their activities. He says it’s been very slow. 
They’re spraying some grasshoppers in the, sort of, Alsask area, 
the border area over there as you probably know. Really no 
midge spraying or very little going on right now because of the 
weather, of course the timing as well. But they don’t know 
what’s going to happen in midge. 
 



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

And the supplies of chemical, we’ve had . . . the department has 
looked at, talked to suppliers of chemical and they say there is 
enough supply of pesticides to handle the flea beetles, the 
grasshoppers, the berthas, and anything that might come along. 
 
So I think we’re on top of it. And that’s all I’ll say for now. 
 
(1345) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thanks, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, the next area of discussion that I wanted to talk to you 
about is the whole area of grain marketing. And this is one area 
that you and I do not share very much common ground on 
unfortunately. Although I see that in growing numbers in 
Saskatchewan the farmers of this province are coming around to 
the view that the Saskatchewan Party has held for sometime. 
 
You’re familiar probably with the survey that the member from 
Melville has conducted in his constituency with regard to grain 
marketing. And the results were as follows from that, Mr. 
Minister, and we’ll be prepared to send a copy across, or I’m 
sure your caucus office has probably already got this kind of 
information. The following results from the survey that the 
member from Melville sent out to his farm producers were as 
follows. 
 
Wheat should be marketed by: 36 per cent viewed it as a single 
desk by the Canadian Wheat Board, 60 per cent looked at 
voluntary marketing, and 4 per cent even wanted to go further 
yet and look to a complete open market. 
 
Feed barley should be marketed by: 33 per cent felt the 
Canadian Wheat Board alone, 49 per cent felt that there should 
be voluntary marketing, and 18 per cent wanted to go 
completely on to the open market. 
 
Malt barley should be marketed by: 38 per cent felt the 
Canadian Wheat Board, 50 per cent looked at voluntary 
marketing, and 12 per cent open. 
 
Should there be provision for producers to sell a portion of their 
production outside of the CWB (Canadian Wheat Board): 61 
per cent said yes, Mr. Minister, and 31 per cent said no, 8 per 
cent had no opinion. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, that you would find if you did similar 
surveys like that, and I suspect and I wonder whether or not 
your department is doing any surveying with respect to this type 
of thing, whether or not you would find similar results all across 
Saskatchewan. I’m quite confident that you would find that 
similar result in my constituency and many other grain growing 
constituencies across this province, Mr. Minister. 
 
As we see the populations of the numbers of farmers continuing 
to dwindle in Saskatchewan, what happens is you see larger and 
larger farmers farm acreages here in this province. 
 
And one of the other things is an interesting sidelight to this is 
that generally speaking younger, more aggressive, larger farms 
tend to favour marketing more of their products on their own. 
And that’s been confirmed in a number of surveys I think that 
have been done by the Country Guide, the western Canadian 
wheat growers, Grainews, a number of publications of that 

type. Agriline I think is another example in that regard. There’s 
been all kinds of surveys done in these kinds of things. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that farmers are of the view that they need 
to have more marketing options. I think they are of the view 
that they want to see things change in terms of allowing them to 
make decisions. I don’t think they are afraid of the market-place 
any longer. 
 
We see more and more farmers growing non-traditional crops. 
We see more and more farmers looking at special crops, exotic 
crops. You name it; they’re looking at them as ways of 
diversifying their farming operations. 
 
As soon as you get into those types of crops, as you know, Mr. 
Minister, there is no Canadian Wheat Board that sells canola. 
There’s no Canadian Wheat Board that sells lentil. There’s no 
Canadian Wheat Board that sells peas. There’s no Canadian 
Wheat Board that sells spices or flax or oats any longer or 
canaryseed. All of those kinds of crops you see the trend line is 
continuing up and up and up in terms of acreage for those crops, 
and the Canadian Wheat Board crops continue to decline. 
 
I think farmers are voting with their air seeders. I think they’re 
voting with their trucks. I think they’re voting with their 
pocketbook in terms of where they’d like to see the marketing 
system in Saskatchewan go. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you believe that the farmers of Saskatchewan 
support for single-desk marketing is slipping? Do you think that 
at some point your administration, your administration will look 
towards making changes in this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well this is an area where you and I will 
continue to disagree. You know, you can cite all the quotes, 
figures, you want, but time after time the question becomes, if 
any of those questions that you asked producers, if you added 
on, if this meant the elimination of the Wheat Board will you 
still want to have it. And they say no. 
 
Because, I mean, here’s the problem. You know and I know 
that the Wheat Board brings money over the street price . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You don’t know. Well you won’t 
admit that. But look at the studies that have been done to show 
that. But you know, but you know . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, the studies that have been done the other way. I mean 
this is the problem. But you know what? This argument doesn’t 
mean much any more. 
 
We can argue about studies, we can argue about surveys, we 
can argue about whatever we want. We can agree or disagree 
with the Wheat Board. But here’s the problem — you’re being 
sidetracked. And it’s up to you as an elected member to bring 
this back in focus. 
 
Because if you continue on this argument, you’re not seeing the 
forest for the trees because the Wheat Board sells grain on the 
international market, competing with other countries around the 
world. They sell grain in North America, competing with 
everyone else. If anyone thinks that getting rid of the Wheat 
Board is going to mean the difference in saving their farm or 
not, they’re kidding themselves because that’s not the issue. 
And we can argue about the issue, about whether the board will 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

do that or not. 
 
But I’ll tell you, you and I both know that the problem is you’re 
going to pay $200,000 for a combine to farm 15 or so quarters, 
for a new one. You’ve got to pay $200,000 for a tractor and air 
seeder for the same amount. And we put them on our farms and 
we leave them there for 12 months of the year. And you know 
what, we can’t do that any more. Because the margin isn’t 
there. And what you and I have to start talking about is how we 
get the margin. How we keep the margin wide enough that we 
farmers can farm within it. 
 
And so you talk about the Board, and I know why you’re doing 
it, because there’s a clientele that you have out there that like to 
hear you say this. And I talk to these people too, but you’ve got 
to be very blunt. You’ve got to be very blunt. 
 
I’ll ask you a question. Do you honestly think getting rid of the 
Wheat Board will be the thing that makes farming viable in 
western Canada, and will continue to increase population in 
western Canada? Because if you look at the seeding of the 
grains there’s, you know, 50 million cultivated acres. We’re 
probably seeding 33, 35 million acres, and we’ve got over just 9 
million acres of wheat in. That’s a board grain. So . . . and 
you’ve got dual-market in barley and that creates problems. 
 
But the fact of the matter is it’s not going to be whether the 
board stays or go that’s going to keep this western economy 
working. It’s going to be things like the transportation rates. It’s 
going to be things like the input costs. It’s going to be things 
like being able to diversify into other crops and add value to 
those crops right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the unfortunate part that I find is that there are some people 
so tied up in ideology that there’re willing to give up the 
potential that we have by focusing on an issue like the Wheat 
Board, saying this is the sole problem that we have in this 
country. 
 
So you may argue that, but I’ll tell you, that’s not an argument 
that’s going to maintain the economy of this province. What’s 
going to maintain the economy is us working together with 
those producers to find different ways of farming so that we can 
farm within that margin. Things are changing very rapidly and 
if we don’t manage that change, I think you know this, if we 
don’t manage that change then we’re going to be losing more 
people out in this country. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, no one has ever claimed that the 
salvation for all of the problems of western Canadian farmers is 
going to be an opening up of a voluntary market. No one has 
ever said anything even close to that that I’m aware of, in terms 
of farm organizations. 
 
The Western Canadian Wheat Growers as you know is a very 
progressive farm organization. They had representation in here 
in the legislature in the last few days. We had occasion, our 
caucus did, to sit down and visit with them. I understand your 
Ag caucus visited with them as well. And I understand that 
even a couple of the Liberals took the occasion to meet with 
them. 
 
Mr. Minister, something that was very disturbing about that 

day, you may recall that day when the Western Canadian Wheat 
Growers were in here. These are not farmers I think that would 
be considered out on the edge of extremes in terms of positions. 
I think they are a responsible farm organization, and I think you 
would agree with me that they are a responsible farm 
organization. They have been calling for changes in the 
marketing system for a long, long time. 
 
Some of the positive changes that we’ve seen from their 
lobbying efforts are the various poolings of grain; separating 
durum from the wheat account is a very good example that they 
lobbied for, for a long, long time and it resulted in it happening. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was very disappointed when we were asking 
questions with respect to opening marketing, opening up 
marketing opportunities for farmers here in Saskatchewan. I 
think you were . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I believe you were at the 
opening of an elevator. The Premier handled the questions on 
that day. 
 
One thing that was very, very disappointing was, was when the 
member from Shaunavon referred to them across the floor to 
me as a bunch of wackos — people who want to look at 
exploring marketing opportunities for themselves. And I’m sure 
you don’t share that same view that farmers who want to open 
up marketing opportunities are nothing but a bunch of wackos, 
but that was unfortunately the comment coming out of the 
member from Shaunavon — that these people who want these 
kinds of things opened up are a bunch of wackos. 
 
And we’ll certainly . . . I want you to know in the next election 
campaign we’ll be bringing that to the attention of farmers all 
over Saskatchewan as to the level of respect that the member 
from Shaunavon has for farmers who want to open up 
marketing opportunities. 
 
Mr. Minister, when it comes to the marketing of grain, farmers 
want to see some changes. I think you would even admit that 
there’s going to be changes. We are seeing the federal 
government looking at changes to the Canadian Wheat Board. I 
don’t think they go even close to far enough — the grain 
marketing panel that they commissioned themselves 
recommended further changes, recommended opening up 
opportunities for farmers. This is what they have been calling 
for, for a long, long time. 
 
I think progressive farmers in this province want to see change. 
Progressive farmers in this province want to see the same kinds 
of things as what’s happening for farmers in Ontario these days. 
You and your administration say that voluntary marketing 
won’t work. 
 
They’ve moved quantum leaps in that direction in Ontario. You 
can market your grain outside of the Ontario Wheat Board now. 
You can market grain into the United States if you’re an 
Ontario producer now. You can do all of those kinds of things. 
You submit your application for an export permit to the 
Canadian Wheat Board and it is rubber-stamped, sent back. You 
don’t even have to talk to the Ontario Wheat Board any longer. 
You can simply move your product to where you see fit. 
 
That’s what I consider progressive change. That’s what the 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

producers here in Saskatchewan consider productive and 
progressive change. That’s what farmers in large numbers are 
calling for here in Saskatchewan. They want to see change. You 
are holding on to a lifestyle and an attitude that you don’t want 
to see positive change here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Minister, you’re out of step with a lot of 
farmers and growing numbers of farmers, and I’m hopeful in 
these discussions that the member from Melville will stand up 
and tell the farmer, tell this Assembly, the results of the survey 
and whether or not his party in this province has made any 
change. At this point the farmers of Saskatchewan should be 
aware of one thing. There is only one party. There is only one 
party in this Assembly that is standing up for the opportunity to 
have voluntary grain marketing in Saskatchewan, and that is the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
(1400) 
 
Your position is clear. The Liberals’ position is clear. They 
believe farmers who want marketing options, marketing 
choices, are nothing but a bunch of wackos. We don’t share 
that. We would never, ever want to get down to calling other 
farmers with differing views a bunch of wackos. Unfortunately 
that is the view of the member from Shaunavon and we hope 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Wood River. The member from 
Wood River. 
 
We would hope he would stand in this Assembly today and 
acknowledge and apologize to the western Canadian wheat 
growers. They were in this Assembly. They heard that 
comment. They were offended by that comment. They don’t see 
themselves as a bunch of wackos. They see themselves as very 
progressive business owners. That’s what you have to 
understand, Mr. Minister. That’s what your administration has 
to understand. That’s what the Liberal Party here in 
Saskatchewan understands. That’s what . . . has to understand. 
That’s what we already understand. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re out of step with farmers. You’re out of 
step with the issue. It’s time to get on track. Will you do that for 
the farmers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — That feels good doesn’t it. I can 
remember . . . I loved making those . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . no, compared to not making a speech. I loved making those 
speeches myself, only a little bit on the opposite side of what 
you’re saying. But I just wanted to . . . The position of this 
government is that the Wheat Board needs more flexibility to 
accommodate some of those wishes like the western Canadian 
wheat growers are putting forward. 
 
No, they’re not a wacko organization. I get along with Mr. 
Maquire very well. We’ve talked about many issues. So I think 
we’re going to have to disagree on the content of whether the 
board should come or go but again just to remind you that it’s 
that margin that concerns me, and it’s not going to be changed 
that much. 
 
So at this time — I assume that you’re finished — I would like 
to thank my officials for being with me today. 

The Department of Agriculture and Food has faced many, many 
changes in the last few years and — I can honestly say — faced 
those changes and handled those changes with style in terms of 
response from the community and that means, I think, the 
department is in touch with rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I want to thank them for being here today and thank you and 
the third party for your questions. 
 
Subvote (AG01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (AG02), (AG05), (AG03), (AG06), (AG07), (AG08), 
(AG04), (AG12), (AG09), (AG10) agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to thank the minister 
and his officials for their help today and for their answers. The 
Department of Agriculture, as you know, is very important. We 
appreciate the work that the officials do on your behalf and on 
behalf of the farmers of this province. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agriculture and Food 
Vote 146 

 
Subvotes (AG02), (AG03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 146 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG10) agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I have with me to my right, the president and CEO 
(chief executive officer) of the Saskatchewan Research Council, 
Ron Woodward; and to his right, Michael Wonnick, who is 
financial analyst in financial services. 
 
Subvote (SR01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, to your officials. I appreciate them coming down from 
Saskatoon today. I know it’s been a busy year for everyone, and 
I’m sure with the SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) and 
the number of changes that they undertook the year before last, 
that they’re probably continuing to be very busy. 
 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1693 

I know that with the emphasis on technological growth and the 
impact of global marketing, this should poise the SRC into 
having a fantastic future as we go into the next millennium. 
 
I appreciate the two annual returns I received just lately, but I’m 
wondering before I go into them if you can give me an idea of 
what . . . just briefly outline what the SRC did last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much for that 
question. As you’ve indicated it has been a very busy and, I 
think, a very productive year for the Research Council. The 
council has gone through a number of changes, as you will 
know. I think that they have shown themselves to be very 
aggressive in terms of developing technology and working with 
the business community in Saskatchewan. And so the joint 
approach that they take, partnering with industry, I think really 
is showing some positive benefits. 
 
Their relationship with the two university campuses, with Ag 
Canada and NR (Natural Resources) Canada continue, and I 
think they’ve developed some very positive working 
relationships . . . and as well the work and the information 
sharing with their counterparts in other parts of Canada. As 
well, the work that they’ve been doing with SOCO 
(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) in terms of jointly 
funding and financing early stage projects I think has also been 
very much a success. 
 
I want to say that there are a couple initiatives that I think this 
government has embarked upon in a broader sense that will 
certainly help the Research Council to develop economic 
growth in our province. The royalty tax credit with respect to 
petroleum research, in particular in heavy oil, and the 15 per 
cent R&D (research and development) tax credit I think are two 
very positive initiatives that will assist the Research Council in 
the job that they do. 
 
As well, the work and the relationship that they’ve developed 
with TecMark, that works with Saskatchewan companies to 
assist, commercialize, acquire new technology and apply that to 
their businesses, has as well been very much a success. 
 
I’d like to just outline a few initiatives for the member in terms 
of new initiatives that the Research Council has embarked 
upon. I’m just going to go through them briefly, and I’m sure 
that you’ll be interested to discuss them with us today. 
 
Their work in ag biotechnology . . . as I’ve indicated, they’re 
working very closely with the two university campuses and 
NRC (National Research Council) to support development of ag 
biotech which has really grown and flourishing in our province. 
We’re becoming very much a world-renowned jurisdiction in 
terms of that. 
 
And the area that the Research Council is working on 
specifically is in the area of fermentation technologies and plant 
and animal genetic services. 
 
The Research Council as well continues to work with the U of 
R (University of Regina) in terms of developing and 
establishing a petroleum research centre here in our province so 
that we can enhance the ability of industry to develop our heavy 
oil resource. We’ve had some success in that in the 1990s. I 

think that the technology that has been developed and that the 
Research Council has been very much a part of . . . has really 
helped to grow our economy here in Saskatchewan. It’s 
something that we see will hopefully be continuing along the 
way. 
 
I want to say as well that several other industry partners along 
with the SRC supported with the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), in terms of the Canada Foundation for 
Innovation . . . will really help to enhance the work that the 
Research Council is doing in terms of pipelines and application 
of pipelines to industry, work in digital maps in terms of the 
environment. 
 
SRC is taking some interest in forestry and forestry 
development to sort of define, help to define the components 
and what we need to do in order to grow and enhance our forest 
industry. They’ve taken just recently a northern presence; they 
now have placed an industrial technology adviser in La Ronge 
as part of National Research Council’s industrial research 
initiative. A female engineer forestry specialist will be filling 
that role in La Ronge. 
 
And as well they continue to work on the international scene. 
They’ve been doing some work, and their efforts are into 
helping grow their presence of the Research Council in places 
like Singapore and Malaysia, Poland, Korea, South Africa, 
Panama, and Columbia. 
 
That’s just sort of an overview of what’s happened in the past, 
what initiatives the Research Council is moving towards and 
interested in helping with a business to assist development of. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, before 
we go into things like the R&D tax credit, I was interested to 
hear you say that you work with SOCO in developing a number 
of ventures. Maybe you could give me some example of what 
ventures you’re discussing. 
 
(1415) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m told by my officials that the 
program is just starting to develop, just starting to bud, the 
relationship with SOCO and that the discussions that are 
happening with industry, with business, are of a confidential 
nature at this point, just because of the fact that they’re just 
starting. 
 
And so they have advised me that it would be not prudent to 
discussing the relationship at this point with the businesses that 
are just beginning to put together their package. But certainly 
it’s the direction that we’re going to take to help springboard 
some economic development initiatives, and hopefully next 
year we’ll be able to come back and give you an example of 
some successes in terms of the work that SOCO, the Research 
Council, and private industry have done. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. I guess I 
wasn’t clear. I wasn’t specifically asking for companies that 
were working together, but how is an initiative started so that 
somebody can use SOCO and the SRC at the same time? Do 
they come to one or the other organizations? Is it a government 
that decides that they can work together, or how are they . . . 



1694 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

when they are actually going forward with a business plan, is 
there a suggestion by one or the other groups that they should 
go talk to the other organization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, I think it’s fair to say that 
either an approach to SOCO or directly to the Research Council 
is totally appropriate. What SOCO and the Research Council 
would do is a joint evaluation of a proposal. And I guess that 
would be sort of the process. So the approach could be made 
either to SOCO or to the SRC. SOCO of course would be 
responsible for the financial side, for the dollars and cents 
aspect of a proposal, where the Research Council would be on 
the technological side. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Chair, then what 
basically what you’re saying then is that the SRC isn’t going to 
be giving a company money to do any research. They will 
actually borrow it, or in an equity investment through SOCO, 
they’ll allow them to do some of the R&D that they’re working 
on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The Research Council and SOCO 
take, I guess, a pretty broad-based approach. They would look 
at investment. They would look at loans, depending on the 
needs of their client. Many clients would come with perhaps no 
financial requirements. That would mean certainly that the 
Research Council could look individually at a partnership 
arrangement or an investment in the company, and in turn . . . 
and in the technology. Some companies of course would require 
financial assistance which would mean the involvement of 
SOCO on that side. So it could come either in the form of a loan 
or an investment. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, the contract work that SOC is 
searching for . . . and I guess most of their income and the 
revenue now is coming from contract work, from my reading of 
the financial statements. Would there be any funding given to 
companies through the SRC for any work that they may do if 
they don’t have the capability, financial capability to undertake 
it themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — To the member opposite, Mr. 
Chairman, I want to say on the outset that the Research Council 
is not in the business of giving grants. That is something that I 
think the board . . . and certainly I as a board member feel very 
strongly that that should not and would not be the role of the 
Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
We have been very much trying to turn the Research Council 
. . . and I think been very successful in terms of turning it into a 
more businesslike operation. Through their small industry 
services branch, they would offer up some engineering 
technology information, those kinds of things that they have 
available to them, which I guess you could put some kind of a 
tangible amount on. But in terms of cash grants, the answer is 
no. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, in the news lately, we’ve been 
hearing about a company, Canamino, and it’s a biotechnology 
firm that’s dealing with agriculture. And I’m wondering if the 
SRC has had any involvement with our company. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, no. 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister, the three areas 
that the SRC has basically been working in — basic research 
and applied research and then development of products and 
processes — has probably been the percentage of where this 
research work is done, has probably been changing over the 
years. I’m wondering if the development area of it is still 
increasing the quickest, or is the basic research actually 
increasing now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the development 
area is the area of growth. The SRC doesn’t do basic research, 
but certainly the area in the development area, that would be the 
largest component of the activities of the Research Council. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, I guess the contract companies 
do probably, or they do hire, give work through the SRC to do 
basic research. And I guess that was what I was indicating is if 
companies were coming to SRC more for basic research. But 
you probably indicated the development process is the one that 
you’re working on. 
 
Last year we learned that you had a patent through for 
converting vehicles from gas to natural gas and that there was 
some actual royalties obtained last year. Is there still monies 
coming in from that royalty? And do you have you any more 
patents in place now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, if I could. I’m told 
by my officials the amount of royalties received by the 
Research Council this year was in the neighbourhood of 
$13,500. And I guess I need to clarify. We could review 
Hansard, but I’m not sure and I certainly wasn’t intending to 
mislead you last year. I think I referred to a global figure of 
$3,000 last year, but it was not applicable to the NGV (natural 
gas vehicles) operation. But this is the global amount in terms 
of royalties they received last year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you for that 
clarification. 
 
Last year we discussed the restructuring, and I understand that 
there was two vice-presidents, and I think there probably still is 
two vice-presidents. Can you tell me if the major work 
undertaken here in Regina is still in the oil and gas sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The corporate structure, I think, and 
the organizational chart I think I can send a copy across to the 
member if she would like. The Research Council now has one 
vice-president and then a number of directors directly under that 
vice-president. 
 
And I think I’ve lost track of what your other part of the 
question was, I’m sorry. Yes, Mr. Woodward refreshes my 
memory. You were asking if the heavy oil research is being 
specifically done here in Regina and the answer to that is yes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, we discussed CanOxy and 
Wascana Energy last year and the fact that their agreement 
could bring in about $1 million into the province. And I’m 
wondering if that actually did happen, how much of that the 
SRC got. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The $1 million was given directly 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1695 

to the University of Regina and the Research Council is 
working with the U of R in terms of accessing those funds for 
specific programs at this time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, I was delighted to 
hear about the R&D tax credit that was introduced in the budget 
this year. And it talked about many different sectors but I heard 
you talk about the energy sector. Is it just specifically geared 
toward the energy sector or is there other areas that will be able 
to benefit from this tax credit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — There’s basically two components, 
to the member opposite. There’s a 15 per cent royalty tax credit 
and as well there’s a 15 per cent research and development 
added to what is available from the federal government. So 
they’re two specific and different programs. 
 
Ms. Draude: — The SRC and the U of R partnered in an 
agreement last year and they were attracting or trying to attract 
other companies, not only CanOxy but other companies from 
Alberta into Saskatchewan. And if our business environment is 
right, I would think we should have seen an enormous 
expansion in that area with these two tax credits. 
 
I’m wondering if the SRC has been able to take advantage of 
this . . . or been able to attract other companies so that we can 
work with the technological advancements that they probably 
are requiring. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Just to answer the member opposite 
with respect to research and development and the investment in 
the province, we have just introduced the incentives for industry 
now. I can tell you that I have had, and continue to have 
discussions. The Research Council, along with my department, 
Energy and Mines, have had a number of discussions with a 
number of people who invest in the resource sector here in 
Saskatchewan. And I can report to you that the interest truly is 
there. 
 
We’ve been talking with them in terms of they having direct 
involvement in the kinds of research and development 
initiatives that we would have. We want them as partners. They 
best understand the kind of development that they need out in 
the field and understand what they would require of laboratory 
types of initiatives. And I think it’s fair to say that we believe 
there will be a fairly substantive uptake in terms of these 
programs, because I think the energy sector recognize and 
realize that in that area of our economy — research and 
development — new technology really is the future. 
 
When I look back a little ways and what was able to be 
developed in terms of heavy oil technology, enhanced oil 
recovery projects, horizontal drilling. The announcement that 
PanCanadian made, as an example in the Weyburn area, of an 
investment of well over $1 billion to use it in an enhanced oil 
recovery process whereby CO2 (carbon dioxide) would be 
injected into the Midale pool, forcing more of the resource out, 
expanding the life of that existing pool by some 25 years, 
creating something in the neighbourhood of 30,000 
person-years of work. 
 
None of that could have or would have happened had it not 
been for the research and the technological development that 

was put in place, government/industry. So quite clearly, if we 
are going to create job opportunities and create resource wealth, 
that will very much rely on what we do today in terms of 
assisting them, working with them, partnering with them to 
develop new technologies. 
 
(1430) 
 
And I think the same can be said in other areas of expertise. If 
you look at ag-biotechnology and the work that’s being done in 
Saskatoon, partly by the Research Council, partly by other 
entities, the development of agricultural biotechnology really is, 
I think, the future of the agricultural industry in western Canada 
and particularly in Saskatchewan. 
 
So we really are working hard on this and want to see a very 
much enhanced research and development capacity and 
capabilities here in our province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I guess I keep on 
asking questions that you say you won’t really know until next 
year. So I’m hoping by next year we’ll be able to see a real 
advantage of some of these tax credits and the royalties that 
we’ve been discussing. Last year you were telling me that next 
year we’ll see a difference, and this year you’re telling me that 
yes, we’ve seen it but it’s going to be really great next year. So 
maybe there would be a measurable amount we can discuss. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Fermentation and Cell Culture Pilot Plant that 
was started last year actually got funding from the Agri-Food 
Innovation Fund, I believe. Can you tell me how much money it 
received and have you received any funding for any other 
projects from that fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think maybe I should clarify. I 
hope I’m not talking in terms of this being next-year country 
because really we had a great year last year based on some of 
the research and development and the technological 
developments that happened. 
 
We had the most activity in the history of this province in terms 
of heavy oil. We had the largest number of wells that we ever 
drilled, and I mean we’re looking at a time when crude was not 
at 25, $28 a barrel but at $15 a barrel. We had the most 
investment we’ve ever seen in the oil industry in this province. 
 
So I think I can point to some of the successes we’ve had 
already and I’m suggesting to you that we can, through these 
kinds of programs that I spoke of, continue with that kind of 
growth and that kind of success. 
 
In terms of the funding, it’s a four and a half million dollar 
total. I’m told that 3.3 million comes from AFIF (Agri-Food 
Innovation Fund), .3 from strategic initiatives fund, and about .9 
from the Research Council. So a total of about four and a half 
million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I was 
reminded by the member from Saltcoats to tell you if we’re 
talking about next-year country then next year I’ll be sitting 
over there with the gentlemen from the Research Council and 
you may be here or you may be just watching us on TV. 
 



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

So in the meantime while we get through the estimates this 
year, I would like to know how the new innovation centre, 
when it’s up and running in Regina, if that’ll have any effect on 
the Research Council. Will you be moving any of your offices 
or any . . . especially the information technology department. 
Will there be any of that in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think it’s fair to say that we 
haven’t made all of those decisions yet. There are some 
discussions happening between the different provincial 
government departments that can and might play a role in that 
development with the federal government. None of those details 
have yet been decided. 
 
With respect to the Research Council, we’re looking at options 
as to whether or not we would continue our operations on 
Henderson Drive, whether it would be more appropriate to have 
that physically located on the university campus, if that would 
happen to take place. But I would want to say that those 
decisions have not yet been finalized. We’re looking very 
seriously at the concept. We think it has all measure of merit 
and would certainly hope that in the next few months we could 
. . . we would be in the position, or the next few weeks we could 
be in a position to make an announcement in that regard. 
 
With respect to the future, I could only say this: it’s very 
unlikely that you’ll be sitting on this side of the House. But if 
you and your party are sitting on this side of the House, I would 
think it would be most appropriate that you would be 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Research Council. But that 
may take quite some time. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, with leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce a group of fine individuals from 
the Invermay School. The entire teaching staff is in Regina 
today on a professional development day, spending I believe all 
day and even part of the evening in Regina on a professional 
development staff day. 
 
It’s my pleasure to introduce them to you. Especially I’d like to 
introduce the principal of Invermay School, a newcomer to 
Invermay as well as a newcomer to Saskatchewan, and I know 
that this is his first opportunity. Mr. Dale Anderson is the 
principal of Invermay School and comes from Manitoba to 
Invermay, and we wish him well of course in the school. 
 
Invermay School is a K to 12 school so we have a staff that 
teaches all grades from kindergarten to grade 12. We have some 
teacher assistants that are along as well, having the benefit of 
enjoying the professional development day in Regina. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming the Invermay staff 
to Regina and to the Legislative Building. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 
 

Subvote (SR01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just have a couple 
more questions for the minister. One of them is the JobStart 
program that was mentioned. I’m wondering if the SRC is still 
involved with that program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m told by my officials that we had 
a contract about three years ago. The contract has expired and 
we’re no longer involved in JobStart. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is the SRC involved at all with the federal 
government? They had an IRAP (industrial research assistance 
program) program at one time. Are they working more closely 
with the federal government on research projects where 
companies can take advantage of federal dollars, and maybe is 
the Research Council actually steering them towards any of 
these dollars that are available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, I am told by my officials we 
are still heavily involved in delivering of the IRAP program. I 
mentioned when I started my remarks that we had placed an 
industrial technology adviser in the community of La Ronge, 
and that is part of enhancing that particular program. As well, 
we work jointly with neighbouring provinces. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, the budget that we have for the 
SRC this year is $7.956 million. Can you give me an idea of 
how much your total budget is that you’ve projected for this 
year, and again I would imagine the rest of it is contract work 
that you’re anticipating. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, my officials are 
working out the exact figure but it’s around $21 million. We’ll 
send over the exact number for you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister, I just have one 
final question. Can you tell me what area you’re expecting the 
largest growth in this year. I know that we talked about these 
seven or eight different areas that are growing very quickly. 
And I was just interested in where we’re seeing the most 
growth. 
 
And before I sit down, I want to thank the officials for coming 
again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The two areas that we believe will 
be experiencing the majority of growth will be — sorry, it’s 
been a long week — in the area of ag biotechnology and 
mining. 
 
And I would want to say that I want to thank my officials for 
their work not only in preparing me for the estimates, but the 
work that . . . Oh, I’m sorry, I think we have some more 
questions. But I’m going to thank them now and finish and then 
I won’t have to later — but thank them for the work that they 
do throughout the year for us. 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

That figure by the way, the total figure is $23.160 million. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, last week in the House I posed some questions to 
the Minister of the Environment regarding the contamination of 
rural water supplies. And in his response to me he did indicate 
that the Research Council was looking into this and had 
investigated it to some degree, and had, I would hope by now, 
done some assessment. 
 
And I’m wondering if you could comment on what kind of 
findings there were. Because in the newspaper, some 
information that came from the hydrological centre at the 
University of Saskatchewan stated that we have contamination 
in western Canada that is 1,000 times more detectable than in 
European countries. 
 
I find that quite alarming. I’m concerned about the health of 
rural residents and farmers and about the future of our drinking 
water supplies. I guess we need to know whose responsibility it 
is to see that something is done about this, and we need to know 
what kind of steps are being taken to clean up these water 
supplies or to stop the contamination. 
 
So if you could comment, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
want to say that certainly the government overall is concerned 
with water quality in our province. As you’ve indicated, there is 
some evidence that in particular dugouts there is some 
contamination. And what we are attempting to do, and this is 
not specific to the Research Council, but through the Water 
Corporation we’re working with communities like the area that 
you represent, Humboldt Wakaw, to develop a secure and a 
better quality of drinking water. 
 
The role of the Research Council for the most part is in 
technical analysis of water sampling, both surface water and 
ground water. We are doing some work in conjunction with the 
Sask Water Corporation, but I can’t say that the Research 
Council has come to any final conclusion with respect to a 
solution to some of the contaminated areas. But certainly our 
area of involvement is one of technical analysis, and I think that 
we have a very good . . . good branch within the Research 
Council in dealing with that. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, my next 
question is in reference to your statement that you are working 
with communities in my region out there, in the Humboldt 
constituency. Could you give me some indication as to what 
communities you are working with and what kind of work is 
being done with them? If you could just state what has 
transpired up until now, I would appreciate it. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think it’s more than just 
work with communities. They will do water analysis for, you 
know, for individual farms and for companies when requested. 
But our area is more one of technical analysis in terms of 
working with water. 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I’m 
interested in how much it might cost an individual farmer to 
have an analysis done. And is the government willing right 
now, with evidence of this contamination being fairly severe, 
are they willing to in fact give farmers some assistance for this 
analysis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We can get for you . . . we don’t 
have a price list for this, but I’m told that a water sample 
analysis is something in the neighbourhood of $20 or $25, and 
basically the Research Council’s looking to recover its costs of 
operation. I will endeavour to send a list of the prices to you. 
We’ll undertake to do that. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if you 
could just converse for a minute with your knowledgeable 
official and ask him how, in fact, an individual farmer is getting 
the information that the Saskatchewan Research Council is 
there for them should they be concerned about their water 
supplies. How they may end up contacting them? Is there any, 
sort of, alert that has gone out to farm people or rural people 
regarding the contaminated water supplies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think it’s fair to tell the member 
opposite that that would be certainly more the role of the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation than the Department of 
Environment. As I’ve said, ours is more an area of technical 
analysis when we are requested to do so. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll conclude my 
questions with that last question. 
 
But I would ask that you please address the minister of the 
Environment to ensure that there is some way of conveying to 
rural residents that there is access to the Saskatchewan Research 
Council, or if you know any other avenue where they may get 
their water supplies tested, so that there’s good communication 
and so that there is awareness of this. 
 
Because I’m not too sure how many farmers really are aware of 
the situation, and I think it’s really very important that they 
become aware; that this is a major health hazard and it could 
end up resulting in a higher incidence of health problems as 
related to this problem. 
 
So I would ask you to do that, and I thank you so much for your 
answers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I too, Mr. Chairman, want to thank 
the members opposite for their questions. And I would want to 
say to the member in closing that the president of the Research 
Council has been spending a considerable amount of time in 
different communities throughout the province, trying to 
describe for people in our communities the role and the 
assistance that the Research Council can play. And I think it’s 
fair to say that Mr. Woodward will, as a result of your questions 
today, attempt to put more focus on water quality control and 
analysis. 
 
Subvote (SR01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

General Revenue Fund 
Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials again, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today to 
my immediate . . . is the executive coordinator of the Women’s 
Secretariat, Faye Rafter; and just behind Faye is the assistant 
executive coordinator, Joan Pederson. 
 
Subvote (WS01) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair and good afternoon, Madam 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Madam Minister, I was interested in the funding that was put 
forward to assist women in rural areas through the Internet 
program. I was wondering if there was any direct assistance in 
that way given to the Middle Lake area of the province? Middle 
Lake, Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I maybe misunderstood — 
did you say Meadow Lake or . . . Middle, the Middle? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Middle Lake. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Middle, Middle Lake . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . .Okay. 
 
Mr. Chair, to respond to that, it doesn’t appear that there have 
been any of those grants that went out on the women’s online 
program to Middle Lake, but that was the first phase. I’m not 
just sure if there’s been an application received or not. The 
second phase of these have not all been determined yet. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister 
could you just tell me what the complete budget is for the 
Women’s Secretariat — what funding you have to utilize within 
this fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — The complete budget for the Women’s 
Secretariat is 1.4 million this year. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
certainly applaud every effort on behalf of yourself to bring to 
the forefront some of the issues that concern women and some 
of the needs of women in the province. I look at the money that 
you have. It’s 1.4 million. It’s not that great an amount in 
consideration of the entire budget. 
 
However I do know that we have some really, really immediate 
needs to be addressed as far as children and youth in this 
province. And I note and I will relay to you that in Manitoba 
there is no Women’s Secretariat, however there is a child and 
youth secretariat. And as you well know, what happens to 
children and youth and to women is sort of interrelated. 
 
And so I would sort of encourage you to certainly talk with the 
Minister of Social Services and determine whether or not 
maybe the funding that you receive might be channelled into a 
child and youth secretariat for Saskatchewan. Because I think 

that a lot of the problems that women have or the needs they 
have are related to their youth, and it’s just so connected that I 
think it’s important that we look at that. 
 
I thank you, and I’ll turn the questioning over to the official 
opposition critic. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, I would like to just respond 
to a few of those comments . . . is that every province does have 
a Women’s Secretariat and they do also in Manitoba. And I 
think one of the important roles is definitely that the Women’s 
Secretariat is involved in . . . would be involved in the role of 
children and youth and the importance of a lot of family issues 
too. 
 
And one of the roles that the Women’s Secretariat plays a very 
effective part in is kind of the integration through departments. 
And they do sit in bringing issues forward to the child action 
plan or to the balancing-work-and-family initiative and to 
violence issues, and all of those issues a lot of times are 
interrelated. 
 
And I believe that’s one of the most positive things that the 
Women’s Secretariat does, is it does work between departments 
to pull together programs and policies that do effect our youth, 
our children, women — all of those issues. And I think that’s 
one of the things in which the Women’s Secretariat plays a vital 
role, to be a part of that integration of policy and program right 
throughout government. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, I guess I have one more question 
then, or one more suggestion. Within the province we seem to 
have a number of agencies and organizations, along with 
government departments, who are working for children and 
youth. 
 
But whether or not we have one body, like a child and youth 
secretariat, that ensures that all of these agencies’ works and 
efforts are noted and the benefits of them are noted. That they 
really assessed and studied so that we can have a really good, 
integrated situation in the province, so that we’re not doing 
overlap, and so that children and youth — the needs of children 
and youth — are certainly taken care of and that we’re not 
scattered. 
 
I suggest to you, and I ask you to really consider that as maybe 
part of whether you want to call it the Women’s Secretariat, the 
child and youth secretariat, whatever it may be. Because in 
Manitoba they have done that and they found that there were a 
number of agencies and organizations that didn’t have a clue 
what other services were being offered. And I think this child 
and youth secretariat came about after the election of Premier 
Filmon, and it might be a good idea to converse with him a bit 
more to see the advantages of what they’ve done. 
 
So I thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Just in response. We certainly will 
review this to see what is happening in Manitoba. I do believe, 
like our child action plan — and that was an attempt to look . . . 
whether its Health, Education, Justice, Social Services, 
Women’s Secretariat — all of us being involved in delivering a 
plan that’s addressing issues for youth and children. 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

But we’re certainly very open at seeing also the model that’s 
being done in Manitoba to see if there’s some positive aspects 
that we could incorporate. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Madam Minister, 
and to your officials again. Madam Minister, I think that you 
and I probably are never going to be quite on the same page 
with some of the Women’s Secretariat programs. And basically 
I feel that the Women’s Secretariat is just sort of a token of this 
government’s commitment to women’s real problems that they 
have out there. 
 
And the benefits of the on-line program is something that I 
highly . . . I have doubts that this is something that’s really 
affecting a lot of women when I look at all the need there 
actually is. I understand that it’s supposed to be to help women 
who are perhaps starting businesses to be more involved with 
other women. But basically if we’re going to look at problems 
that women have, I think ones of abuse and women’s shelters 
and that type of thing would definitely reach the top of the list 
of the real problems. 
 
Many of the women that are able to make use of this on-line 
program already have the funding that they need to have. They 
have the computer, they have the wherewithal to get to the 
programming, they have the ability to have means to buy gas 
and already know how to be in business. 
 
I think that even purchasing the computer itself is something 
that they have already been able to do. The small amount of 
cost there is to hook up to Internet and the studying and the 
training it takes to use it is quite minimal when you look at the 
money that is required in very many other areas. 
 
But of that million dollars that was allocated two years ago, I 
think 750,000 of it went to Internet hook-ups, but there was 
about 200,000 went towards youth violence issues. And that’s 
what I’d like to discuss with you. I’m wondering if this money 
has been spent and if it has, how has it been spent? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, just two or three comments 
that I would like to make in response. To say on that, women 
on-line as part of that funding, the groups . . . we got an 
overwhelmingly positive response and many, many of those 
groups certainly did not have access to computers or access to 
Internet. And what those dollars have done is been able to 
connect women right across this province and just a very 
positive response in being able to deal with issues that they feel 
are very, very important which are issues about violence and a 
number of other issues. 
 
But to be more specific on the . . . also the money in that overall 
million dollars, $750,000 went to women on-line; $50,000 of 
the violence money went last year to enhance the farm stress 
line which we get information and so on that could be accessed 
then through the farm stress line and also the Internet. The 
remainder of the money will be announced in a program that 
will be introduced this fall which will be mostly focused again 
on violence initiatives and public education on those initiatives. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister, I would 

imagine and I would hope that you would have got a positive 
response from people who have received money from your 
department. Why wouldn’t you? You’re not going to write back 
and say gee whiz, I wish you wouldn’t have given me that 
money. But what I am saying to you is that they probably could 
have contacted each other anyway if they had wanted to, and 
there’s so many issues that women who don’t have the financial 
means to contact each other or to address some of the problems 
that are really facing them — they could actually use your help. 
 
But, Madam Minister, when we talk about the work that you’re 
going to be doing, it sounds to me like a lot of it is going to be 
around the area of making another brochure and studying 
something and talking about aid in written pamphlets. Madam 
Minister, people know what the problem is. What they want is 
answers to a lot of the problems there is when it comes to 
violence and they want to have something concrete done. They 
don’t want you to write another pamphlet and write another 
book on what they’re supposed to do if they’re being abused. 
We want to have something that’s very positive, something that 
you can work with. 
 
So I’m wondering if you can tell me: for women who are 
abused, does your department play any role in the emergency 
shelters for women? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — In response there’s a number of kind of 
issues there. But the importance of doing still more public 
education is so that people are aware, first of all I guess, of the 
issue, and also information on how to access different services. 
 
All of those things are extremely important still to women. And 
that’s been very . . . and not just to women, but to all of our 
communities. In all of the groups in which I’ve met across 
Saskatchewan, the importance of the violence and initiatives 
that needed to be still dealt with and more information that 
needed to get out to the public was one of their key priorities. 
 
The specific thing too, in talking about shelters — we don’t do 
any direct funding to shelters —that one of the things, again, in 
which we got back on our Internet program was . . . And it was 
from a shelter, and this is a quote, and this is from the shelter 
for women in Yorkton. It says: 
 

It will give abused women and their children options that 
they never had before. It’s going to be a great benefit to 
our clients because they won’t have to leave the shelter to 
get more information. 
 

For example, it says: 
 

Abused women who plan to relocate themselves and their 
children will be able to use computer to track down 
information on other communities such as the local job 
market, housing, and schools. 

 
And it goes on and on to say how important that this service 
that is also being provided in our shelters is important to both 
women and their families. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. People who 
work in the shelters for abused women say that there really isn’t 
the wherewithal to counsel and to work with the children who 



1700 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

come to seek refuge along with their mothers. And I think that 
if we want to look at the real root of the cycle of abuse, we have 
to be dealing with the children as well. 
 
I’m wondering if the secretariat looks at this issue or if it’s 
something that’s dealt with by Social Services. I think that this 
would be an appropriate place to allocate money because it 
would be used for people or for women who don’t have the 
wherewithal to deal with this type of issues on their own. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, the Women’s Secretariat’s 
role is, we work on an interdepartmental committee on violence 
initiatives, which certainly does take into consideration the 
children that are affected by abuse. That’s certainly one of the 
roles. But we still work on the main part . . . is that we work 
through the other initiatives with other departments in policy 
and planning, and certainly children would be part of that 
planning. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I don’t have any further 
questions. And I’m hoping that next year we’ll be closer to the 
same wavelength on what we can be doing to really help 
women. 
 
Subvote (WS01) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (WS02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 41 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — We will continue with 
Intergovernmental next, so we’ll stay in committee. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just wanted to 
thank my officials today for coming, and for all the fine work 
that they have done in the Women’s Secretariat. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 

Subvotes (IA01), (IA02), (IA15), (IA16) agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 25 and Vote 30 
 
Subvotes (IM04), (IA12), (IA11) agreed to. 
 
Vote 25 and Vote 30 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(1515) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 63  The Film Employment Tax Credit Act 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to reintroduce her 

officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce 
my officials: Bill Werry the executive director; and on my right, 
Keith Comstock, the senior policy advisor. Sorry, Keith. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to 
your officials, Madam Minister. I just have a few questions, 
Madam Minister. And I guess maybe I could ask you to start 
with: can you explain to us how the tax system credit will work 
and how do you go about receiving it? How do they apply and 
so on, and what is the criteria to go doing that. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the details of how it 
will be administered are at the present moment, as are the 
regulations, being drafted. And negotiations are taking place 
with SaskFILM and the hope is that an arm’s length agency, 
which has the expertise and knowledge of the industry, will 
basically, with the supervision of our department, be in charge 
of the administration. We haven’t got all the details yet in the 
agreement hammered out but those negotiations are happening. 
 
And basically the way it works is usually . . . it can be up to 60 
per cent of the costs of a film will be labour costs. And so this 
will be a 35 per cent tax credit on the Saskatchewan labour 
portion, Saskatchewan people who are employed, and to a 
maximum of 50 per cent in one production. And the percentage 
. . . there will be a credit against corporate taxes that the 
production company might pay. The details will also be worked 
out with Revenue Canada. And they will either get credit of any 
taxes that might be due by them to Revenue Canada or if there 
is an excess then they’ll get a cash rebate from Revenue 
Canada. 
 
The thing is that once the production is registered as being 
eligible, the production company can actually take that 
registration, you know, to the bank because there’s a guarantee 
that that money will flow back in. So it’s useful for collateral. 
 
Then one interesting feature that I think we have is that if the 
production is done more than 40 — is it kilometres or miles? 
kilometres — away from either Saskatoon or Regina, where the 
production is based, that there’s an additional 5 per cent. So 
there’s an incentive for productions to take place in rural 
Saskatchewan, away from Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — With leave, Mr. Chairman of 
committees, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of committees. 
I’d like to introduce to the Assembly, seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery, 18 grade 6, 7, and 8 students from St. Thomas School at 
Storthoaks, in the very south-east corner of the province. Along 
with them today are their teacher, Judy Bouchard, and 
chaperons, Laureen Paradis, Paula Yates, and Nancy Elton. 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

I would ask all members in the Assembly to welcome them here 
today and I look forward to meeting with them in about half an 
hour for conversation, drinks, and photos. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 63 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, do 
you have a rough idea? And I know you can’t give an exact 
number, but you must have projected ahead what the actual cost 
to the treasury will be to give this tax credit. And I guess is 
what I’m asking is, not counting what you would call potential 
benefits but just the straight cost of the treasury, do you have a 
rough idea what that would be? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, this would be an 
estimate only of course based upon a projected increase in 
activity. But our projection for this year is $3.1 million; and for 
the out years, 4; and $5 million in the year 2000. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And have 
you checked . . . can you tell us how it compares to tax credits 
in the other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, there are . . . 
Essentially our tax credit is along the same lines as those in 
other provinces and other jurisdictions, but it has three 
distinguishing features that I think are very important. 
 
One is the inclusion of the labour costs for qualified mentors. 
For instance if there is a position, an area of expertise where 
there is no Saskatchewan-trained person available, then if we 
have to bring . . . if the production company has to bring in 
expertise from the outside, either on a contract or salary basis, 
as long as that person is developing, training a Saskatchewan 
person — in other words leaving some expertise resident here 
when they go — then those costs can be included. 
 
Another important part is when the tax credit begins. In the 
other provinces it doesn’t begin . . . no credits are allowed until 
after the script is completely ready. So the research . . . the 
labour involved in the research and the writing of the script and 
so on cannot be covered, and that’s the kind of work that is 
often done here and we want to include that. 
 
And then the 5 per cent bonus that I mentioned that’s available 
for rural activity, or activity that takes place away from the 
large centres of Saskatoon and Regina, that incentive. 
 
Those are the three features that distinguishes Saskatchewan’s 
tax credit, and we think are important enhancements that will 
bring activity here. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
ask you and the Assembly to welcome 75 students from the 
Tisdale Elementary School visiting us here today from grade 4 
and 5. They’re in the east gallery. They’ve upped the population 
of Regina significantly. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teachers Gwenne Degenstein, 
Morley Mehler, and Darlene McRae; and chaperons Lori 
DeForest, Dave Rathgeber, Dorothy Allan, Kim Spencer, 
Sharon Teale, Cheryl Hill, Glen Angus, Jackie Randall, and 
Albert Burrows. 
 
Please welcome these wonderful people from Tisdale in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you very much. I would like to join 
the member from Melfort in welcoming the students and 
teachers from Tisdale. I believe I have a nephew up there in the 
crowd, Chad Ernst. I can’t see from here but . . . And I would 
like to join the member from Melfort in welcoming them here 
today. And if my nephew is up there, perhaps he can wave at 
me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 63 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, I believe you touched on my next question. You 
actually got into the employment part of it. And I guess if I 
understood what you’re saying is if they are in the process of 
training someone from Saskatchewan, then they would be 
eligible for the tax credit. Did I understand what you were 
saying there right? As long as someone from Saskatchewan is 
there? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Yes. As long as someone from 
Saskatchewan is being mentored and skill is being built that’s 
going to be resident here after the project is over. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well 
according to the numbers too that you gave me . . . you said 3.1 
you’re projecting, and naturally that’s an estimate, and next 
year 4 and 5. So what I’m guessing that you think that this will 
create more and more activity in the province. Is that why our 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

numbers are up? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, that’s correct. We 
project that from a base of about 500 jobs in the industry, that 
by the year 2000 there should be about 800 direct jobs and 
many other indirect ones. And that from a base of $5 million in 
’92-93, that there should be $50 million of activity in 
Saskatchewan by the year 2000. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That’s all the 
questions I have. I just want to thank your staff for helping us 
out here today. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to thank the 
members opposite for their questions, and I want to thank my 
officials, and most particularly Keith Comstock. Thank you. 
 
(1530) 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Noxious Weeds Amendment Act, 1998 
 
The Chair: — I’d ask the minister to introduce his official 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I’d like to introduce to the Assembly Mr. 
John Buchan, director of sustainable production in the 
Department of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, do you have any projections regarding the potential 
for cultivation of hemp in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — We don’t have, Mr. Chair, we don’t 
have any predictions on what we can grow in Saskatchewan. 
We think that there’s going to be a potential for fibre production 
and also a potential for the use of the oil. 
 
As far as going into things like refined clothing or other things, 
that would be down the road. But because it’s such a new 
commodity, we have a license in Saskatchewan. Manitoba has a 
bit of production. But right across Canada this is very new, and 
I don’t think anyone will know what the real potential is until 
they do some testing of the product. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — What is the potential cash value of the crop in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I don’t know. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Does anybody know, I wonder? Is this crop 
grown anywhere else in Canada currently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — There’s a bit of commercial production 
in Manitoba this year, but really nobody knows. The legislation 
has just changed in Ottawa. This legislation accommodates that 

change. We think there is potential, but really I mean if I knew, 
if I had any idea, if anybody had any idea we could tell you, but 
really nobody knows exactly what the potential is. We’re going 
to have to do some testing. There’s going to be some production 
coming on stream over the next few years. There will be 
processing plants; I assume that will go in conjunction with that 
plant, and we think the processing will be in terms of fibre and 
oil. But until this unfolds, really there is no answer to that 
question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Is it correct that the federal government will 
continue to regulate its growth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — What . . . are you in a communications strategy 
looking at in terms of addressing the very obvious concern 
about hemp being grown in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — What concern do you refer to? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well the concern that people may be of the view 
that we have legalized the growing of marijuana here in this 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — No, the variety is a low THC 
(tetrahydrocannabinol) variety so the hallucinogenic properties 
have basically been removed or almost removed. What happens 
like if you get . . . If you totally remove the THC, you get a 
plant that I understand lacks little vigour. But the amount that’s 
left in is not a drug so that’s why the federal government has 
moved to legalize this. And I don’t think there should be any 
concern about the growth in this product. It’s another product 
that’s going to be able to allow Saskatchewan people to 
diversify and to add value if we can process this product here. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, do the plants appear similar? And 
if so, is there a concern about a crop of legitimate hemp being 
used to conceal something a little less desirable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I’ll just read to you the industrial hemp 
regulations for commercial licensing from the federal 
government. It’s from Health Canada: 
 

Producers are required to obtain a licence before buying 
seed. Importers and exporters of industrial hemp, as well as 
seed distributors, require a licence. Only pedigree seed of 
varieties listed on Health Canada’s list of approved 
cultivation may be planted. Varieties that produce plants 
containing more than 0.3 per cent delta-9 (I won’t read that 
out because I can’t pronounce it) THC will remain illegal. 
 
To obtain a licence for importation, exportation, 
production, or sale, applicants are required to produce a 
police security check. 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — I’d like to ask the member why she’s on her 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

feet. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — With leave, Mr. Chairman, to introduce 
a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to now 
introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
Assembly, in the west gallery, my son Jesse Bradley is here this 
afternoon. He has just spent a year in Quebec, helping students 
there learn English skills in the school, and he is back this 
summer to work and attend university. And so I’m pleased to 
welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 35 — The On-farm Quality Assurance 
Programs Act 

 
The Chair: — Before we start on the Bill I would ask the 
minister to introduce his official please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I’d like to introduce to the committee 
Maryellen Carlson, director of industry and development in the 
Department of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Clauses 1 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1545) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Act 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Noxious Weeds Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The On-farm Quality Assurance 
Programs Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
now be read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 25 — The 
Pipelines Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 26 — The 
Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I just have one question for the minister or 
his designate. The minister was out in my area in the 
Langenburg east C & D (conservation and development area 
authority), and I’d just like to get an update if possible on what 
is going on out there. There’s the Assiniboine Valley study 
that’s going on. I just would like an update on that because 
there’s an awful lot of hard feelings still going on in my area 
over that, and I’d just like to know what’s happening. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much. To the 
member opposite, we will take note of your question. We will 
have it of course in Hansard, and we will commit to giving you 
a written answer to the question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, 
to the minister. Madam Minister, the project referred to in the 
eastern side of the province, referred to as the Upper 
Assiniboine River Valley study, has been under way with the 
federal government, the province of Manitoba, and the province 
of Saskatchewan. There has been difficulty, Madam Minister, 
with the proposed project at Fishing Lake whereby the proposal 
was to ensure that channel drainage takes place to ensure that 
the water level which has done tremendous damage to both the 
environment as well as the properties . . . would occur. That 
project was put on hold because of the conflict between the 
governments of Manitoba and Saskatchewan and the federal 
government regarding the passing of water over provincial 
boundaries. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like some assurance from the Minister 
responsible for Sask Water that this project will not get 
cancelled, that indeed they will continue to pursue the 



1704 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 1998 

opportunity for a solution to the problem. To just ignore it and 
allow the kind of damage to continue to occur is not in the best 
interests of everyone. 
 
I would like to know whether or not there has been some 
agreement with the province of Manitoba, with the communities 
involved down the river, down the Assiniboine River Valley 
system, to ensure that the proposed project at Fishing Lake can 
continue? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the 
member opposite, again we’ll take note of the question, and we 
will make a commitment to give you a full and complete answer 
on that in writing. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome to your officials today. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to relay to you a specific concern of 25 
people who reside just south of Stony Lake near Humboldt. 
Now it has been indicated to them that their water line has got 
to be changed because of the age of lines. What’s happening is 
the 25 people that live out there are asking whose responsibility 
it is to have these lines and all of the test digs, etc., that must be 
done to determine whether or not the lines have to be changed 
for sure. Apparently the cost to do the test digs on that line has 
been estimated at $16,000. If the lines would need to be 
electrified, the town of Humboldt would be estimating that at a 
cost of $122,000. 
 
Now the people on the lines feel that it’s not necessarily their 
responsibility to pay for all of these expenses because they are 
receiving water from the pipeline that is running through 
Humboldt. The RM (rural municipality) does not want to take 
responsibility. They say that they’re not in the business of 
supplying water, although the taxes do go to the RM, the taxes 
those people pay. The town does not feel that they have the 
responsibility, so I ask the minister: who do you determine that 
the responsibility for these costs should go to? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, she asks a 
very good question and we’ll take note of that, and we will 
commit to give you a written answer to that particular question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a couple of 
questions from the Kelvington Conservation and Development 
Area. They’ve been working on negotiating treaty land 
entitlement claims and selling off the Pipestone easements to 
Yellowquill Holdings, and they’d like to know what Sask 
Water’s position on these negotiations are at this time. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much. To the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena, I say that’s a very good 
question. We’ll take note of it and provide you a full and 
complete answer in writing. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, I also would like to ask a 
question from the conservation authorities. They’re concerned 
that they would possibly lose the Pipestone easements that are 
in place to Yellowquill Holdings when they become under 
reserve status and under federal jurisdiction. The Kelvington 

conservation area feels it would be in Sask Water’s best 
interests if they expedite the proposed Pipestone construction 
project while they still have provincial jurisdiction. And they 
need an estimated figure for this project so that they can set an 
assessment. Can you give us an idea of when Sask Water is 
going to make a decision on this? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. That’s a very good question. It’s now on the record 
and we will commit to giving a full and complete answer in 
writing. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, I have three more questions 
that I’m going to ask and I’m sure that that minister will just 
take them into consideration and give us her answer in writing. 
So these ones are: Sask Water has actually been cost sharing on 
maintenance and it’s supposed to be 50 per cent, but lately we 
found that there are some areas where there are less than 50 per 
cent is committed for maintenance. 
 
The people have spent a lot of money to make sure that these 
projects are built and we’d like the government to recognize 
their responsibility and continue to provide 50 per cent of the 
maintenance that is required. And also the Act that is actually 
governing the C&Ds is outdated and for a number of years 
they’ve been asking for changes to this Act and the resolutions 
that have been brought forward to the government have been 
outlined in their conventions for the past number of years. So 
we’re asking that the government consider these 
recommendations and change the Act as quickly as possible. 
 
And the third concern that’s been addressed by the conservation 
development association is regarding funding on reserve land. 
Some conservation development ditches in the future may no 
longer be on privately owned land but may be owned by the 
federal government and may in fact have reserve status. They’re 
asking that the government through Sask Water continue to cost 
share in the cost of maintenance of conservation and 
development ditches passing through reserve status according to 
the present schedule. 
 
A commitment on the continued funding for maintenance 
projects from the department is important if people are going to 
be able to use the projects in the manner that they were first 
built. So I ask that the government prepare an answer for these 
as quickly as possible. 
 
Ms. Julé: — In addition to the question that I posed to the 
minister earlier, I am issuing a question to you on behalf of 
constituents around Regina who don’t seem to be getting a lot 
of response from their own MLA. And it’s an issue, Madam 
Minister, that has been brought up since 1989 and 1990. It has 
been brought up to Minister Calvert and Minister Tchorzewski 
when, I believe, they were in opposition. And the issue is 
surrounding the problem with contaminated water being 
pumped into Wascana Creek from the Condie aquifer. Now 
there is a great deal of concern because a lot of this water . . . or 
this water is being used by residents north of Regina. It is going 
into the pipe system that supplies them with drinking water. I’m 
wondering whether or not the minister or your department has 
looked into a solution to this problem. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again to the member opposite, we 



June 5, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1705 

will commit to provide a full and complete answer in writing to 
that question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to discuss 
the Fishing Lake project. And I would like to remind the 
government that the overflow channel is a natural flow that has 
been filled with natural flow dirt over the years. I’m wondering 
why Sask Water won’t open a natural run and give Fishing 
Lake residents the drainage that would occur under the situation 
that would be a natural program from years ago. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again we will commit to the 
member opposite that we will provide a complete answer in 
writing to that question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, I just have one final question and 
that is actually on the potato chip plant that’s been announced 
around the Lucky Lake project. SPUDCO actually has agreed 
that they’re going to pay for construction of the storage bins for 
the increased volume of the product. They were wondering how 
much money this is going to cost and what kind of 
commitments have been made to the landowners around there. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again we’ll make a commitment 
that we’ll provide that in answer to that question. 
 
Subvote (SW01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (SW02), (SW03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — I would like to bring to the attention of the 
members that Sask Water had a statutory advance of $9.3 
million. It doesn’t have to be voted on but it was brought to 
your attention. Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — And with wishes for an enjoyable weekend to 
all hon. members and looking forward to seeing you back on 
Monday at 1:30 in the afternoon. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:11 p.m. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1659 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1660 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1660 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Krawetz..........................................................................................................................................................................1660, 1696 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1660 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Bradley...........................................................................................................................................................................1667, 1703 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1700 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1701 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1701 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Health Care Requirements 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
 Saskatchewan’s Economy 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
 Museum Month 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
 Building Independence Call Centre 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1661 
 Young Hockey Players from Northern Saskatchewan 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1662 
 Michael Zerr Memorial Golf Tournament 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1662 
 Prairie Fire Rugby Team 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1662 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1663 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1663 
 Kenosee Youth Camp 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1663 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1664 
 Hiring of Additional Nurses 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1664 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1664 
 Health Care in Saskatchewan 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1665 
 Dangerous Goods Route near Moose Jaw 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
 Special Care Facility in Humboldt 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1666 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1667 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1670 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1672 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1676 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1677 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Agriculture and Food — Vote 1 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1677 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1677 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1682 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Agriculture and Food — Vote 146 ............................................................................................................................................1692 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
 General Revenue Fund — Budgetary Expense 
 Agriculture and Food — Vote 1 ................................................................................................................................................1692 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Saskatchewan Research Council — Vote 35 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1692 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1692 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1697 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Women’s Secretariat — Vote 41 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1698 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1698 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1699 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs — Vote 30 ...........................................................................................................1700 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 — General Revenue Fund — Budgetary Expense 
 Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs — Vote 25 and Vote 30 ......................................................................................1700 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Saskatchewan Water Corporation — Vote 50 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1703 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1703 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1703 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1704 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1704 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 63  The Film Employment Tax Credit Act 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1700 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1700 
 Bill No. 37 — The Noxious Weeds Amendment Act, 1998 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1702 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1702 
 Bill No. 35 — The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1703 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 63 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Act 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1703 
 Bill No. 37 — The Noxious Weeds Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1703 
 Bill No. 35 — The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1703 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 25 — The Pipelines Act, 1998 ......................................................................................................................................1703 
 Bill No. 26 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1998....................................................................................1703 


