





























































Hansard: June 08, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1707 
 June 8, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project with or without federal assistance. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the 
communities of Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Morse, Stewart 
Valley, Gull Lake, and many communities. I am pleased to 
present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of thousands of people from 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen’s organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone, 
regardless of their heritage. 
 

These petitions come from Strasbourg, Bulyea, Porcupine Plain, 
Norquay, Bjorkdale, Quill Lake, Archerwill, Young, Watrous, 
Lanigan, Guernsey, Viscount, Colonsay, Watson, Young, 
Saskatoon, Viscount, across the province, Mr. Speaker. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well to present a petition. 
Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I’m presenting today is signed 
by individuals from the Tisdale and Carrot River, Bjorkdale 
areas of the province of Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present for the residents of Saskatchewan to do with 

the twinning of the highway. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project. 
 
As is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Gull Lake, Swift 
Current, Tompkins, Kenosee Lake, Consul, Hazlet, Shaunavon, 
McCord, and the list goes on, Mr. Speaker, all over the province 
of Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present petitions 
signed by individuals from numerous communities across the 
province. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find out 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about adequate funding to support 
a regional radiology service in Melfort. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signatures on this, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Tisdale, Melfort, Naicam, and Muenster. Mr. 
Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition as well 
to present to the Assembly this afternoon from the North 
Central Health . . . concerned about the North Central Health 
District and the level of services that they are providing to their 
constituents. 
 
This petition comes from the Melfort, Kinistino areas of the 
province, and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the welfare of Steven and Kimberley 
Walchuk and children that are found in similar situations: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may take the required action to allow the 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

children named to remain in the custody of the maternal 
grandparents and that appropriate amendments be made to 
the justice system. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these petitions come from Melville, Esterhazy, Strasbourg, 
Bulyea, Duval, Craven, Regina, Swift Current, Moose Jaw, 
Loreburn, Briercrest, and Saskatoon, and truly, Mr. Speaker, 
from throughout the land. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with petitions 
concerning the confusing and dangerous entrance to the city of 
North Battleford. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to relocate Highway 40 to east of the 
David Laird Campground in order to alleviate the 
congestion at the entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 

Your petitioners come from Gallivan, Saskatoon, Maymont, 
Cut Knife, and North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
concerns of citizens worried about the treatment of our northern 
residents. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take immediate action to 
allow the North to join the rest of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Uranium City. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition on northern Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take immediate action to 
allow the North to join the rest of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 
from Patuanak and Ile-a-la-Crosse, and I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to present 
a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 
completely ban the practice of night hunting in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions have been signed by many people 
across this province, including those from Stalwart, Imperial, 
Liberty, Penzance. We have some from Swift Current, 
Rosthern. We have a number, Mr. Speaker, from Melville and 
Dalmeny. We have some from Regina; we have some from 
Sturgis; we have Esterhazy. We have a good number, Mr. 

Speaker, from the city of Melfort. We also have a huge number 
from North Battleford; we have some from Battleford. Mr. 
Speaker, we also have some from Delmas. Mr. Speaker, we 
have some from Hafford; we have some from Meota. We have, 
as I said earlier, we have a lot from North Battleford, Mr. 
Speaker, and we also have some from the community of 
Rosthern. And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are seeking 
justice for men and women who have lost their spouses in 
work-related accidents. And I’ll read the prayer for the 
Assembly: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan, whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

People who have signed these petitions today, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Saskatoon, Avonlea, and Regina, and I present them with 
pleasure on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of people 
of Saskatchewan, I present the following prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the communities, Mr. Speaker, of Consul, Saskatchewan, 
Swift Current, Medicine Hat, Cabri, and Maple Creek, and all 
the way from Manitoba to British Columbia, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read 
and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your Hon. 
Assembly may cause the twinning of the Trans-Canada; 
save the Plains Health Centre; cause the government to 
cancel severance payments to Jack Messer and conduct an 
independent inquiry surrounding Channel Lake; relocate 
Highway 40 at the entrance of North Battleford; 
concerning the high cost of power rates in the North and 
radiology in the North Central Health District. 
 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to the rest of my colleagues in the 
legislature, seated in your gallery 20 students from Makwa 
School. Attending with them is their teacher, Mr. Charles Stein, 
and Mrs. Drumheller, Mrs. Gerstanhofer, Mrs. Nydegger, and 
Mr. Kirsh. 
 
Makwa is a farming community located about 25 or 30 
kilometres to the west of Meadow Lake. And over the years 
Makwa has fairly regularly visited us here in the legislature, so 
I would like all members to join with me in welcoming them 
here once again. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that you, Mr. 
Speaker, and other members of the Legislative Assembly will 
want to welcome Alexa McDonough, the Leader of the New 
Democratic Party, to the Assembly today. Alexa, if you would 
stand up and be recognized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Alexa of course became the federal leader of our 
party and got us very surprising and stunning results in the 
Maritimes. And we want to thank you for leading our party in 
that way. I want to say as well that, of course, coming from 
Nova Scotia, she was the first woman in Canada to lead a major 
party in politics at the provincial level. 
 
And I want to say your record is impeccable, we’re proud of 
you, and welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course I 
would like to add my greeting to Alexa McDonough. We had 
the pleasure of going around Mosaic on Saturday evening. And 
the number of people who wanted to talk with her, and to let her 
know they are wishing her very well was amazing to me. And 
I’m very pleased that she’s with us today. 
 
I would also like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through 
you to the all members of the Assembly, someone sitting in the 
west gallery. A person I’ve known because the Moose Jaw man 
that I married introduced me to her a number of years ago. And 
since then I’ve just been amazed and always proud of all of the 
work that she’s done for our community. 
 
She’s the past-president of Sask Sport, the 1996 recipient of the 
Women of Distinction Award from the YWCA. She’s received 
a Canada 125 Medal for contribution to sport and to 
volunteerism in Saskatchewan. She is the past-president of . . . 
or is vice-president of the Canadian Figure Skating Association, 
and chair of the special initiatives program. 
 
If I listed all of the things that this woman is capable of and/or 
involved in we could be here all afternoon, Mr. Speaker. But I 
would ask all members to join with me in warmly welcoming 
Pat Stellek to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the official opposition we would want to welcome Alexa 
McDonough to the Assembly, as well. Mr. Speaker, you would 
know that my grandparents came from Nova Scotia, although 
I’m quite certain they wouldn’t share the enthusiasm of the last 
election. They brought a great spirit . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . they brought a great spirit of free enterprise to western 
Canada, leaving behind some of the old things in the Maritimes. 
 
But on behalf of the opposition we would want to welcome you 
to western Canada and all of the beautiful province that we have 
to offer here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add 
my greetings to Alexa who has taken time on several occasions 
to personally come to my constituency which I think is quite a 
feat . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, you wish. 
 
And I just want to recognize also that our loss was Alexa’s gain. 
And Shelley Sundholm is with her today, so also welcome 
Shelley here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add the 
voice of welcome from the Liberal caucus to Ms. McDonough 
to the Assembly here and to this great province of 
Saskatchewan. I’m looking forward to perhaps one day 
welcoming also the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party that 
might be on the federal scene one day as well. But welcome 
here and enjoy yourself. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to welcome to the Assembly a group of grade 5 and 6 
students who are joining us from Massey School. They’re 
seated in your gallery. Massey School of course is in the 
Hillsdale-Whitmore Park neighbourhood of this city, and it’s 
always a pleasure to have folks from the riding here. So if you’d 
join with me in welcoming them, I’d appreciate it. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Volunteers for Can-Am Police-Fire Games 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few minutes 
ago, I had the privilege of introducing to you Pat Stellek, one of 
the busiest women in Saskatchewan. 
 
First, she is the executive director of the Saskatchewan Special 
Olympics Society, which is currently preparing for the national 
Summer Olympics in Sudbury from July 7 to 12 . . . this after 
the Saskatchewan Summer Games last summer, and in 
preparation for the international Summer Games in 1999. 
Sixty-nine athletes, 17 coaches, and four helpers will be going 
to Sudbury where they’ll be worthy competitors for and 
ambassadors of Saskatchewan. 
 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Supporting an undertaking of this size takes a great deal of 
energy, hundreds of volunteers, and constant fund-raising about 
which you will here more later. Pat Stellek is the trail boss for 
this whole operation. 
 
In her spare time, however, Mr. Speaker, she is also the 
manager of volunteers for the Can-Am Police-Fire Games, 
which are being held right here in Regina this month, June 22 to 
28. 
 
These games will bring hundreds of athletes competing in over 
60 events; some of them Olympic events, some of them one of a 
kind, like the toughest cop alive and the canine competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pat needs 3,000 volunteers — 1,100 volunteers a 
day. I humbly suggest that we wrap up our business here and 
volunteer to help for a few days, the people who protect our 
communities year round. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drug Awareness in the North 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The community of 
Buffalo Narrows lost an energetic and young man to a drug 
overdose, Ken Hansen, who was only 28 years old. Ken’s death 
has served to open the eyes of northern residents to the serious 
problem of drug abuse amongst our youth. 
 
But the residents of Buffalo Narrows will not let his death be in 
vain. Most current programs deal with rehabilitation, and as 
such there is a great need for a drug awareness program aimed 
at prevention. 
 
To meet this need the Ken Hansen Drug Awareness Foundation 
has been established. The foundation was initiated by the family 
and Minolta corporation made the first donation to the trust 
fund. Since then the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan, the town of 
Buffalo Narrows, Chartier and Shatilla Wood Products, as well 
as many other individuals, have made contributions to fund this 
worthwhile project that, in the words of Ken Hansen’s family, 
is aimed at a small but powerful message of saying no to drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again the people of northern Saskatchewan have 
come up with an innovative program to meet the needs of their 
own people. Drug abuse amongst the province’s youth is a 
serious concern. It is important to prevent such tragic events 
such as Ken’s death, and to have programs available to those in 
need of treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan youth, and northern youth in 
particular, can no longer wait for beds and treatment facilities 
for drug and alcohol abuse in this province. Mr. Speaker, it is 
time to create and fund these facilities and continue the example 
that the Hansen family has put before us. 
 
Thank you. 
 

1998 Torch Run 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I had the 
pleasure of meeting Pat Stellek and other officials from the 
Saskatchewan Special Olympics Society at the Summer Sports 

Festival in Swift Current. 
 
Today I would like to acknowledge in a public way, the efforts 
of law enforcement officials with regard to the Saskatchewan 
Law Enforcement Torch Run, which raises money for the 
Special Olympic events and athletes in our province. 
 
Runners covered over 1,500 kilometres throughout the 
province, with routes converging in Swift Current for the 
Summer Sports Festival. The festival was designed to be a fun 
weekend to help in the development of our special Olympians. 
 
Two hundred officers participated in the final leg, carrying the 
torch into the opening ceremonies of the ’98 Summer Sports 
Festival on June 5. The torch bearer was joined with a Special 
Olympics athlete to complete a lap around the track and then 
light the standing torch and signify the beginning of the festival. 
 
Participants from over 50 communities ran with one common 
purpose to help improve the quality of life for Saskatchewan’s 
population with mental handicaps, through the support of 
Saskatchewan Special Olympic Society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Torch Run started in 1988, raising $15,000. 
Last year the Torch Run raised $100,000, and to date the run 
this year has raised . . . altogether the run has raised almost 
$700,000. This year’s torch run raised $75,000 for its first 
instalment. Thank you to all who were involved in this very 
worthwhile cause. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tragedy in Kindersley 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . very tragic news 
from the Kindersley constituency over the weekend. As you 
may be aware, and all members may be aware, Dan Haseloh, 
James Allcock, and Edward Peterson were all involved in very 
terrible aircraft crash over the weekend killing all three of them. 
 
They were shooting a promotional video on behalf of Rotary 
Air Force in Kindersley. The crash is now being investigated by 
Transport Canada into what exactly happened. The details are a 
little bit sketchy at this point. I’ve been attempting to contact 
Rotary Air Force to get some information on the crash. We 
would want to, on behalf of I’m sure all members of the 
Assembly, extend our most sincere condolences to the families 
of the men involved and to the community and the employees 
of Rotary Air Force, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rotary Park Peace Plaza 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. The Saskatoon writer 
Edward McCourt once said that a city built on the banks of a 
swiftly flowing river is blessed with a vitality uniquely found 
only in this geographical setting. We who live in and represent 
Saskatoon know of what he speaks. One of our city’s best spots 
for recreation and reflection is on the riverbank in my 
constituency. 
 
Last week Rotary Park was made even more attractive with the 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

completion of a peace plaza, with a peace pole as the focal point 
of the plaza. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one would have thought that at the end of this 
century with all of the horrible lessons it has provided us on the 
waste of war, that a structure re-dedicated to peace would be 
unnecessary. As we all know events of the past few days on the 
Asian sub-continent and once again in Africa and central 
Europe have reminded us that the “price of peace is eternal 
vigilance,” and the cost of conflict is uncountable. 
 
This peace pole is part of a movement in 160 countries. It has 
inscribed on it the wish, and I quote, “May peace prevail on 
earth” in four languages: one obviously English, the other 
French, one Cree, and Japanese — where the peace pole 
movement began. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was proud to take part at the dedication of this 
plaza and I congratulate Doug Bentham, the artist, The 
Saskatoon Multi-Faith Centre, the five Rotary clubs of 
Saskatoon, the Nutana Community Association, the city of 
Saskatoon, SaskEnergy, and the Meewasin Valley Authority for 
their involvement in this worthwhile project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Prevention of Family Violence 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, today I want to pay tribute to 
the Aboriginal Women’s Council of Saskatchewan and the 
Prince Albert Grand Council women’s commission who have 
accepted the challenge of taking . . . doing some grassroots 
work with the issue of preventing violence within families. 
 
They have been given $40,000 last week by the Minister of 
Justice. This is part of a $350,000 program, provincial program 
that’ll work to respond to the effects of family violence. And 
the objective is to assist with the healing of the effects of 
violence within the family and of course to prevent occurrences 
of violence within the family. 
 
The Aboriginal Women’s Council of Saskatchewan will expand 
its current services by hiring an additional counsellor. And the 
Prince Albert Grand Council women’s commission will hire a 
family wellness coordinator to provide support for women and 
children. 
 
Congratulations to all the local volunteers who will be working 
together with Social Services and other people in the 
community . . . all working to this goal of promoting the 
concept that violence within the family is unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crop Damage in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to express concern on behalf of farmers across the 
province. Many farmers saw serious damage done to their crops 
in the past weeks from drought and frost. 
 
Recent frosts have caused severe damage in a number of areas, 
Mr. Speaker, and I had the opportunity late last week to view 

some of that firsthand in the eastern part of our province, in the 
Yorkton, Canora, Norquay areas. And take my word for it, 
some of the damage is very severe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the farmers are going to be forced to 
re-seed some of their crops due to this severe frost damage. And 
as well as re-seeding there’s going to be a significant set-back 
to all the crops in many of these areas in terms of delays in 
maturity. 
 
Now the way the growing season is going and as uncertain as 
our weather can be in this province, I think it’s important that 
farmers can be certain that this government is developing a 
contingency plan, putting a plan in place that would cover such 
extraordinary circumstances of natural disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is one of the most important industries 
in Saskatchewan and the concerns of every farmer must be 
taken into consideration. I’d ask the Minister of Agriculture to 
correspond directly with producers across the province to gain a 
full understanding of the impact of this disaster. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crop Damage in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier or his designate. 
Mr. Premier, Prime Minister Jean Chrétien is in town today. We 
are wondering if the government is going to take this 
opportunity to raise some very important issues for 
Saskatchewan starting with agriculture. 
 
Our MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) have been 
home, as you have been, over the weekend and this morning 
they were all reporting areas where the crop is in very serious 
difficulty due to lack of moisture and frost. At the same time 
farmers see crop insurance is totally inadequate to deal with this 
problem. Reseeding benefits don’t even come close to covering 
the cost of reseeding, and overall coverage levels are going to 
leave Saskatchewan farmers in a huge cash crunch this year. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you doing about this and have you taken 
it up with the Prime Minister who is town today? Will you be 
getting together to work out an immediate improvement to the 
crop insurance program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the member well knows that the crop insurance program has 
been greatly modified over the last two years and we have a 
very good program. 
 
One of the things . . . and I don’t want to downplay any of the 
problems the farmers are having because we are keeping on top 
of this day by day, and we have about 2,200 claims for frost in. 
Over the last six years we’ve had a high of about 2,300 to a low 
of about 1,100 claims. Those claims, we think, won’t go up to 
much more, but there is coverage for those. 
 



1712 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

One thing I want to straighten out. Now the member says that 
the coverage for re-seeding benefits is not satisfactory. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve worked this out with the department, with myself, 
with my neighbours, and talking about if you take canola at two 
bucks a pound . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well the member 
should listen because he’s spreading false information. 
 
At two bucks a pound, five pounds an acre, six pounds, 10, $12. 
Add on about 3.60 for fuel, repair, oil, and labour. That’s 
another, let’s say four bucks for that. That’s $16. And this is the 
most expensive. If you had to re-seed canola, that was very, 
very expensive. It could get more, but crop insurance doesn’t 
pay any more that 70 or 80 per cent anyway. So I think what 
you should do . . . we’re working. You should be a little more 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 

International Trade War in Grain 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, at the 
same time that farmers are being hit with frost, drought, and 
rising input costs, an international trade war is also looming, 
and Canadian farmers are going to get caught in the cross-fire. 
 
The European union is already providing huge subsidies to its 
farmers; the U.S. (United States) is threatening to retaliate with 
subsidies of its own. And if that happens, the bottom line here 
in Saskatchewan . . . on Saskatchewan farms is going to be 
dramatically affected. 
 
And what does the federal Liberal government have in place to 
deal with a trade war? It appears absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Minister, international trade is a major responsibility of the 
federal government and the Prime Minister, and so far Canadian 
farmers are getting hung out to dry by the federal Liberal 
government. 
 
Mr. Minister, did you have the opportunity, or has the Premier 
had the opportunity, to raise this very important issue during 
Mr. Chrétien’s visit to Saskatchewan? What exactly is the 
Liberal government in Ottawa doing that can help farmers in 
this very difficult circumstance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member raises a 
very important question for this province. We have worked long 
and hard with the federal government to try to make sure they 
maintain their safety net basket at $600 million. We’ve been 
able to do that so far and we continue to do that. 
 
We’ve improved crop insurance, putting in more than the 
federal government to reduce the reinsurance fund, to improve 
that, to make it cheaper by $35 million a year for farmers. 
 
But the problem is this. We’ve got a federal Liberal government 
who allowed the Crow benefit to be ended immediately. Then 
the U.S. had their export enhancement program only put on the 
back burner and they could re-enact it under WTO (World 
Trade Organization) agreements. The Europeans have the same 
kind of programs where they can reduce them over six years by 

36 per cent. 
 
The problem is we’ve got a federal government that sits on its 
hands, abdicates its responsibilities, stands up there and wrings 
its hands and says, well you guys shouldn’t be doing this. 
 
Well those other countries are working on behalf of their 
farmers. We will be talking . . . I have been talking with my 
department and to the federal people. The Premier has talked 
about the agricultural concern for the drought and the frost 
already this year. 
 
Yes, we are on top of this situation and will continue to be on 
top of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Highways Program 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier or his designate. Mr. Premier, the 
deplorable state of our highways is causing accidents and 
injuries. It’s hurting the economic viability in many 
communities. It’s holding back the economic development of 
the entire province. 
 
And now that we are well into the tourism season, thousands of 
visitors to our province are getting a taste of the problem as 
they travel on our two national highways, the Trans-Canada and 
the Yellowhead. 
 
Mr. Premier, large portions of the Trans-Canada and the 
Yellowhead have not been twinned and truck traffic on these 
two main arteries is getting heavier every day. The more trucks, 
the more dangerous it gets. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Prime Minister is in Regina today as you 
know. Will you be meeting with the Prime Minister to demand 
funding for the twinning of Saskatchewan’s national highways? 
What is your government doing to force the federal Liberal 
government to establish and fund a national highway program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The one thing 
that our government is doing is putting more dollars into 
highways in the program here in Saskatchewan. 
 
On the other aspect — on what we’re doing with the federal 
government — definitely from the ministers of Transportation 
right across this country, the premiers across this country, the 
premiers of western Canada have all been on the federal 
government about a national highways program. And so are the 
municipalities. And we’re certainly hoping that the federal 
government, that Ottawa will be listening to it. 
 
As we have said in this province over and over, that we’re 
putting twinning as one of our major initiatives forward in this 
budget. We’ve announced twinning projects on both sides of 
No. 1 Highway, east and west. We will be continuing to twin 
the Yellowhead. 
 
But we certainly could reduce the time of twinning if we could 
get a national highways program in which we could halve that 
amount of time to finish the program. 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Madam 
Minister, let’s not forget that in the first two years of your 
10-year program, you’re 80 million short on your share. Madam 
Minister, the state of Saskatchewan’s sections of the 
Trans-Canada and Yellowhead highways are a disgrace to this 
province. The NDP (New Democratic Party) is already 80 
million, as I’ve said, behind on your highway funding promises. 
 
And to make matters worse, Saskatchewan is being left out 
completely of the federal Liberal government’s highway 
program. And unfortunately, Jim Melenchuk and his band of 
provincial Liberal sidekicks haven’t dared to raise the highway 
funding issue with their federal cousins. 
 
Madam Minister, immediately following question period, the 
Saskatchewan Party will be moving an emergency motion, 
condemning the federal Liberal government for its failure to 
implement a national program to fund maintenance and 
improvement of the national highways in all provinces, 
including Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, Saskatchewan’s economic viability depends 
on a safe, efficient highway system. Will you support the 
Saskatchewan Party motion and demand the Liberal Prime 
Minister provide funding to twin the Saskatchewan national 
highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, right now we 
don’t have a national highways program and certainly we are 
lobbying in every way that we possibly can for that. 
 
The federal governments right across North America all have 
national highway programs. Matter of fact, in the United States, 
highway funding . . . they just put forward an additional 
program called the ISTEA (Intermodal Surface Transportation 
Efficiency Act) . . . program that will putting billions of dollars 
into their national program. 
 
The provinces, the territories have all just recently met and what 
we have all said is that they should be putting towards $800 
million a year through the federal government, which will be 
matched by the provincial governments . . . which will put 1.6 
billion, which is still less than half of what the United States is 
putting towards it if we even took the same population base, 
towards their national highways program. 
 
We are calling on the federal government in every way possible 
to certainly put more dollars into a national highways program. 
Our federal leader is here today to listen. I’m not just sure 
where your leader is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order. Now all 
. . . Order! Now all hon. members I’m sure will want to . . . 
Order. Order! Now I’m sure all hon. members would much 
prefer to have the questions and the answers on the record. And 
there’s an easy way of doing that and that’s to give your 
attention to the next questioner. 

Employment Insurance Fund Surplus 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
federal Liberal’s Employment Insurance slush fund is growing 
to $15.7 billion and it could swell to as much as $20 billion by 
the end of the year. That’s a massive payroll tax on every 
employer and employee in the country, and other premiers are 
speaking out against it. The Premiers of Nova Scotia and New 
Brunswick are calling for the federal government to start 
returning that money to workers. And the Premier of Ontario is 
threatening to sue Ottawa if something isn’t done. But we 
haven’t heard anything from your government, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, when you meet with Mr. Chrétien today, will you 
be discussing this issue with him? Will you be pressing him to 
start returning this surplus to workers and employers in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the hon. 
member has been but we in fact have raised the issue of the 
surplus in the Employment Insurance fund with the federal 
government many times, Mr. Speaker, many times. And we 
along with the other provinces, Mr. Speaker, have called upon 
the federal government to reduce the amount of premium 
payable by employers on behalf of themselves and workers into 
the Employment Insurance fund. 
 
Because we have said many times, and I’m on the public record 
as saying, Mr. Speaker, that it is a payroll tax to have an 
Employment Insurance premium that is higher than it takes to 
run the Employment Insurance program. 
 
And as long as we have that kind of payroll tax from the federal 
Liberals, Mr. Speaker, that’s a tax on jobs. And the 
Saskatchewan economy’s performing very well, but we would 
do even better, and some of the areas of the country that don’t 
do as well as us would do better, if the Liberals would take 
some action on this matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Survey of Hospital Waiting Lists 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, health care professionals across 
this province are expressing amazement about the closure of 
acute care beds during the summer months and the fact that no 
elective surgeries will be booked. Doctors say this can only 
mean that waiting lists, which are already unacceptable, will get 
even longer. 
 
Last year we heard that the Health department would be 
conducting a comprehensive survey to assess waiting lists and 
determine how best to priorize patients requiring a wide range 
of surgeries. As part of this process surgeons, physicians, and 
health district officials were to be interviewed last fall and the 
findings were to be completed and released by June 1. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give us a copy of that survey today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at least in my review 
of literature over the last several weeks, there is one piece of 
information, Mr. Speaker, that Maclean’s reports accurately, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the information that 
I provided a couple of days ago to the member opposite clearly 
stated in the notation from the district health board, that elective 
surgeries in the Royal University Hospital will continue in the 
area of pediatrics. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that that decision has been 
made by the district health board in consultation with the 
physicians who are overseeing the surgeries. And that there will 
be no . . . the reductions this year will be far less than they were 
last year — I think seven weeks this year as opposed to 10 
weeks last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, the last available figures suggest 
that an estimating 6,600 people now occupy a waiting list, three 
times what the former Blakeney government thought was 
acceptable. 
 
It’s a crisis in Saskatoon where the average wait for general 
surgery is 370 days, and now you’ve cancelled all elective 
surgery in Saskatoon for the summer. Health care in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is in crisis, and the reason is that 
government across there. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit that the real reason for the bed 
crisis in Saskatoon and Regina is because of your government’s 
incompetence? And will you also admit to the people of 
Saskatchewan that they are sick of your wellness program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite, if he’s had an opportunity to review Maclean’s which 
is a document that has just been released, it talks about bed 
closures across the country; it’s what I’ve been talking about for 
the last several weeks. 
 
And, Mr. Member, I want to say to you that when you look at 
the report that comes out of Maclean’s, the very first thing that 
they say is, Ottawa has cut it’s contributions to Saskatchewan 
health budget by 22 per cent, which is your family of friends 
who have reduced the cost all across this country. This is your 
family of friends. 
 
They also go on to say that Saskatchewan has the lowest 
number of hospital bed reductions in Canada, in Canada, at 7 
per cent. And it goes on to talk about what is happening across 
the country. And you stand up from time to time and talk about 
what Liberal governments are doing across the country, what 
Liberal governments are doing across the country. 
 
Liberal Nova Scotia has reduced its hospital beds by 33 per 
cent, is what they’ve done. Which is the same government that 
you represent, my friend. And I say to you that it’s unrealistic 
for you, in this province, to be talking about hospital bed 
reductions to the degree that you do because we have reduced 
hospital beds to the least amount in Canada. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Statements from Health Districts 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, in typical fashion the NDP 
government will not be releasing the financial statements of 
Saskatchewan’s 30 health districts until this session of the 
legislature is over. However, ten districts have already disclosed 
their financial picture and all of them are in deficit situations: 
East Central, three and a half million; Living Sky, one and a 
half million; Southwest, 200,000; The Battlefords, 1 million; 
Regina, 5 million; Saskatoon, 5 million; Central Plains, 
340,000; North-East, 800,000; Parkland, 500,000; North 
Central, 200,000. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health: what plan have you 
prepared to help districts deal with these massive deficits 
without cutting services any further? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that we’re going to continue to work with district 
health boards across the province in the way in which we have 
in the past. District health boards are going to continue to work 
at reducing their debts across the province by ensuring that the 
level of services are protected for all health districts, and that 
the people in each of their areas of the province continue to get 
the level of quality of services that they have in the past. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, I mean, what would he do? 
Or what is he saying about the federal government’s reduction 
in spending to health by 22 per cent? What is he saying to that? 
Instead he gets up and he continues to beat up on the province 
of Saskatchewan. And by the same degree, all of Canada he 
beats up on, when it’s the federal government that’s responsible 
for the reduction of health spending in this country. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, you need to put your pen to 
paper or go down to the meeting place today where the Prime 
Minister is and have a chat with him about the amount of 
spending that’s been reduced in this country by Liberal cuts 
across the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the total deficit for only 10 
health districts is $18.4 million. And we’ve yet to hear what the 
financial picture is for the remaining 20 districts. 
 
The Minister of Health promised that there would be no more 
cuts — no more cuts would take place. In spite of that, 25 acute 
care beds have been slashed in the Living Sky district, and 12 
pediatric beds have been closed in the Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Minister, our districts have seen their services cut to the 
bone, yet you continue to force them to cut deeper. Mr. 
Minister, the people are afraid that you are saving the worst for 
last because you don’t want the financial statements of the 
health districts brought up during this current session. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you release the financial statements of the 
remaining health districts today? Will you release them before 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

this current session is over? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that the district health boards, their release of financial 
information will be done in its timely fashion, as it always has 
been done in the past. And I say to the member opposite, when 
the release for the financial statements are ready and prepared, 
we’ll release them in the order in which we have in the past. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, he continues to stand in his 
place and talk about, and he holds up his broken record about 
the number of beds in this province. And I say to the member 
opposite, if you want to hear a broken record, you should play 
the one that he plays on the bed reductions across the province. 
Because if the member were to listen, and I’ve described to the 
member in the past, when you take a look at the number of bed 
closures across the province, Mr. Speaker, and you see what 
happened in the funding shift, you see this, Mr. Speaker, that in 
Saskatchewan we’ve reduced only 7 per cent of the number of 
beds. 
 
When you look across the rest of the country, Mr. Speaker — 
led by and chirping from their benches are the previous Tory 
people here — when you take a look at them . . . and then the 
Tory Party talks about what’s happened with them. Alberta 
Tory’s have reduced their beds by 33 per cent; Nova Scotia by 
33 per cent — Liberal or Tory, same old story in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Judicial Review of Pollution Claim 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Speaker, as you 
will recall, a young man by the name of Perry Anton, a farmer 
from Fox Valley, suffered severe pollution on his ranch. 
\ 
For the past six years Perry and Charlotte Anton have been 
trying to get this government to just do something to bring them 
justice. Retired judge Ken Halvorson has been appointed to 
look into this matter. And I quote very quickly from a letter that 
I received that was written by Perry Anton just last week. And I 
quote: 
 

The judge can’t even call on the people involved in this 
mess. Mr. Halvorson seems like a very nice man. 

 
We now have a fair judge but an unfair rule for him to follow. 
Okay, Minister, give us a fair crack at this; we are asking you to 
change the terms of reference so that they are fair. And let’s get 
on with this. Mr. Deputy Premier, would you let Perry Anton 
and his wife Charlotte have justice and would you get on with 
this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to say that the minister responsible for SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management), that 
department and my department have been working diligently 
with the member opposite to find a fair solution to Mr. Anton’s 
problem. We have, as he indicated, appointed Mr. Halvorson to 
take a fair and an impartial review of this situation. And based 

on his recommendations, hopefully a solution can be found. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that if you look at this issue, you 
look at what these two departments have done, I think that we 
have given Mr. Anton and his family a very, very fair review. 
We are willing to have Mr. Halvorson find a solution, find a fair 
solution. The terms of reference are fair, they’re adequate, and 
we support them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
whoever has some intelligence on this issue that wants to 
answer it. Because the fact of the matter is that anybody who 
writes a set of terms of reference is naturally going to think that 
they are fair. 
 
The reality is that the judge doesn’t think they’re fair; Perry 
Anton doesn’t think they’re fair; and the thousands of farmers 
and ranchers in this province who have their farms and ranches 
polluted from time to time, they don’t think this is fair process 
either. They believe that this whole process is nothing but a 
cover-up to allow the big oil companies and gas companies to 
continue to pollute for their profits while you do nothing about 
what has to be done to save the quality of our water and the 
quality of our land and the quality of our air. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you come clean with the people of 
Saskatchewan, assist the people of this province to tackle these 
problems so that we don’t all end up dying the way that people 
have in other jurisdictions where these very same problems 
have occurred in the past? 
 
Mr. Speaker, my direct question to the minister. Are you going 
to at least give Perry Anton some justice so that we can get on 
with the larger problem at hand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 
fairness I think we would expect fairness from that member as 
well. I talked with him behind the rail just the other day with 
respect to this issue, and it was his indication to me that day that 
he agreed that what these two departments in this government 
have offered was indeed a fair process for Mr. Anton. 
 
Now today the member stands up grandstanding in the dying 
days of this session, and I want to say, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 
Speaker, if there is a lack of credibility on process or on the 
issue, certainly it’s from that member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again my question is to 
whoever wants to answer it. The truth of the matter is, Mr. 
Speaker, that I would have been quite prepared to leave this go 
at two questions, quite prepared to let the minister answer that 
he would do something that the judge’s asked him to do. The 
judge finds this to be an unfair process. 
 
But I want to go on further because his personal attack now has 
gotten into it. The truth of the matter is that nobody, but 
absolutely nobody, in this province trusts the Minister of 
Energy and Mines. 
 



1716 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Everybody that I talk to, everybody that I’m in contact with 
with pollution problems that relate to the oil and gas industry 
says, go to the Premier, go to anybody, but don’t talk to the 
Minister of Energy and Mines because he not only won’t show 
up for the meetings that people call where he says and promises 
he’ll be there — two of them in fact with these same people that 
have been involved in these very problems — he refuses to 
come. 
 
Mr. Minister, how about if you pull up your bootstraps. Will 
you commit today to meeting with Perry Anton yourself instead 
of passing the buck to everybody else and then telling little 
stories about what was said and what wasn’t said that didn’t in 
fact even happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say again to 
the member opposite, I believe that we have found a reasoned 
process by which this can be resolved. I’m certainly willing to 
meet with the member. I’m willing to meet with Mr. Anton, as 
I’m sure all of my colleagues are, in terms of this issue. 
 
We have just recently spoken — my department has spoken — 
with Mr. Halvorson with respect to the terms of reference to 
clarify the broad nature of these. But if there is some 
misunderstanding in terms of the terms of reference, I’m more 
than willing, as my colleagues are, to meet with Mr. Anton, Mr. 
Halvorson, or yourself, sir, whatever it will take. 
 
What we want is a fair and a decent and a reasoned resolve to 
what has been a very long dispute between a private landowner 
and an oil and gas company and we’re looking for a fair 
resolution to this. We’re attempting to facilitate that and we will 
continue to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 226  The Referendum and Plebiscite Amendment 
Act, 1998 (Constitutional Amendment Referendums) 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the first 
reading of Bill No. 226, The Referendum and Plebiscite 
Amendment Act, 1998, known as the Constitutional 
Amendment Referendums. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise pursuant to 
rule 46 to ask leave to move a motion of urgent and pressing 
nature. 
 
The Speaker: — Now the hon. member from Saltcoats requests 
leave to introduce a motion under rule 46 on a matter of urgent 
and pressing necessity, and to set aside the ordinary business of 
the House in order to entertain it. I’ll ask the hon. member to 
very, very briefly advise the House as to why he feels the House 
should set aside its business and the nature of the motion he 
wishes to introduce. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Funding for National Highways Program 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
given that the Prime Minister is in town today, this would be 
good opportunity to point out to the federal Liberals their 
failure in bringing about a national highways program. 
 
The feds must take responsibility, at least for the national 
highways such as the Trans-Canada and the Yellowhead. Other 
provinces have been given federal money for highways to the 
tune of hundreds of millions of dollars, next to nothing for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d read the motion at this time. 
 

That this Assembly condemns the federal Liberal 
government for its failure to implement a national 
highways program making Canada one of the only nations 
in the western world without such a program, and further 
urges the federal Liberal government to put into place a 
national transportation strategy that provides for adequate 
highway funding for all provinces, including 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 

The Chair: — Before we start I would ask the minister to 
introduce her officials please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Today I’m 
pleased to introduce the deputy of the department, Dan Perrins; 
behind me, Ken Alecxe, associate deputy minister; Mae Boa, 
executive director of finance and operations. And seated across 
the back, John Biss, executive director university services; 
Brady Salloum, director of student financial assistance; Wayne 
McElree, executive director of programs; and Paul Fudge, 
executive director of operations for SCN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Network). 
 
Subvote (PE01) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Welcome, Madam Minister, and also to your officials. We had 
an opportunity to ask some questions in estimates — I believe it 
was back in the middle of May, and we didn’t have a whole lot 
of time that day so I would hope that we can move through a 
number of things. 
 
Madam Minister, that session ended with some discussion on 
the universities in Saskatchewan — the University of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Regina — and dealing with 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

the recommendations that had been made by Mr. Harold 
MacKay in the MacKay report. 
 
And I think your comments were that there were many things 
that had taken place already and that you had indeed identified a 
number of the points that you had put forward. I think in 
something you called the post-MacKay report, back in the 
middle of March, where you highlighted some of the 
accomplishments I guess and developments that you saw. 
 
(1430) 
 
Madam Minister, I guess the question that I would have is that, 
we have seen in the last year, and of course over the course of 
the next year, that both presidents of the U of R (University of 
Regina) and the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) will be 
leaving their positions. And I think key to ensuring that 
suggestions of the MacKay report get to see the light of day 
depended upon that guidance from the highest level at the 
administration at both universities. 
 
Now that we’re seeing a shift in terms of changes, at both, of 
the presidents’ levels, and I’m not familiar with the current new 
president of the U of R, or who might be selected by next year 
in terms of the U of S. But as far as the planning that is going 
on, the kinds of things that you see happening at the university, 
will the changes at the presidency levels, will this have any 
effect on the kind of collaboration, on the kind changes that you 
have seen take place at the U of R, and what kind of difficulties 
do you see happen with the changing of those two offices? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The leadership 
at the universities is certainly an important part of getting the 
work done, and we certainly thank President Wells for all the 
good work he’s done over the past several years. 
 
But part of these kind of changes is to have both universities 
embrace the culture of change and to incorporate the kind of 
working relationships needed to make the changes happen. And 
I think they’ve done a lot of work over the past year at building 
the working relationships, and we’ve got three levels of process 
by which people officially get together to discuss progress on 
the MacKay items. And as well, you know, there’s the 
DesRosiers report now, which is creating further momentum for 
the discussion. 
 
So I think if you take the degree to which people have taken this 
work seriously — embraced it within their organization but also 
the external changes that are forcing the need to continue with 
this work at any rate regardless of people’s preferences — I 
think that the environment becomes too compelling for anybody 
to back off of the work that needs doing. 
 
So I am totally confident that the universities and the people 
from the department will continue work in the path that they’ve 
been going. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Chair, Madam Minister, the items that you have identified as 
successes so far with the adoption of the MacKay report, have 
you seen a significant amount of financial savings? Have you 
seen a significant amount of program changes improvements to 
program? 

Are you satisfied with what changes have been implemented, 
and what do you see as an additional need to have a focus on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One of the important things, even to be 
able to compare whether you’re making progress, is to have 
some common assumptions about what you’re measuring and 
how you’re measuring it. So some of the administrative work 
that’s been done around common budget designations, common 
ways of evaluating expenditures — there’s been a lot of work 
done at the administrative level on doing that. 
 
So we have a situation now where not only is it possible to 
compare what’s going on in both universities with more 
accuracy, but it’s also possible for them to then identify where 
they’re making real progress. 
 
Some of the things are administrative, some are in the areas of 
joint purchasing, and some are in the areas of improved sharing 
of teaching resources. And certainly things like the high-speed 
link between the two universities, co-operation on the 
engineering program, some of the distance ed initiatives. I think 
this is also giving them more capacity and more efficiency on 
the instructional and teaching level as well. So I think that the 
only way we can go on this is up. But certainly it’s 
administrative, it’s purchasing, it’s teaching — it’s on all levels 
that they’re cooperating. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, recently the vice-president 
of academics at the University of Saskatchewan announced that 
they were going to be redirecting, I think was the word that he 
used, a significant amount of money — over a million and a 
half dollars — to try to have the University of Saskatchewan 
regain some of its status that it had lost and the slippage that has 
occurred. I’m sure that that must concern you as the minister 
responsible that indeed we are being rated far lower than what 
we were not too many years ago. 
 
With the kind of comments that the vice-president makes where 
he suggests that . . . I think his quote was that “compared with 
support for penitentiaries and support for labour initiatives, 
universities have failed miserably”. That’s his quotation. 
 
I’m wondering what kind of meeting you have had with the 
University of Saskatchewan to alleviate those kinds of 
concerns. And if there is such a crippling situation at the 
University of Saskatchewan and the redirection of monies — a 
million and a half dollars — is taking place, what areas, what 
programs are going to be on the chopping block if the money is 
being reallocated from existing programs? Are you aware of 
what programs the University of Saskatchewan is looking at 
cutting or eliminating? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again because a very long time ago 
and for very good reasons, a principle of autonomy was 
developed to basically prevent political interference in 
universities, certainly it’s up to them to undertake the 
examination . . . to both look at what they most appropriately 
should be providing the students in the province and students 
who come into the province, but also to look at what they can 
sustain on a ongoing basis. 
 
You may have seen the headline in the Star-Phoenix recently, 
an initial take on DesRosiers, that the universities compared to 



1718 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

other universities in Canada seemed to be reasonably 
adequately funded. In fact I’m being cautious; the statement 
was much stronger than that. 
 
But the comments you’re referring to were made before the 
budget. And I’ve certainly had letters from the president of the 
university saying that this recent budget has gone a long way to 
helping them meet their capital needs and allows them the room 
in operating that they need — the increase of 8.8 million in 
operating and 9 million extra in capital. So I think that their 
concerns have gone way down since the announcement of the 
budget but we still have some work to do and I think certainly 
Mr. Atkinson and Mr. Whitworth and others are looking hard at 
the range of programs and services provided, and looking at 
whether there’s some ways they can achieve better integration 
in some of their program areas rather than having as many 
separate and distinct programs as they have. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, when I met with the University of Saskatchewan 
Students’ Union back a short while ago, there was definite 
concern about the elimination of programs at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the students there were expressing a great concern that this 
indeed would place Saskatchewan, as a province, in a situation 
where we won’t be able to attract people from outside of the 
province. I’m wondering if you could elaborate on the reduction 
of those programs at the U of S. 
 
And secondly — because of some of the initiatives that have 
been undertaken by both universities here in Saskatchewan — 
are there similar kinds of things occurring at the University of 
Regina where we will see the elimination of particular programs 
or particular classes? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I don’t think any of their discussions 
have arrived at the point yet where they’ve specifically 
earmarked things for elimination. 
 
But what I will say, in today’s new, more competitive 
educational environment — you may have seen in The Globe 
and Mail a recent half-page ad soliciting students from across 
Canada for their business administration area — And we’re 
seeing more and more that students have a lot more choice 
about where they take their education, what time of day they 
take it, whether they take it in a classroom, on the Internet, 
through CD-ROM (compact disc read-only memory). There’s 
just a whole range of options now that are available that were 
never available before. 
 
So I think the universities will have to look at their ability to be 
competitive in this new environment, both from the point of 
view of quality of program, number of students, level of 
technology, and ability to deliver through a variety of mediums. 
And I don’t envy them in a way, their task. 
 
This is not a simple change that’s taking place. It’s a very 
sweeping change and it will be a much more competitive 
environment. And I think that may help make some of their 
decisions for them as they look at what they can reasonably 
sustain and offer a high level, quality program that’s 
competitive. 

Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, one of the other concerns 
that is on the minds of students — and I again heard about it in 
the last week of course, after the report on university funding 
and the level of funding expected from government. 
 
We’ve noticed in the province of Ontario that recently tuition 
fees are going to be increasing; that the portion that students 
will be expected to pay will continue to increase. The concern 
of course from students in both universities here in this 
province, is that tuition fees will continue to rise at an 
unacceptable level. 
 
You’ve indicated that you felt that the administration has felt 
that they are able to control those kinds of costs by some of the 
things that have happened within their control. Yet we do see 
tuition fee increases not only that took place last year but those 
that are proposed for this fiscal year at both of the universities. 
 
Madam Minister, has your government considered working 
with the universities in trying to establish a cap whereby tuition 
fees cannot increase beyond a certain level each year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — On the notion of a cap, I think as a 
general rule of thumb, we’ve said that tuition should be in line 
with the tuitions across Canada, and certainly we don’t want to 
see Saskatchewan sticking out as being higher than other 
tuitions. 
 
The money provided to the universities in this budget did allow 
them to take less Draconian measures than they may have had 
to, and certainly the University of Regina coming in at 2 per 
cent was a big improvement over the original projection . . . 
original pre-budget projection. 
 
One of the complicated parts of this whole tuition discussion is 
when we have students who get loans — which about 40 per 
cent of students apply for loans — 75 per cent of their costs are 
living expenses. So 75 per cent of the problem is not really 
specifically a tuition problem. It’s more the costs of students 
being able to live while they’re going to school. So I think 
there’s some access issues that don’t have specifically to do 
with tuition that we’re going to have to take a look at in this 
whole thing as well. 
 
But with the improvement to the student loans and the bursary 
this year, both by the provincial and to a lesser degree the 
federal government, I think that students who have hardship 
will find that they’ll be in a much better situation going into this 
year than they have been in any previous year. 
 
Now what we want to make sure is that we don’t create a 
situation where there’s a gap in access to professional programs 
such as medicine, law, engineering, and those kinds of things. 
And I think we’re going to have to keep a close eye on this and 
to continue to urge the universities to work harder at their 
fund-raising campaigns and other sources of revenue rather than 
tuition. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That area that 
you’ve opened up of course is in the area of student financing 
of education and the like, and we’ll come back to that if I might. 
 
I’d like to just ask you a couple of comments about a discussion 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1719 

that we had last time and that was regarding the provincial 
training allowance and the provincial youth allowance. You 
indicated I think in your report at the latter part of March that 
you had reached a new agreement on how the PTAs and PYAs 
were going to be handled. And you’ve indicated that there was 
going to be significant change in terms of actual finances and 
who they would be paid to. Rather than training institutions, 
you’re now talking direct financing to clients. Your report I 
think indicated that well over 351 youth clients were involved 
in the previous year and nearly 3,000 in the other category. 
 
Madam Minister, how will this affect students, both adult and 
youth, in terms of how they will be able to receive the training? 
Will it be a benefit to them? Will it allow easier access to 
training programs or will it be much more difficult now for 
students to be able to be admitted into training programs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The reason we had to confer a little bit 
there . . . was there was sort of three different programs that 
were combined in your remarks and we wanted to sort out the 
different parts. 
 
I think the 350 that you’re referring to is the Youth Futures in 
P.A. (Prince Albert) and that program has a waiting list of 
young people waiting to get into it. And certainly it seems to be 
working well and is well regarded so far. Of course we’re going 
to be doing an evaluation on it to make sure that it’s achieving 
the results that we all hope for, but at the moment it’s looking 
very promising. And when you’ve got a waiting list of young 
people waiting to get in and do the responsible thing, that’s kind 
of encouraging as well. 
 
(1445) 
 
The provincial training allowance is the change in supporting 
people through social assistance and instead giving them 
supports into the mainstream for basic education. And we 
haven’t had an increase in the number of people who have been 
accessing that, and we’re very hopeful again that this’ll achieve 
the objectives of getting people more situated in the 
school-to-work environment rather than in the dependency 
environment of social assistance. 
 
The other issue about the direct funding: the place where that 
change has taken place was in the EI (Employment Insurance) 
legislation, where instead of doing seat purchase — the federal 
government — now the money travels with the individual. And 
this could create some problems in the predictability of training 
because before with the institutions receiving the money, they 
could hire an instructor, offer a course, and the students could 
enrol. 
 
But with less money going directly to the institutions, it makes 
it a little iffier how that instructor and that facility is going to be 
there to provide that predictable service. And we may find 
ourselves in more contract relationships with employers, with 
students, where there’s a group that needs a particular type of 
training. But it certainly increases the level of uncertainty for 
the educational institutions and may therefore have some effect 
on those programs being readily there and identifiable by 
students. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, as you are aware today we 

raised some questions, the Saskatchewan Party raised some 
questions today, on the EI fund, the federal EI fund, and 
significant dollars have been accumulated in that fund, I think 
upwards of $15 billion . . . projected to increase to as high as 20 
billion by the end of the year. 
 
I understand, and I’ve had an opportunity to review some of the 
comments by the Post-Secondary minister from last year 
responding to questions where he indicated that indeed the 
responsibility for delivering that program was now going to be 
shifted to the provincial government and that it would be much 
more difficult for the purchasing of seats to occur at the 
provincial level. It would be a greater financial burden on the 
province. 
 
I’m wondering then if with the fact that the federal fund is 
growing in huge numbers, have you been able to reach a new 
agreement with the federal government regarding EI funding of 
programs? What will we be able to see people who for, you 
know, no choice of their own because of changes in jobs, 
because of changes in classifications, have been forced to look 
at re-training and will rely on that assistance from the EI fund? 
 
Has Saskatchewan been able to arrive at any new programs and 
any new type of agreements with the federal government on EI 
funding of training programs in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the difficult part of this 
discussion is the federal government still has complete 
jurisdiction over how EI funds will be collected and expended. 
We’re really only providing the training portion of the EI 
services and the labour market service portion so we are not 
actually in discussion over their jurisdiction to the EI fund. Now 
we certainly, as the Minister of Finance said earlier today in 
question period, we certainly would have our own suggestions 
over what should be done with that fund, but it’s completely in 
the hands of the federal government. 
 
And there are people who have concerns with how that fund is 
used for training because of course people who have never been 
on EI don’t have access to it, and there’s certainly people who 
feel that some of those resources should be used to meet those 
kinds of training needs. And as well people who perhaps 
couldn’t access the training opportunity during the time they 
were on EI may feel that they have some needs. 
 
So we have some specific needs in the training area but there’s 
also, from the finance perspective, the need to look at how big 
that fund really needs to be to provide a bit of a cushion in a 
downturn. And then to look at whether there’s a way to make it 
a little easier for employers to have a little less burden on that 
front as far as the payment of those funds. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, one of your . . . actually it 
is the document, the Estimates document, indicates that the 
number of full-time equivalents have grown from 223 to 350, 
and I know you had a small opportunity to make a comment on 
that the last time. When we talk about 127 new positions as far 
as being under Post-Secondary Education, where did the people 
. . . have there been new people hired? Where did the people 
come from? Were they the responsibility of the federal 
government before? Or have you just been amalgamating 
departments and putting them under one roof? 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can give you a quite specific answer 
on that: 46 of the employees are New Careers, now that’s 
full-time equivalents so there may be actually more individuals 
involved; 71 of those positions are labour market agreement 
with the federal government, so those would be the federal 
employees moving over; and then 10 are actually employees to 
do with new work that we’re doing in the department. 
 
And I could give you the detail on that if you’d like. There’s 3 
for the career information hot-line; 1 on the university 
revitalisation work; 1 on the technology issues related to the 
labour market information; 1 on accountability and evaluation; 
2 on apprenticeship field positions, because we want to 
strengthen work in the apprenticeship area; 1 on the sectoral 
partnership program; and 1 on youth employment. And that’s 
basically the disposition of those positions. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I think we’ve for a number 
of years felt that Saskatchewan could deliver quality 
post-secondary education, and job training and skills. With the 
shift from the federal government in terms of actually passing 
on not only less, maybe less finances, but also passing on a 
greater responsibility to your department, do you feel that the 
needs of Saskatchewan students will be better met by the type 
of mechanism that we have in place now to deal with 
post-secondary training; to deal with job skills; to deal with all 
of the programs necessary for not only students on social 
assistance, those on EI, and those just moving into a 
post-secondary institution from high school. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m going to answer that question on 
two levels. One is the national level. There’s no question that 
the labour market agreement will give us a better opportunity to 
provide single-window service. But at the same time, we don’t 
want the federal government out of the game. 
 
We think, as our national representative to an international 
economy, a global economy, that they have a responsibility to 
make sure that the entire Canadian workforce is competitive on 
a global basis. And there are certainly things that they need to 
do, standards that need to be set across Canada, things like the 
red seal program in the trades that makes people in 
apprenticeship trades mobile across Canada. 
 
We think there’s many things that the federal government 
should still involve themselves in and be concerned with as far 
as national standards and national resourcing of what are 
essentially national issues. But as far as the local delivery of 
labour market and training in education services, we think the 
current agreement is going to work very well for us. 
 
As far as provincial delivery, there’s no area of education that 
hasn’t gone through a rethinking. We’ve done the university 
revitalization, the Bridges to Employment which is the training 
strategy linking training more directly to the labour force. The 
work with the REDAs (regional economic development 
authority) to have the regions look hard at their needs and to 
link up the regional colleges with the REDAs so that they can 
work more closely for the development of the various economic 
regions of Saskatchewan. 
 
We think all of this is going to produce great results for us over 
the next few years, but it’s a pretty dramatic change in the way 

of doing things. And so whereas many short-term successes are 
felt, I think it’s going to take a year or two to get all the new 
changes firmly on the ground. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I’d like to now switch to an area I think that’s very 
dear to many students, and maybe even very dear to many 
parents who have children who have student loans, and that’s 
that whole area of financing of student loans. 
 
I’d like to begin by a statistic that you’re very aware of, Madam 
Minister, in that from 1991 to 1996 we saw an increase in the 
number of student loan bankruptcies of about 87 per cent. 
Significant increase and no doubt taxpayers on the whole have 
been responsible for picking up a lot of that tab. 
 
A change occurred where we now see the financing of student 
loans through one financial institution. Have you had any 
opportunity to have statistics and information provided to you 
to give you an idea where we’re moving as far as the direction 
of student loan bankruptcies. Will it be decreasing? Because I 
understand from the Royal Bank that they have been not only 
assuming new student loans but have also assumed the entire 
package that was there before. What kind of changes are 
occurring in the number of student loan bankruptcies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well we’d like to able to give you an 
answer to that today, but at the moment again we’re in a period 
of change. The federal government has changed some of the 
bankruptcy rules for students and we’ve changed our bursary 
arrangement with students, and I think it’s going to take about a 
year to see how these changes will play out as far as the actual 
bankruptcies. But I certainly hope we get the opportunity to be 
in our respective seats asking this question again a year from 
now, and you could ask me that question again. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I’m sure that the question will surface again, 
Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the concerns that is also expressed 
from the universities — the new academic vice-president at the 
University of Saskatchewan has indicated that the emergency 
student loan division that is handled . . . has been very, very 
active this last year. In fact almost over-active, and I’m 
wondering if your department is concerned about that, the fact 
that students are having to seek emergency student loan by the 
end of their session. It seems to be on the increase. Is that so? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, these particular funds are 
administered by the universities; they’re not administered by us. 
And they have a whole range of reasons why people might get 
them, everything from a death in the family, perhaps — I’m 
only guessing here — it could be dental work, it could be 
anything. But it’s something that isn’t dealt with directly with 
us. 
 
And certainly as far as the core needs of the student, every 
student in the province is evaluated on the same basis: their 
living costs, their tuition costs, their capacity to pay. So this 
would be something that would be of a very particular nature 
related to that specific student. If a student’s circumstance 
changes as far as income or expenses, that would be a matter for 
our student loan department and we would review it. But it 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

would have to be a change in their fundamental circumstance, 
not an emergency. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, it was my understanding 
that your department does pay for . . . partially pay for an 
employee that is located at the University of Saskatchewan 
dealing with emergency student loans. That’s not so? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Apparently this is totally — you’ve 
taught me something today — this is totally a program of the 
students, the student union. And we go up for a couple of 
sessions to hear appeals and what not for our program. 
 
But the particular one you’re referring to is a student union 
program and doesn’t involve us, although if they were having 
some difficulties with something we would give them some 
advice and support. But it’s not anything to do with us and we 
don’t fund it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, in the light of, you know, the student loan 
bankruptcies that we’ve seen throughout the 90s, the current 
demand for additional emergency loans that seem to be on the 
increase, what is your department doing to provide, I guess, 
technical assistance, to provide advice? 
 
To provide all the things necessary to not only the students at 
the student union office who are trying to do that as a program 
of the student union, but also to provide provincial assistance to 
students that say, you know, like: don’t get into this situation at 
the very, very beginning? And being able to provide, I guess, 
financial planning; being able to be able to provide advice on 
expenditures, and the like. 
 
Because I think what we’re seeing is that by the end of a term, 
if a person is relying on student loans, the report in the . . . the 
task group report has indicated that the debt load for students is 
increased dramatically over the last 10 years. The total debt at 
the end is severe. And if we’re to provide any help to anyone, it 
would be to ensure that there isn’t going to be the potential of a 
bankruptcy. 
 
How is your department involved in that type of advice? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s no doubt that the quality of 
decisions and the successful outcomes for students is very 
dependent on the quality of information that they get. 
 
We’ve actually put quite a bit of effort into this year — 
everything from the career toll-free line, where people can call 
if they’re at all wondering what their best options are, but also 
new materials in the area of apprenticeship, JobStart, Future 
Skills, letting students know that they have a whole range of 
options. 
 
And it’s interesting. I might just mention a study that was done 
in Alberta where the vast majority of high school students 
thought they were headed for university, but about 50 per cent 
less actually ended up in university than thought they were 
going to. So obviously there is a perception gap for students 
between what’s there and what they might actually access and 

what they believe is what they’re going to access. So there’s no 
question that a whole bunch of more effort needs to be put and 
is being put on the earlier years when a student is making up 
their minds. 
 
Some of those things are work experience programs. I think the 
high schools that are doing some of the work placement 
programs are very important and very innovative because the 
students gets a chance to see whether they really have an 
interest in an area before they’ve committed a whole bunch of 
resources and time to it, and as well with the new labour market 
agreement. 
 
And as we go to a more unified labour market information 
system that gives people information about financial supports, 
program options, etc., we’re hoping that the more single 
centralized collection of this information will free up the 
councillors to spend more time with the students that they work 
with and not be so much involved in information collection. 
Because it’s very difficult for them to keep up with the load of 
information on new occupations, new skill requirements, new 
educational offerings. 
 
I think when you’re talking about a new economy a lot of the 
jobs are new and people aren’t really familiar sometimes with 
what those jobs are so there’s a lot of work that needs to be 
done even in describing that economy to people. But I think a 
really big role that we can all play and certainly employers can 
play is to give students that work experience. 
 
Now in the financial fund with the banks becoming more 
involved, you’ve probably seen banks now that are putting out 
fairly substantial financial management programs for young 
people involved in loans and banking. They’ve got CD-ROMs 
(compact disc read-only memory), Internet links and what not, 
and a lot of people are actually choosing to borrow directly 
from a bank as opposed to using a student loan program 
depending on what their individual circumstance is. 
 
So I think that we probably have a generation of students 
coming up for . . . a little more financially savvy than they were 
before. I mean many young people now have RRSPs (registered 
retirement savings plan) which is something we wouldn’t have 
thought of until we were much older. 
 
So what we’re doing is working with the student councillors, 
with the career days at the schools, with the toll-free career line, 
with trying to get the advertising out there that lets students 
know they have options. We’re just making every effort we can 
to give them the best information we can so that that a good 
decision is made early on and they don’t get into debt going 
down a path which isn’t the right path for them. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Your comment 
intrigued me. I think you suggested that someone who might be 
eligible for a student loan because they would not have their 
own income etc., would not do that, and would go to a financial 
institution directly. I’m not sure that I could recall anyone who 
would do that if indeed the student loan has some forgivable 
part to it as well. So maybe you could comment on that as well. 
 
Madam Minister, you did mention providing advice by way of 
career counselling, by way of career days at high schools. And 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

the question that I have for you is, whose responsibility is it to 
tell the students about the student loan program that is in place 
in Saskatchewan? Are those counsellors from your department 
or will they be specifically counsellors, or I guess financial 
advisers, from the financial institution, in this case, the Royal 
Bank. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well basically one of the things that I 
think that . . . well the Minister of Social Services — I just 
thought perhaps I shouldn’t use his name — the Minister of 
Social Services and myself have found out that when there’s 
money available you don’t have to advertise real hard, but . . . 
as he’s found out in his new income support program. 
 
But the fact is that we do a lot of general advertising. I’m sure 
there would not be a high school in the province who does not 
let students know about this. And as well I think the 1-800 
career hot line is a very important addition to how people get 
information. 
 
But it is our program; it is our responsibility to make sure that 
anybody who is in a role of advising people, of giving career 
counselling, has this information and we certainly do make sure 
that they’ve got it. Now whether they use it is one step down 
the line and certainly we work with them to make sure they do. 
But we do work with all the people who are responsible for 
providing this kind of information in the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Specific question, Madam Minister. As far as 
the calculations and I know that all students are treated equally 
across the province if they of course are in the same categories, 
and that is a single versus single person with children. 
 
Is there any calculation — and this is an intriguing question, 
because I had a couple of calls on it — is there any report of 
assets of parents that is necessary or is required by your 
department or the bank before a student loan is actually 
determined? Or is it strictly based on income for that year of not 
only the individual. I guess if they’re a student right out of high 
school terms are a little different than someone who’s in the 
middle of their university, or not only university but also 
post-secondary training. Or does it strictly depend upon income 
earned? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The assets of a student would be taken 
into consideration but not the assets of the parents. That’s 
strictly based on income and the relationship that the student 
has with the parent. You know why they’re living at home, etc. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Would you then be surprised to hear that 
Royal Bank is asking students for the complete asset description 
of their parents before they would consider a student loan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, Mr. Salloum has just verified what 
I would have thought about it, is that if it’s their own loan 
product, they can ask whatever they want because they have 
their own student loan products. 
 
If it’s the one they’re administering for us, no they’re not to ask 
that question. So we would need to know whether it was a 
situation where it was a Royal Bank product, or whether it was 
our student loan product. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Would you then be expecting Royal Bank to 
try to ensure that students would take their student loan product 
and not even consider the student loan of the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I suspect that some of the students that 
would take the Royal loan product would be people who may 
not qualify for student loan, but for reason of cash flow or 
perhaps they’re going to be working at a job and they’ll be able 
to pay it back, have decided that they want the more 
straightforward relationship of a line of credit or something like 
that rather than getting into a student loan. 
 
So I would suspect that for the most part these are students who 
are perhaps a bit less needy and a little more straightforward 
about their borrowing and repayment capacity. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, in the Finance minister’s address he noted a number 
of significant changes to the student loan area. Could you 
summarize the specific changes for some of the groups? And 
overall, what are the improvements to the student loan plan that 
would affect all students — not just those, for instance, with 
children. 
 
Could you give that breakdown, first of all n terms of how the 
changes that your government has suggested, how those 
changes will affect all students; and then specifically, for the 
various categories, the changes that you’re intending. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Twenty-two million of the dollars were 
partly new dollars out 6 million, but also converting old dollars 
that used to be used as loan forgiveness and taking that money 
up front into a bursary program. 
 
Now it is targeted at high-need students and it does give 
increased financial assistance for students with dependants. And 
as well, it includes some tax changes for dependants that are 
harmonized with the federal tax changes that were announced in 
the federal budget, which also was extended to part-time as well 
as full-time students. 
 
Now one of the big advantages of this shift is that students have 
more financial certainty. They know upfront that they’re going 
to qualify for that money. They don’t have to wait until they get 
into debt and apply for a loan forgiveness later on. As well, for 
students with dependants, it levels the playing-field, where their 
level of debt should not be greater than for a student without 
dependants, because a lot of their costs are related to the living 
costs of supporting dependants — child care, that kind of thing. 
 
And we’ve really enhanced the assistance to those students to 
make it more possible for students with dependants to get 
post-secondary education. Because of course they’re the most 
likely to be trapped in a situation where they can’t upgrade their 
education and therefore they have less of a capacity to support 
their children and to create that quality environment for their 
children to grow up in. So we’ve tried to make it easier for 
those kinds of students to get back to school and to create a 
better situation for their families. 
 
Now the changes in the income tax area amounted to about 5 
million. We don’t have any experience yet with whether this 
will achieve the objectives that we hope it will. But certainly 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

we’re optimistic that this should be a simpler system and a 
better system for a high need students, students with 
dependants, and all students with need generally. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, one of the 
recommendations of the task group on student assistance was 
that the maximum level of assistance provided to a student, I 
think was at $275 per week — that that should be increased for 
all students. And you’ve indicated that a large cost of a 
student’s education are living costs. 
 
And I know you’ve talked in this House about increases to not 
only to utility costs, but also things like textbooks, materials. 
You’ve also indicated that there were student costs that were 
unexpected . . . that damage deposits that increased with the 
change in legislation — that some of the things that students 
incurred as far as costs, changed significantly. 
 
Did your current budget address those needs and has the 
maximum assistance level changed for all students? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We did increase the maximum level for 
people with dependants, because again when we took a hard 
look — the student assistance task force took a hard look at 
who was having the difficulties — certainly the 20 per cent of 
students out of the 40 per cent who borrow, who had difficulty, 
were largely people with dependants. So we did increase the 
level for those students, but the level remained the same for 
students without dependants. 
 
Now if you understand the student loan program, it’s a 60/40 
sharing with the federal government. So that 275 you talk of is 
made up of 165 federal and 110 provincial. And right now 
we’re in a process of negotiating a number of changes with the 
federal government on student loans, but one of the things we’ll 
be looking at is getting them to increase their portion and then 
we would increase our 40 per cent to go along with it. 
 
But we really want them to come to the table on this, especially 
considering some of the discussions around the millennium 
scholarship. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I think you announced 
some changes about when the bursary level would kick in, that 
that level had changed as well, or is it the same level that was 
previously in existence? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s the same for the need calculation. 
What’s changed is the amount of support to people with 
dependants. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, of the 20 per cent or of the 
40 per cent that you indicated, how many students on average in 
the province of Saskatchewan would qualify for some bursary 
as part of their entire student loan program for the year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — About 40 per cent of the students who 
borrow would be eligible for the enhanced level of benefit, and 
that would be made up of both the high-need and the students 
with dependants. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Forty per cent, Madam Minister, I guess 
would translate then into somewhere between 6,000 and 6,500 

students then that would . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 6,000 to 
6,500, who would actually benefit from a bursary, if I read your 
numbers correctly. 
 
Madam Minister, I guess the question that is being asked by 
many students who are looking at financing their own education 
is that . . . Your announcements this year, the federal 
announcements this year, have done improvements to those 42 
per cent that acquire a student loan. 
 
There are 58 per cent of the people attending post-secondary 
education who finance their own education either through, I 
guess loans from parents, or as you’ve indicated maybe a 
financial institution based student loan, or they are just 
financially well off to be able to incur four years of costs. What 
kinds of things, besides the tax credit for the interest, are being 
put in place to address the concerns that students are facing, and 
the whole need to be able to finance their own education? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s a number of tax changes. I’ll 
just quickly go through them. Borrowers are now able to claim 
a tax credit on the interest portion of federal and provincial 
student loans because, again, I mentioned we harmonized. And 
this will be effective in the 1998 tax year. 
 
Students in part-time studies, who couldn’t claim at all before, 
will now be able to claim an education tax credit and a child 
care expense deduction. Tax free RRSP withdrawals can take 
place for post-secondary students, subject to conditions. And as 
well, there is the Canadian Education Savings Grant, which is 
more for I guess the students of the future. But certainly I’ve 
talked to young families who are planning to make use of that 
measure. 
 
(1515) 
 
And as well, the grants to the universities have certainly created 
a reduction in the university’s need to get more of their revenue 
from the students. So I think those measures were the ones that 
affected all students. 
 
And the other commitment we’ve made to students, again 
coming out of the student assistant task force, is that we would 
work on improving youth employment opportunities, both as far 
as the quality of the jobs and the income earned from those 
jobs, but also the availability of those jobs. And some of that 
will likely be further developments in the work study area and 
the co-op study area because that seems to work very well for 
many students. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, that was the point that I was hoping you would touch 
on is some of the recommendations of the student task force, 
where I think they have addressed a number of concerns. 
 
Because no matter how we look at it, the end result will be is 
that a student will have a debt if they are financing it at their 
own . . . by their own choice or through a student loan. And if 
that debt can be reduced in any significant way, not only for the 
province but also for the students, those 58 per cent, there has to 
be an attempt to look at what small things can be done. 
 
One of the requests I think was that we start to look at the 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

amount of monthly deduction that is current in the Income Tax 
Act. That type of cost is nowhere close to what a student is 
incurring and being able to deduct from their income tax. 
 
You mentioned RRSPs and the ability for students to be able to 
use them. Well I would think that there has been a significant 
improvement from yours and my day regarding RRSPs, but I’m 
not sure that we have a whole lot of students out there who are 
going to take advantage of RRSPs. 
 
And as a result, again that is still their own money that they 
were using for — as it says, registered retirement pension, you 
know — rather than looking at saying well it’s not an education 
plan but at least I’ll be able to spend it now and hopefully be 
able to secure a job. 
 
I think one of the key elements in this report is that students 
have to be able to address repayment of student loan or 
repayment of their own loans, and that would be determined by 
the type of job and the type of income that people are able to 
secure. 
 
And I’m wondering if there is any correlation between the 
number of bankruptcies and the kinds of jobs or the inability of 
students to find jobs and whether or not your changes to the 
student loan program will have a benefit on ensuring that 
students will be able to reduce the number of bankruptcies. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m just going to mention, I don’t know 
if you noticed this as you’re reading through that material, but 
we’ve had the largest number defaults for some of the smallest 
loans like 2 and $3,000. The defaulters aren’t the 30,000; 
they’re the small loans that are defaulting, which go figure, I 
guess, why that would be? And I don’t know that we’ve gone 
intensively enough into that to really determine why that is. 
 
But from the point of view of people’s ability to repay, there 
was a recent StatsCanada study entitled “University Education 
— Is It Still Worth It.” And if you look at a graph of education 
related to both the ability to get jobs and earning power, you’re 
still on a direct upward trajectory with the number of years of 
education and your ability to be both employed and to earn an 
income. 
 
So whenever I’m talking to students I always say, if you don’t 
wish to be poor all your life, the one thing that you can do that 
will most assure that you won’t be, is to get an education 
because it correlates directly and has for many years that I can 
remember looking at these kind of figures. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Looking at 
statistics and graphs is a favourite pastime. And I note one of 
your reports has indicated that the university grad income for 
. . . and I think your numbers are a little out of date because you 
have a 1993 chart where you were indicating that $34,000 is an 
annual income for a university grad. And I’m not so much 
concerned about what is the value of the salary earned. The part 
that concerns me is that the average student debt for people who 
have attended university has grown, and the ratio of debt to 
annual income has grown from about 20 per cent in 1985 to as 
much as 35 per cent in 1993. If we were to look at 1998 
statistics — and I know we don’t have them — but if you were 
to look into the crystal ball and have your officials provide you 

with 1998 numbers next year, maybe, what would they say? 
Would they show that the average ratio of debt to annual 
income has gone from 20 to 35 in 1993 to 40 or 45, or do you 
expect it to have levelled off? Or would you expect it in fact to 
have declined slightly? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We believe that the ratio is going to 
stay about the same. The maximum debt load of regular 
students after completing four academic years of university 
with a bursary will be about 24,000, regardless of whether the 
student successfully completes each year of study. So for a 
four-year program, if you did not have another way to defray 
the costs that would be about where you’d be sitting at 
completion. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, the concerns of students are, I think, very high on the 
agenda of universities when they look at program planning. 
They’re looking at tuition fee increases being as moderate as 
possible to ensure, as you’ve indicated, that we are as 
competitive as possible. 
 
But the end result is, I think, that we have to try to do 
everything in our power as government and as people elected 
for the province of Saskatchewan to ensure that the end result 
will be is that we have highly educated and very qualified 
people in this province. But we don’t put them in a situation 
whereby debt becomes so cumbersome so that it scares away 
the potential person who would like to have a post-secondary 
education. 
 
I know you’ve indicated — and I agree with you — that the 
chances of success is far greater for those people with 
post-secondary training, whether it be at the technical level or at 
the university level. That is key — that the people who attain 
that education have the highest success rate, have the highest 
degree of attaining a salary that will allow them to be a 
productive person in society. 
 
But the key that we must address here is that I think we have to 
look at what level of student indebtedness is too much. You’re 
indicating 24,000 possibly at the end of four years. Those 
numbers, I’m sure, have risen significantly over the last five, six 
years. 
 
We have to ensure that government — not only provincial but 
federal as well — and the universities, the technical institutes, 
that we work cooperatively to ensure that that debt load is not 
going to increase to the point where we do not have students 
that will be interested in post-secondary. I would appreciate a 
comment on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I should maybe clear something up. 
The maximum debt load was the 24,000 on the four-year; the 
average is 13,000. Well, it’s close to 14 — 13,960 — so let’s 
round that up to 14,000. So that would be the average that 
students are incurring. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — And as I indicated, Madam Minister, while 
those are the student loan numbers, no question about it, there’s 
that other 58 per cent that are incurring the same kind of costs 
whether they’re using up their own bank accounts or their own 
employment accounts, or whether they’re relying on parents, 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

they continue to do. Yes, some of us continue to pay. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to turn to another topic, and that was 
the announcement, the long awaited announcement this past 
spring of, I think, something that the University of Regina and 
the province of Saskatchewan has long awaited. I’m sure that 
the aboriginal community has awaited this for a long, long time, 
and that’s the announcement of the construction of the new 
home for the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College. 
 
Madam Minister, just a couple of short questions because I’m 
not sure that this project is already under way. I know that when 
you had announced the project, you had indicated at that time 
that there were still a few things that had to be put in place. Last 
Friday on campus, I think that there was joy expressed that 
indeed this project was going to happen. 
 
Could you give us a quick update as to where the project is in 
terms of its beginning? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can let you know as far as I know. I 
know that they’ve tendered the contract for development of the 
project. And as well they are continuing with their corporate 
fund-raising efforts to pick up that 3 million that they still need, 
although I’m sure they wouldn’t feel bad if they exceeded it, 
and they certainly feel they’ll be in a much better position now 
to do that. 
 
But as far as I know they’re on track and hoping to get 
construction going as soon as possible. So as far as I know there 
is nothing at this point that would prevent this from going 
forward. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m glad to hear 
that. The other question is more for clarification. You indicated 
that the province’s financial commitment was not in the capital 
area, that indeed there were no dollars provided for capital 
funding. 
 
Mr. Goodale’s message that he circulated around the province 
through a newsletter is indicating, and this is a direct statement 
from his . . . (inaudible) . . . He says the provincial government 
is providing funds for a $5 million mortgage. And I know that 
in the House your explanation was that you’ve increased the 
amount of grants to, I think it was 800-and-some thousand 
dollars to allow the college to be able to take the mortgage for 
the additional 5 million. Mr. Goodale seems to suggest that the 
provincial government is involved in the $5 million mortgage. 
Is this so? 
 
Are you having to sign agreements that will indeed support the 
taking of a $5 million mortgage? Or is the provincial 
government at all involved with that $5 million proposed 
mortgage? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Universities have the flexibility within 
their budgets to set priorities to a very significant degree. And 
this would not be the first university that has used some of their 
operating to fund other priorities that they have. So what would 
be happening here is, I do believe they will be making a 
decision to use some of that operating to pay on a mortgage, but 
that would be their decision. We’ve provided it to them as 
operating funds. 

Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I take it then that the 
provincial government isn’t having to take that $5 million 
mortgage as something . . . Related to capital, Madam Minister, 
we’ve heard a lot about the capital projects at the University of 
Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, where the number of buildings . . . 
last year one of the buildings having to have been . . . having to 
be removed. 
 
I’m wondering if your department is involved with capital 
planning, with not only annual plan but I guess the three- and 
five-year plan that is under way at the University of 
Saskatchewan, how will your department be involved in the 
replacement of capital structures at the University of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I had a lovely letter from Dr. 
Ivany that they’re certainly pleased that they’re able to get on 
with their capital projects. And as you know — I think they 
have a list; I’m just trying to recall here — has got maybe 10 
projects into the future on it. But their top three are their 
Thorvaldson Building, which of course is the chemistry 
building that’s so important to the whole area of science and 
technology here. They also have the phys ed building which, as 
well as all the services it provides on campus, is quite involved 
in the community. And then they have their convocation hall, 
which are their three top priority projects. 
 
But at this point, given the commitments in the budget, they’re 
proceeding with work on all three of those projects. And they 
do need to bring their capital projects back to us for approval, 
but certainly it’s our understanding right now that those are 
their priorities and that they’re proceeding with them. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Good. Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, one of the other questions that the Saskatchewan Party 
has raised over the last number of weeks is the whole question 
of shortage of nurses. I think the program at Kelsey Institute has 
changed such that it is not a two-year program but a three-year 
program, and probably this is the year that there will be no 
nurses graduating. Can you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The program is in transition right now. 
We’ve been working with SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association) and SUN (Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses) and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology) and the universities on this new program. It 
was certainly the consensus of everyone in the nursing field that 
nursing had changed so much they had to substantially upgrade 
and change this program. 
 
And nurses are working more in the community. They’re doing 
just a broader range of things than they’ve done before. So they 
developed this new program that’s referred to the NEPS 
(Nursing Educational Program of Saskatchewan) program 
which is a four-year program that will jointly be delivered in 
both Regina and Saskatoon by SIAST and the universities. 
 
Now there is a three-year exit from that program with an option 
for the fourth year, but you’re right that it’s the last year now of 
the two-year program. But there still will be nurses who are 
finishing off their last year of that other program, so there still 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

will be nurse graduates. I don’t have a figure right at my 
fingertips but it would not be accurate to say there won’t be 
graduates. There just won’t be graduates from the new program 
yet. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In my 
discussions with Ms. Farnham who handles the program out of 
Saskatoon, she indicated of course that there’s been a 
tremendous interest in the program and indeed their quota of 
120 was reached at I believe a cut-off level of about 70 per cent 
average out of high school. So indeed that there is a resurgence 
I guess of students looking at nursing as an occupation. 
 
However as I pointed out, we are in a shortage right now. We 
are not going to have as many graduates come forward this year 
even though you’ve indicated that there are still some students 
that will be completing the two-year program. 
 
What kinds of things are occurring in your department to ensure 
that we can alleviate the concerns that the district health boards 
have, that other agencies providing care in the province have 
regarding a shortage of nurses in this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s really two problems I think 
when it comes to questions about shortages, and one is around 
actual supply But there’s also issues on the demand side which 
has to do with the human resource practices of a particular 
organization, whether or not people are being offered jobs in the 
particular configuration that suits their view of what kind of a 
work setting and hours of work and what not that they need to 
have. 
 
So I think we can do our part on the supply side and work 
certainly closely with the nurses, the institutions, the hospitals, 
etc., to get a situation in place where they can get the people 
they need as far as new graduates go. 
 
But on the recruitment front, the health boards are going to have 
to look at their practices themselves, and decide what’s most 
likely to produce success for them in the recruitment area. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That’s my final 
question at this moment. I want to thank you for being so open 
and forthright with your responses. And I want to thank the 
officials for being present today as well. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
and to your officials, good afternoon. I have a question that I’ve 
been asked on more than one occasion with respect to 
scholarships. 
 
Students who through their diligence earn scholarships, and 
they are for the University of Regina, however the courses that 
they choose to follow are not available at the University of 
Regina but are at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon 
and yet they are told that those scholarships are not transferable 
or they cannot use those bursaries, those monies, anywhere 
other than the U of R — could you clarify that for me, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Whether one might have concerns 
about it or not, this is the common practice in universities. But 
you’ve certainly given me an idea today. Because when we start 
discussing the millennium scholarship, perhaps what we need to 

do is make sure that that scholarship is not anchored to a 
particular institution but can float with the student, based on the 
particular merits of the student’s ability and circumstance. 
 
But most scholarships are set up as dedicated to a particular 
institution because it would quite often be someone who has 
gone to that institution or for a particular reason decides to 
support that. And that would be true of every university in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Is that not taxpayers’ money that would be used 
for those scholarships or monies that would come from . . . 
Where would that money come from then for those scholarships 
and grants? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — A very small part of it might be public 
money. And you might see that for example in some targeted 
efforts to get students in a particular program. But for the most 
part it’s private bequests and private scholarships, and a 
business that may decide they want to encourage students in a 
particular field like engineering or dentistry, whatever. So 
generally they come from outside sources, not government 
money. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Well thank you. Yes, and that makes sense, but I 
would . . . it seems that if unfortunately those subsequent 
courses are not available at that institution, it’s too bad. And I 
hope you would look into that, Madam Minister, to make them 
transferable or at least come to some kind of an agreement. 
Because the individuals who do work very hard and with a great 
deal of diligence and now find that this scholarship that they are 
very proud of, they cannot take it with them elsewhere. So I 
appreciate your concern in that respect, and do you believe that 
there may be an opportunity to allow that to happen in the near 
future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes there is, and there’s even an 
opportunity for you to support me in this effort because there 
still is not a definitive answer to the question of how these 
millennium funds will be distributed. They’re new funds, 
they’re substantial, and I think it’s a very good suggestion you 
make, and we’ll certainly add it to our list of things to discuss 
with the millennium folks. And your support in that would be 
welcome. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I thank you very much. I’ll now defer to my 
friend and colleague from North Battleford. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, 
and your officials. First of all I want to ask you about the 
joint-use project in North Battleford. As of course, Madam 
Minister, you are aware the North West Regional College was 
to have moved into the North Battleford Comprehensive High 
School, and initially plans were announced last year by your 
colleague, the Minister of Education, whereby renovations 
would have been undertaken and completed for September of 
1998. Now I understand that for a number of reasons there have 
been delays, and I would ask you to kindly update us as to 
where that project now stands. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I’m just refreshing myself on this 
one because I’ve actually discussed it with the folks. Their 
problem was that although they were granted the necessary 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

money to do this work, they had unanticipated roof work that 
needed to be done that ate up a chunk of their money, and the 
cost of the roof project coming in at 1.5 million, which was 
again an unanticipated cost. 
 
But we have made funding available at 1.75 million in this 
year’s budget as was committed in April 1997. And 
Post-Secondary committed 304,000 in the 1997-98 budget for 
the implementation of the Saskatchewan training strategy for 
the regional college portion of the roof replacement project. So 
we’ve given them some additional funds into that and hopefully 
that will be enough for this project to be firmly on the road. 
 
But we have had a very high uptake in the joint-use projects 
across the province. I would say that aside from student loans, 
the next biggest area of demand is in the joint-use area, and 
there’s certainly a lot of competition for dollars in that area. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Madam Minister, I’m aware of the 
situation with the roof. Actually my understanding is that the 
roof was always part of the project. However, it had initially 
been thought that the roof could be one of the last things done, 
and then with the problems of last year, when it started to leak, 
it had to be the first thing done rather than one of the last. 
 
However, my question is that last year it was a three-year 
project costing a total of about 5 million. How many years now 
will the project take? When will North West Regional College 
be able to move in? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — All I can tell you with certainty today, 
and I can certainly get you more information if you’d like it, but 
they are proceeding with phase one. But phase two involves 
some other discussions around the training strategy and around 
the needs for the future. 
 
So I think at this point they’re a bit indefinite about whether the 
project that was originally designed is still what they need down 
the road with the changes that are taking place. And they’re 
going to be taking a bit of a second look at the next phases of 
the project. 
 
But what I can say is that the board of governors of the North 
West Regional College and the North Battleford 
Comprehensive School Board have indicated they’re now 
prepared to proceed with the project and are proceeding with 
phase one in this year. 
 
Again, if you would like more information than that, I can get 
some for you. But I think they are rethinking some of the larger 
part of the project as far as new needs are concerned. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate the 
undertaking. However my understanding is though that, as you 
say, there is no undertaking from government at this point as to 
further phases of the project, and there is some reluctance to 
undertake phase one if we don’t know that the project will be 
proceeded with. 
 
And last year the announcement from your colleague, the 
Education minister, was that this is a three-year project that 
we’ve provided 2 million for this year. We will provide the 
funding in the next two years for it to be completed, and the 

North West Regional College will then be housed in the 
comprehensive high school. 
 
And my concern today is, is that still the project? And if it is 
still the project, can you give us some idea of the current time 
frame? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, there’s still the same time frame; 
still the same commitment to it. It’s only because of the training 
strategy that they’re looking whether they might want to do a 
few things somewhat differently. But we haven’t changed our 
commitment to it nor have they changed their time frame. 
They’re just taking a little bit harder look at some of the 
implications of the training strategy for the space that they’re 
going to be using in the building. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — If I may, I wish to read from a letter that your 
colleague, the Minister of Education, sent in December of 1997 
saying: 
 

We remain optimistic that a very worthwhile project can be 
developed with the available funding and that North West 
Regional College will be in the facility (that is the 
comprehensive high school) in the fall of 1998 as I 
announced this spring. 

 
So are you saying that that still continues to be the plan and the 
proposal? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’re going to have to report back to 
you on that. Deputy Perrins is going up there tomorrow and he 
will certainly be talking to them about it and we can confirm to 
you where that’s at, at that time. But as far as we know, it’s 
proceeding as committed to and as expected. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you for that undertaking. Madam 
Minister, if I may turn to our universities. I understand that the 
capital projects that are now required on the University of 
Saskatchewan campus, that it is being proposed by your 
department that they be undertaken by incurring debt by the 
university to finance the capital projects. And I would ask you 
what your plans are in that regard. 
 
Are you asking for the university to float debentures to finance 
capital projects? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The university is requesting that we get 
involved with them in such a way that we can help get the best 
rates for them in financing their project. The details of that 
haven’t been worked out yet, nor do we have approval yet to 
proceed. But certainly we’re working together on putting 
together a financing package that suits their needs and that we 
can agree with. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — As I see it, Madam Minister, the issue would 
be that if the university floats debentures itself it would be 
paying a higher interest rate than would be necessary if the 
province were involved. On the other hand obviously if the 
province is involved, that reflects on the overall indebtedness of 
the Government of Saskatchewan. Is that basically the issues 
that are before you now in deciding how to proceed in terms of 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

capital funding for the university? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The difference in the cost to the 
university — I wanted to get an exact figure for you — is 
53,000 depending on the two different methods of financing. 
And of course 53,000 less if the province was to have more of 
an involvement in backing that loan. 
 
But again this is something that we haven’t done before in the 
area of university financing, so we have to look at it and make a 
decision before we can proceed. But we certainly are working 
with them on it. 
 
And the difference is not huge, but still it’s 53,000 a year. And 
your analysis of what it would do to the financial situation is 
accurate. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Madam Minister, would you not agree that it 
would be something new for our province to finance capital 
projects on our university campuses by insisting that the 
universities go into debt. This would be a new departure and it 
would be an unfortunate departure in placing our universities in 
a situation of being massively in debt in order to meet their 
capital needs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I suppose on a very limited level I 
could say that there’s some small merit in your comment. But 
the fact of the matter is, everybody has to learn at some point to 
live within their means, universities included. And because you 
would like to do something does not always mean that you’re 
able to do it. 
 
Now if we’re able to assist them in some way of meeting the 
needs that they’ve identified, I think certainly we have an 
obligation to do that. But we don’t buy everything straight out 
ourselves as a government and I don’t know why a university 
would expect to either. It’s perfectly within the realm of 
possibility that many institutions, organizations, businesses, 
governments, incur mortgages in order to be able to proceed 
with projects that they would have to wait many more years. 
 
So I guess I would ask you, would your choice be to wait many 
more years or to have them be assured that they have the 
ongoing funding sufficient to be able to meet their mortgage 
obligations? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Madam Minister, with all due respect, 
you seem to be talking about the university as if it is some other 
entity other than the province of Saskatchewan. And if I may, I 
would remind you that the establishment of the University of 
Saskatchewan was something that our government did when 
this province was only two years old. And our province at that 
time considered it a high priority to have university education in 
this province. 
 
Now you seem to be suggesting, well, the university is a 
separate entity for which the government has little or no 
responsibility. And you also seem to be referring to the capital 
requirements of the university campus as a wish list as opposed 
to an acknowledgement that these capital requirements have 
come about because, quite literally, the roof is falling in. 
 
So this is not a wish list of some grandiose plan that the board 

of governments . . . governors would like to see happen. This is 
something that has been very much forced on our campus by 
circumstances beyond anyone’s control. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Member there, I was trying 
to be polite but you forced me to have to talk about the CHST 
(Canada Health and Social Transfer). And you know and I 
know where billions of dollars have been lost to health, 
education, and social services in this country. 
 
And if you really want to help us out, there’s not an area in 
which universities haven’t been cut, whether it’s research, 
whether it’s the money that the province gets that we’re unable 
to flow through to them to support their facilities. Sometimes 
it’s direct funding that comes without regard to provincial 
priorities directly from the federal government. And certainly 
universities have sometimes had to bear the brunt of decisions 
that were made that weren’t their priority. 
 
But the fact is that we do provide the funding for them to 
support their mortgage costs. And that’s certainly the discussion 
we’re involved in with them right now. And they have agreed 
that this is a situation that they’re certainly willing to work 
with. 
 
And so I think at this point our only common objective is to 
look at what the best financing package we can get to keep 
those interest costs down and to enable these projects to 
proceed. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, you will 
recall that in the federal budget of this year there was 
considerable new spending in post-secondary education. And 
the Premier took the view that this was an intrusion into 
provincial jurisdiction. And I think we were all disappointed to 
hear the Premier critical of the federal government for taking 
post-secondary education as seriously as it does. 
 
What I want to know, do you still consider university education 
to be a priority of the provincial government as it was when this 
province was a mere two years old? Or do you now take the 
position that if buildings are crumbling on the campus, that is 
the problem of the university that has little or nothing to do with 
the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would say that probably this 
government has demonstrated more support for post-secondary 
education than virtually any government in Canada. And 
certainly that would be the impression I got when I recently 
attended a council of ministers of education with our 
stakeholder groups from the various major organizations. 
 
If you want to look at where some of the shortfall is, I’m going 
to go back to the student loan program — a 60/40 program with 
the federal government. If they were to contribute their 60 per 
cent to the degree that we contribute our 40 per cent — right 
now they owe us about 30 million as far as their contribution to 
student loans. So I think they’ve got a long way to go before 
they’re even delivering what they’re obliged to deliver under 
current agreements — never mind what we might want into the 
future. 
 
And I would certainly hope that you would keep the interests of 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

your constituents at heart while you’re busy defending the 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I don’t think I need to be reminded that the 
interests of the people of Battlefords come first and foremost in 
my deliberations then, Madam Minister. 
 
But in view of your ringing endorsement of our universities, 
may I ask then will you give a commitment that the capital cost 
of renovations required on our university campuses will not be 
pushed off onto our universities having to float debt? And if 
you will not give that commitment, can you identify any other 
provincial university in Canada where that is the case. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In keeping with the autonomy of 
universities, I will commit to you that we will come to an 
agreement with the universities that suits them and ourselves in 
discussion. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Has any other province in Canada insisted that 
for the maintenance of university buildings the universities have 
to float debentures not underwritten by the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, this decision isn’t being made on 
the basis of what other people are doing. It’s an agreement that 
we’re reaching with the universities. So we can find that out for 
you, but we haven’t checked on that nor have they commented 
on that to us. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Madam Minister, maybe there’s not too 
much further I can take this, but I would respectfully suggest 
that it is not so much an agreement you are making with the 
university as something you are ramming down their throats; 
that you are saying the only way you’re going to get the 
calamitous state of our university structures back up to an 
acceptable standard is by floating debentures that will not be 
guaranteed by the province. And this is not a case of the 
university agreeing, this is a case of the university being 
dictated to by your department. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, I’ll just emphasize that we’ll 
certainly give the universities all the support we can in this 
cooperative effort, but that in fact they have not expressed what 
you’re expressing to me. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Madam Minister, we have now had the Royal 
Bank administering student loans for, I believe, two years and I 
would like to ask you what has our experience been in 
contracting out the administration of student loans? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We certainly still are responsible for all 
the policy in relation to student loans. They are merely the 
money managers. And we do encourage students who have any 
information they require, concerns with that relationship, to let 
us know. 
 
But certainly we make every effort to make sure that students 
who are needing either an interest free period or needing to 
renegotiate their loans, that we give them ample opportunities 
to do that. 
 
Usually the only way a student will get into difficulty with their 
financial institution is if they haven’t been keeping in touch. 

But I just emphasize that we still entirely determine who’s 
needy and what the policy is for the program. The bank simply 
administers it. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the hon. member for Watrous on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Permission to introduce guests, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today it 
gives me great pleasure to introduce to the Assembly two guests 
in the Speaker’s gallery. Seated in the Speaker’s gallery is my 
father, Herbert Upshall, and my nephew, Bryan Upshall, have 
come to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I just want to wish them a safe trip 
home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
Subvote (PE01) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Welcome to the Minister of Agriculture’s 
family, and if I may continue. How often are we using 
collection agents for delinquent student loans. Do you have any 
numbers on that, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. Once the banks start administering 
these programs, other than all the guidelines and the 
opportunities that students have to get assistance if they’re 
having difficulty, once it reaches a point that those remedies 
have been exhausted, it’s really up to the bank whether they use 
a collection agency. It’s not us. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Madam Minister, when the Plains Health 
Centre ceases to function as a hospital, we understand that it is 
going to be used for administration. And I would ask you what 
programs are going to be moved into the Plains Health Centre 
in terms of teaching and administration, and whether or not 
these will all be from the city of Regina or if they will be from 
other communities as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Just the Wascana programs will be 
moving into there. And of course, it’s eight campuses moving 
into there, so there’ll be everything from ABE (adult basic 
education program), nursing programs, automotive technician 
— I mean the full range of what Wascana delivers will be 
delivered all at that one site. But to say “administration” is 
hugely misleading; these are the students that’ll be there. 



1730 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Mr. Hillson: — Can Madam Minister give her undertaking that 
no programs will be removed from other communities, such as 
Moose Jaw, into the Plains Health Centre and that it will only 
be a consolidation of Regina programs and administration? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The most excellent MLAs from Moose 
Jaw have already had the jump on that one and we have assured 
them, as we assure you today, that that is the case. We won’t be 
moving any of the programs. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just a few 
questions for you, Madam Minister. In a perfect world we 
would have training institutions in every community and every 
region to try and impact what their needs are to develop an 
economy, and I understand clearly that we haven’t got a perfect 
world. 
 
One of the biggest challenge in northern Saskatchewan, as you 
are aware, in the province as a whole with the aboriginal 
population being what it is and certainly the projections within 
the next 10, 15 years, would suggest that we have to have, with 
all due respect to the other minorities and certainly the general 
population of Saskatchewan, we have to have an aboriginal 
specific initiative when we talk about trying to incorporate 
some of the aboriginal people into the workforce. 
 
And I would like to take it a step further, Madam Minister, that 
we look at the whole option of a geographical specific initiative 
as well. And of course being a representative from northern 
Saskatchewan, that’s the focus of some of my conversation and 
my discussion here this afternoon. 
 
I guess the one factor I want to point out is that in northern 
Saskatchewan many students do finish grade 12 and 
post-secondary aspirations may be in their plans, perhaps 
maybe even immediately entering the workforce. Something 
certainly has to be done. 
 
Many of the common concerns that we have out there in 
northern Saskatchewan is because of the isolation factor, some 
of the challenges of being an aboriginal person; and certainly, 
the cost of relocating to other centres from your home 
community to achieve extra studies in the post-secondary field 
certainly adds to the challenge of northern people. 
 
And I was just wondering, has your department ever done any 
in-depth study of some of the northern communities in terms of 
what some of these young students and young people are going 
to do after they’ve achieved their grade 12? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Probably the briefest way to answer 
that is you of course would be familiar with the multi-party 
training agreement which is with the mining sector where that’s 
definitely what the purpose is there, is to identify the 
opportunities and to make sure that people have access to them. 
 
But as well, I think some of the more historical programs — the 
NORTEP (northern teacher education program), the NORPAC 
(Northern Professional Access College) — are trying to access 
people to the jobs available in those areas. 
 

And in the regional colleges, both I guess Northlands and 
Woodland that affect that area, as part of the Bridges to 
Employment training strategy, there’s a couple of things really 
that I think are fairly significant for the North. One is the 
attempt to have the colleges work much more with the 
economic development groups from their area to make sure that 
the training that they’re providing is relevant and useful and 
helps assist the economy and the people in moving forward. 
 
But as well, we’re doing a lot more in the distance education 
front so that people don’t have to leave their communities and 
incur the dislocation and the expense of travelling to a southern 
institution to get their education. And certainly people like 
SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College), GDI (Gabriel 
Dumont Institute), SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies), are all trying to develop distance programs so 
that even things like Cree, various technical programs, math, a 
whole range of things that people may want is accessible at a 
distance. 
 
So I think as these distance education efforts, the changes to 
regional colleges, you’ll certainly see a much more responsive 
system for the folks in the North to get what they need without 
having to go out of their communities to do it. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. And just to elaborate on that 
point, the reason why I bring it up, Madam Minister, is that of 
all the programs I’ve seen . . . every program of course has an 
immediate benefit and impact for the students and many times 
you see that that of course is hard to measure in the period 
following your training — I being an example of that. Many 
people did not believe that the business administration program 
I took through GDI in Buffalo Narrows in 1988 would have 
some benefit today, but it certainly has. 
 
I think the key point that we talk about when we talk about 
community development in a local sense is that the one 
program I did have some hope that would eventually have some 
immediate impact and benefit from would be the economic 
development officers that we spoke about behind the bar. And 
the key strategy there is to try and have these people out there 
trying to develop packages, programs, and employment 
opportunities, and profits for the communities. 
 
And I would suggest to you that there’s got to be some way, 
shape, or form that we can develop an overall strategy — if it’s 
through the university system, if it’s through distance 
education, if it’s through our regional colleges — in which we 
could look at the employment creation, economic development, 
social development scenario of focusing efforts at the local 
level. Because as long as you’ve got these communities far 
removed, sometimes even distance education and the best 
efforts and the best intentions will not hit the huge majority of 
people. 
 
And I was just wondering if . . . would you care to elaborate on 
that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well whether we’re talking about the 
North or the South, probably community development and 
community economic development is one of the hardest areas to 
get people who have a skill and a talent for it — because I think 
you need a bit of talent for that as well as a skill — and such 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

individuals are in great demand and very costly. So I think 
you’re right, we’re going to have to develop them if we’re 
really going to see much movement on that front. And we do 
have a pilot project out of the P.A. campus with young people 
from the North — who the community selected them to train as 
economic development, community economic development 
workers for their communities. 
 
I was very encouraged to see the mixture of both young male 
and female people from the North selected by their 
communities to do that training. And I haven’t checked recently 
on the success of that, and if you wish we could provide you 
with the contacts for that program. But certainly if that pilot 
goes well — it’s also experimenting with the use of new 
technology so you know there’s a little extra piece there that has 
to be seen whether that is a viable way to help deliver that 
training and networking — But there are efforts being made in 
that direction and I agree with you that we need to expand that. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you and certainly when people come 
to visit some of our communities — if it’s Buffalo Narrows, if 
it’s Ile-a-la-Crosse, or if it’s Pinehouse — the common question 
we get from visitors is, what’s here? What keeps people here? 
What keeps people in some of these northern communities? 
And the question we have is that there’s a lot of potential and 
opportunity that has not been yet tapped by a lot of local people. 
 
And what we have to try and do, Madam Minister, as I 
mentioned before, is try and make a connection between some 
of the local aspirations that people have to create their own jobs 
versus what’s happening out there now. And unfortunately I 
don’t see a concerted effort to try and accomplish that. 
 
And clearly when we talk about community development, you 
look at any of these communities and you see what they’re 
spending in social services, you see what they’re spending in 
health care, what they may be spending on infrastructure, and 
what they may be spending on maintaining offices and staff and 
so on and so forth. Then you begin to ask the question, after all 
these dollars are being, as some people say, pumped into 
northern communities, why is it we have a continual 80 to 90 
per cent unemployment rate? And there’s very little success and 
very little progress made at the local level. 
 
The primary reason for that, Madam Minister, is that we have 
not made the concerted effort and we have not taken the next 
step higher to try and make a relationship to the amount of 
money that we have spent in these communities — to the 
creation of a self-sustaining, independent economy developed 
by the local people. 
 
And so when I give that response to some of these visitors when 
they ask what’s in Pinehouse or what’s in Buffalo Narrows or 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, they’re kind of taken aback by it. And the 
reason why I believe they’re taken aback by it, stepping back 
from it, is they still don’t completely understand that the people 
out there do have a lot of opportunity associated with the land. 
 
So I think the key point that I’m trying to make is that there is a 
lot in these northern communities and what we have to do is 
awaken that spirit to try and get people to understand that they 
can indeed develop their own economy. That there’s a lot of 
opportunity, and all that it takes again is a thorough plan, a plan 

in which you really begin to mesh with people who are familiar 
with the whole plan to develop themselves and their economy. 
 
We talk about the mining sector, Madam Minister. And 
certainly there’s been a lot of positive work being done in that 
area and we’ve stated many times before we support the mining 
sector. But the mining sector is, of course, one particular part of 
the industry of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And as long as we begin to focus our development of the 
economy on one industry . . . an industry I might add, Madam 
Minister, that it’s a non-renewable industry. After 20, 30 years, 
once you’ve finished mining for gold and uranium and so on 
and so forth, that industry’s gone. 
 
At this point in time, 1998, what people of northern 
Saskatchewan are saying to government is that we must make a 
concerted effort by all the departments to try and develop an 
economy that we could be familiar with and that we can 
develop and we can benefit from. And some of those economies 
don’t just involve mining — they involve tourism, they involve 
fishing, they involve agriculture, they involve manufacturing, 
they involve agriculture. The list just goes on and on and on as 
to the ideas. And I don’t believe that we should say at any time 
— this is how your economy should look. What we should do is 
give the complementary sources of professional training and 
also give the complementary and coordinated approaches of the 
different departments of government to accomplish that. 
 
So as the minister responsible for Post-Secondary Education, 
you should take the opportunity to talk to the minister of 
housing and say, if I put a program in place in Pinehouse to 
teach somebody to become a self-sustaining business person, 
can you make an effort to try and diminish the disincentives 
associated with housing? 
 
So in essence, when I talk about community development, 
Madam Minister, there’s a lot of factors that really influence a 
community and, quite frankly, limits their opportunity to create 
their own economy using the post-secondary opportunities 
available through your office. 
 
So I guess my point, Madam Minister, is that there’s got to be 
some heavy coordination and some heavy concentration and 
some heavy involvement by the community people to really 
take advantage of the post-secondary commitment of your 
department. And we look at the whole scenario and again, it’s 
such a complex science. It’s not a simple solution nor is it a 
singular approach to this whole challenge. 
 
And I was wondering if you’d be able to offer me some 
response on some of these points I’m making. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the best concise answer I can 
give to that is if the CREDOs (community regional economic 
development organizations) work closely with the regional 
colleges, that will give us the link we need to accomplish the 
work that you’ve identified. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That pretty 
well wraps up my comment. I just wanted to stress to you today 
that your department certainly plays a role. 
 



1732 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

And I want to say as well on behalf of the people of Buffalo 
Narrows and certainly the west side communities, when the 
Northlands College was set up in Lac La Ronge, that had a 
significant disadvantage to the people on the west side. And you 
can go into every community and talk about how the Westside 
Community College had some positive impact and benefit to 
the region and they’ll tell you it certainly has had. 
 
When the PC (Progressive Conservative) administration come 
and amalgamated the Northlands College into one, they done 
another disservice to the people of northern Saskatchewan — 
not only put this province deep in debt, but they also limited a 
lot of people’s potential. So in northern Saskatchewan, again 
the damage has been lasting. 
 
(1615) 
 
So as the Minister of Post-Secondary Education, what I would 
highly recommend to you, Madam Minister, is that you revisit 
that amalgamation. It did not save the government any money; 
what it done was it limited our opportunity to access 
post-secondary, concentrated dollars to accomplish our own 
objectives to our own Westside Community College. 
 
So I would encourage you, Madam Minister, to really look at 
this whole thing so that once again the people of Buffalo 
Narrows don’t have a shell of a facility, to have some real 
programs, real commitment, their own community college apart 
from Lac La Ronge, and certainly are able to help their own 
people do their own thing. 
 
And I’m looking forward to your response to try and undo the 
damage of the Conservative government of the 1980s because 
that damage has been prevalent. It has been felt for many years 
and it will continue being felt for years unless you make a plan 
to stop that. 
 
Subvote (PE01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (PE02), (PE05), (PE04), (PE07), (PE03), (PE06) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 37 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I just want to thank the members 
opposite for their excellent questions, and we certainly have got 
some things we need to follow up on here. And I’d like to thank 
the officials for coming today, and just let them know that the 
opposition has offered to take you out for a lobster supper. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On behalf of the official 
opposition, to thank the minister and her officials for the timely 
answers, responses that were offered in the debate on 
Post-Secondary Education. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. I would also like to thank the 
staff and the minister for taking their time. 
 
And certainly, Madam Minister, we were looking and listening 
to what your plans are in reference to the Westside Community 
College concept we spoke about. And again, thank you very 
much. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the Minister of Finance to 
reintroduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today is 
Mr. Bill Jones, immediately to my left — he’s the deputy 
minister of Finance; and to his left is Terry Paton, who is the 
Provincial Comptroller. Behind me immediately is Glen Veikle, 
who is the director of intergovernmental affairs and . . . taxation 
and intergovernmental affairs I should say, in the Department of 
Finance. And to his right is Jim Marshall, who’s the executive 
director of economic and fiscal policy. 
 
Behind Mr. Jones is Mr. Len Rog, who’s the assistant deputy 
minister of the revenue division; and to his left, behind Mr. 
Paton, is Bill Hoover, who is the director of the financial 
services branch in the administration division. 
 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
committees. Welcome again, Minister and officials. There were 
a fair number of points we’ve already covered in previous 
discussions under the review of the Finance department’s 
estimates. There’s a couple of issues that I’d like to touch on 
today. 
 
Minister, can you tell me what is the revenue generated for each 
1-percentage point of provincial sales tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, the answer would be 
approximately $105 million. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, a year or so ago you reduced the 
provincial sales tax by 2 percentage points. Can you tell me 
what the reduction of income to the provincial budget was in 
effect after the reduction of 2 percentage points? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In 1996-97, Mr. Chair, to the member, the 
revenue from sales tax was $810 million, approximately. In 
1997-98 it’s forecast, and the Public Accounts of course will 
come out at the end of August, beginning of September, to be 
about $707 million. So that would be a difference of about $103 
million. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So the two points of drop in the provincial 
sales tax rate resulted in about the equivalent of 1 percentage 
point of decreased revenue. Would that be a fair generalization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I would answer the question this way. That 
certainly when the two . . . I don’t think that is a fair 
generalization, Mr. Chair. But not to be argumentative, I would 
agree with the member, if this is where the member is going, 
that the 2 per cent reduction in sales tax undoubtedly has an 
effect on the stimulation of economic activity. There’s no 
question about that. 
 
I don’t believe that the fact that the value of 1 percentage goes 
up is only attributable to the fact that the sales tax comes down. 
And I’d explain that this way. When the sales tax was increased 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

in the early ’90s to 8 per cent and then 9 per cent, we also saw 
at that time coincidentally, economic activity increasing. In 
other words economic activity may increase whether the sales 
tax goes up or down. 
 
That has been the history of Saskatchewan since 1991 in the 
sense that our retail sales in Saskatchewan since the early ’90s 
have been very high in growth each year, including years when 
we increased the sales tax. 
 
So I don’t know if this assists the member, Mr. Chair, but I 
would agree with the member to this extent, that the increased 
revenue will partially be due to the fact that the sales tax has 
been cut, but I believe it is also due to the fact that the economy 
generally performed very well in ’96-97, and hopefully will 
continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me 
what the total provincial taxable income would be on our 
income tax returns . . . each of us have a certain box; I don’t 
know what it is — 105 or whatever — where it’s taxable 
income. What I’m asking is what’s the sum total of that for all 
people that file tax in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Individual income in Saskatchewan, which 
would be taxable, would be approximately $16.1 billion per 
year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, you’ve 
undoubtedly seen, and I don’t want to use a prop, but in the 
Star-Phoenix for example on May 30 of this year it says, 
“Commodity prices fizzle.” And there’s an article on the 
various changes in economic outlook made I believe by the 
Toronto Dominion Bank where it says that commodity prices 
have dropped to a five-year low, there’s an economic slowdown 
predicted, wheat prices are low, mining prospects have 
diminished, and retail spending has begun to stall. And while it 
says, I believe it quotes someone from your department saying 
there’s mild anxiety stage, not worry stage. 
 
(1630) 
 
Minister, I wonder what mechanism you use to, you know, 
track all these different things. Oil prices are down from the 
seventeen and a quarter, and as time ticks on, you know, it gets 
increasingly difficult for the average price that you used from 
the forecast to recover. Do you do an ongoing review process of 
all of these various factors that have some impact, maybe 
major, on the provincial economy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Madam Chair, to the member, yes indeed 
there are people that work in the Department of Finance who 
spend a great deal of their time simply tracking these things 
both on the expenditure side and the revenue side because 
they’re concerned about what may be happening in the budget. 
 
The member is quite correct, that oil prices since the budget 
was delivered, I believe have been an average of about fifteen 
and a quarter, which is $2 off the yearly estimate of seventeen 
and a quarter, but better than the thirteen sixty-eight or 
whatever it was on March 19, budget day. So they do seem to 
be going in the right direction. But in any event, to answer the 
member’s question, yes we certainly track that on a daily basis. 

And to anticipate where the member may be going, the 
department also does a review, a forecast of where prices may 
be going up, where they may be going down relative to what 
was estimated in the budget. And I think it’s fair to say that 
while some things like the oil prices will be down, or could be 
down, other things will be up this year perhaps. And the 
Department of Finance continues to feel that we will meet our 
revenue target notwithstanding the problems on the oil side that 
may occur, and some other problems. 
 
And I might say to the member also that I took the opportunity 
to put this same kind of question to the investment dealers 
association when they were here. And I said, well you know, 
we’ve made these projections but we’re worried slightly about 
the oil situation and also the farm side. And they said, well yes, 
but your economy is quite diversified now as well so that you 
may do poorly in some areas but do better in others, and 
certainly you have more strengths than you used to. 
 
And I noticed that Moody's Investors Service which is going to 
review our credit, made the same comment in response to some 
reporters’ questions, that yes, you may lose a bit on the oil and 
the farm side, but your economy is more diversified. So they 
also felt, or seemed to indicate that they felt we could meet our 
projections. 
 
The advice I received from the officials in the Department of 
Finance, who I might say have a pretty good track record the 
last number of years in being pretty close on these things, is that 
they feel that we can meet our revenue projections for this fiscal 
year. Some things will be down, other things will be up. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, when these 
things occur . . . And hypothetically looking at, say, at the end 
of the year the price of oil is off a dollar a barrel, and I 
appreciate other commodities might be up. Where I’m going on 
this is, is how does this impact on the equalization formula? 
 
Last year I believe you predicted 300-odd million dollars — or 
this year — coming in from equalization. If we lose a dollar on 
revenue from the oil and gas sector, for example, does the 
equalization formula pick up some of that so that we end up 
with . . . What I’m trying to ask is, the question I’m getting at is 
how does the equalization formula figure in with the changes in 
commodity prices across the piece to cushion the impact of a 
dollar loss or a two dollar loss? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Generally speaking, when the oil revenues 
go down below that which we projected, equalization would 
largely pick that up and we would receive more money on the 
equalization formula. 
 
I should say, as the member probably knows, Madam Chair, 
that the equalization formula is a very complicated formula. 
And it also is sort of a rolling, not average, but that kind of 
thing. And some of the money that you might be entitled to, you 
would not receive in the same fiscal year. You might receive 
that in a subsequent fiscal year. And so that would occur as 
well. 
 
Having said that, I do believe while we are cushioned 
significantly with respect to oil prices by the equalization 
program, equalization will also be affected by areas where we 



1734 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

do better than we had anticipated. So that if sales tax revenue 
goes up more than we thought, then that will pull equalization 
down. But certainly equalization will assist us if our projections 
or estimates with respect to oil revenue turn out not to be 
correct. 
 
I would like to add, just for certainty, that our preference would 
be not to rely upon equalization certainly. Our preference would 
be for the price is up and we have more activity here. 
 
I might add in that regard the activity this year while down from 
’97, I believe is exceeding ’95 and ’96 if my memory serves me 
correctly, because 1997 was such an extraordinary year. 
 
So even though the price is down and there’s some downturn 
relative to last year in the oil patch, the year to date I believe 
may actually be up to standard for some of the years prior to 
1997. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Another area I’m sure 
that you’re aware of is at least causing mild anxiety at this stage 
is the whole agricultural area in terms of many areas of the 
province are experiencing pretty severe drought conditions this 
spring. We’ve had a good area of the province that has 
experienced frost, and the farmers’ input costs have continued 
to at least rise somewhat while the commodity prices, as I’ve 
indicated in that article, are diminishing. 
 
That has had an impact or will have an impact on the farms, the 
farm corporations, the farms themselves, taxable income as the 
margin or the profit if you like, is squeezed. But it also seems to 
have an impact on the farmers’ buying patterns. 
 
So for example in my neck of the woods, Bourgault Industries 
has initiated a fairly major stopping of production for three or 
four months. I understand that most of the implement 
manufacturers are doing the same things with some lay-offs. 
That kind of thing — how does that impact into your 
projections of meeting revenue, because I would think 
potentially it has a very great potential of diminishing it fairly 
significantly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as I said, Mr. Chair, to the member 
earlier, there are some negatives such as the member has 
referred to but there also are some positives. And I would 
answer the question in general terms this way. When I put this 
same question myself to some of the experts who look at the 
economy and what may happen in it, like the investment 
dealers, you know, you say, well what about the farm sector and 
the oil side? They say, well yes, those things may be down a bit, 
but your economy is more diversified, and looking at the whole 
economy, you will still have real economic growth somewhere, 
you know, around 2.7 per cent I think they’re saying, which is 
consistent with what we projected in the budget. 
 
So in other words, yes, in the farm implement sector, if there’s 
fewer jobs there this year than last, then your revenues are 
going to be down from last year in terms of income tax from 
those workers and so on. But on the other hand, if you have 
some growth in other sectors, then your revenue may be higher 
than anticipated and we have seen higher than anticipated 
growth, I think, in some sectors. 
 

So we’re still, like the investment dealers and others, 
anticipating that we’ll have real economic growth this year. 
And I think every commentator, whether the Royal Bank or the 
investment dealers, the economists around say much the same 
thing. So that is our hope and we continue to believe that we 
will meet the revenue target that we set and that we will have 
economic growth in the economy about the same as what was 
projected in the budget. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, another area 
. . . I guess before I finish in that area, do you have contingency 
plans in your budget? Do you have the ability to respond to the 
unforeseen? For example, if there is a major downturn in the 
agricultural economy because of a drought or things of that 
nature, how do you adjust or how do you respond to unforeseen, 
significant changes in the provincial economy in order to assist 
those sectors that maybe aren’t doing as well as you’ve 
admitted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, to the member, yes. I should say 
that notwithstanding things that may happen in the economy 
throughout the year, we expect that people will adhere to the 
budget. In other words, that the government departments and 
agencies, boards that are funded by government will spend the 
amount of money that is allocated to them by the legislature. 
 
Now we know that sometimes extraordinary things happen and 
extra money has to be spent. But in general terms we would say 
to them first of all that if you have some problem that arises and 
you have to spend more money doing something than you 
anticipated, you should try to arrange your affairs within your 
department so that you try to find that money from another area 
and live within your budget. So that’s the first and foremost 
expectation. 
 
Now I agree with the member, Mr. Chair, that isn’t always 
possible because things can happen, and we’ve seen them 
before. You can have too many forest fires, although I think the 
Department of Environment by the way is doing a very good 
job in terms of how they fight fires now. They’re doing it much 
more effectively. And you can have, you know, spotty crop 
conditions or drought in some areas. We hope that that doesn’t 
happen, but it could happen. 
 
The member asks, well do we do contingency planning. Well 
certainly we don’t announce any contingency plans until events 
actually transpire that would make that mandatory. But in the 
event that things become very difficult, the province always has 
a reserve which is, as the member will know, the liquor and 
gaming fund. And if there were difficult circumstances in any 
given year I suppose that fund is drawn upon, and that would be 
one area where the province would look to draw on its reserves, 
which is really what that kind of fund is for. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister, and I think you also 
addressed another concern I was going to raise about the forest 
fires. And I expect that if the season stays particularly dry and 
volatile, then the process you’ve outlined is how it would be 
used. 
 
Minister, do you have a department or section of your 
department that . . . I don’t know what the right word is — the 
blue sky, the dreamers, the what-if scenario people that sit there 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

and use different economic maps or formulas or spreadsheets — 
that say what would be the expected impact on the economy if 
we took this kind of an action, if you reduced the provincial 
sales tax by two points, if you raise the income tax, or you 
remove the high income surcharge or, you know, that kinds of 
things that are the what-if scenarios that give you the kinds of 
choices that you may use in order to determine what’s the best 
direction for your department to go. 
 
Is there any of that forward-thinking, you know, what-if 
scenarios that go on, and is someone specifically responsible for 
that? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, certainly that should be the job 
of many people in the Department of Finance to consider the 
implications of various policies and alternatives. But I would 
refer the member to, in the Estimates, page 61 under budget 
analysis, there is money allotted to the budget analysis division 
which develops and analyses revenue expense and economic 
policies to assist the Treasury Board and cabinet in developing 
and implementing the government’s fiscal plan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Does that department 
or sub-group, do they also review what’s happening in the rest 
of Canada and the rest of North American and the common 
market in the Commonwealth? I think particularly New 
Zealand, Australia, some of the changed methodologies of 
approaching the fiscal challenges throughout the world that 
governments are using. Does it include that kind of 
outward-looking searching for workable solutions that can be 
applied to Saskatchewan’s situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Certainly they engage in that kind of 
outward-looking approach. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and I 
would like to thank your officials for participating in this. That 
concludes our questions in your department. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. 
Welcome to your officials this afternoon. Does your department 
continue to be of the view that the provincial budget is on target 
for a balanced budget this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, we certainly do. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — So the reduction in resource prices that have 
been reported have not caused your department to think that 
there is a need for revision to the forecasts that were published 
with the provincial budget earlier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — As I said earlier, Mr. Chair, to the member, 
we anticipate that some sources of revenue may not be what we 
thought they would be. They may be lower but we anticipate 
that others may be higher. And certainly we are supported in 
our view by some objective organizations like the Investment 
Dealers of Canada and Moody’s, both of which say that because 
we’ve had diversification in our economy, our economy is 
stronger than it once was and we’re not totally dependent upon 
fluctuating commodity prices. 
 

So my answer to the Liberal questioner is the same as my 
answer to the member from the official opposition, which is that 
some things are down but other things will be up. We continue 
to anticipate that we will have economic growth in the range of 
about 2.7 per cent, and we have every confidence that our 
budget will be on target as indeed has every budget presented 
by this administration since we assumed office. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Are the lending requirements of SaskTel 
higher this year than last year? And if so, can you tell me what 
are the reasons for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, to the member, yes. As 
indicated on page 68 of the budget booklet, the borrowing 
requirements of Saskatchewan Telecommunications are up over 
last year. And according to the budget document, this year they 
will be about $99.8 million — almost $100 million. And I 
believe that this relates to both increased capital requirements 
and to refinancing. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Can you give any indication as to what the new 
capital requirements are as opposed to simply the requirements 
from bond issues maturing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, to the member, yes, as indicated 
in the Estimates, pages 14 and 15, the $30 million is refinancing 
and $69 million or thereabouts would relate to capital 
requirements. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I understand, Mr. Chairman, that we 
experienced a 5 per cent increase in retail sales in the province 
last year. I wonder if the department did any work to try and 
ascertain to what extent that increase represents expanded 
economic activity in the province and to what extent it 
represents the decrease in the provincial sales tax leading to 
fewer people making purchases outside the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The department certainly has considered 
that matter. And I’ve had the opportunity to speak to the 
officials about that and to other people outside the department. 
And it’s very difficult to quantify to what extent the increased 
retail sales result from the lower sales tax that we have — the 7 
per cent versus 9 per cent. 
 
Certainly we think that that is a contributing factor to increased 
sales. But as I pointed out to the member with the official 
opposition, sales also increased during times when the sales tax 
was going up. So we think it’s positive. 
 
It’s difficult and perhaps impossible to quantify how much of 
the increased sales result from the lower tax. And we don’t have 
any figures with respect to how many fewer people may be 
purchasing goods outside the province now versus before. 
 
But I would suggest to the member, Mr. Chair, that probably 
the biggest factor in that regard may be the low Canadian dollar 
relative to the American dollar, in that there’s much less 
cross-border shopping into the United States now, I would 
surmise, than before, because it isn’t very economical to go 
there. That may be a bigger factor in terms of cross-border than 
the actual change in the sales tax. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, is there any attempt to track 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

cross-border shopping as between provinces? Do we have any 
idea as to how much money Saskatchewan residents spend in 
Alberta versus how much money Alberta residents spend here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We do not keep track of those figures. We 
don’t have the capacity to do that and never have engaged in 
that. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — At one point a former colleague of yours, Mr. 
Anguish, suggested that one of the problems of cross-border 
shopping and the lack of retail sales in the western strip of the 
province especially, could be addressed by greater enforcement 
of Saskatchewan residents shopping outside the province. 
 
Are you saying that there simply is no attempt to track that or to 
enforce that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, I’m not saying that, Mr. Chair, to the 
member. There’s attempts to enforce the sales tax with respect 
to larger items where tax evasion may be attempted. And 
certainly some revenue is recovered by the revenue division of 
the Department of Finance through enforcement activities. 
 
What I’m saying to the member in response to the previous 
question was, the member asked whether we had figures as to 
the amount of money people spend in other provinces and the 
amount of money people from other provinces spend here. And 
I’m simply saying we do not have those figures and I don’t 
think we’ve ever had those figures. 
 
But if it is reported to the Department of Finance or if the 
Department of Finance conducts an audit and discovers that 
someone has evaded the provincial sales tax then an attempt is 
made to collect the sales tax and throughout the year some 
millions, I think, of dollars are recovered each year through 
those activities. So an effort is made but undoubtedly, I mean 
we do live in a free country, we don’t look in everybody’s trunk 
or vehicle every time they cross the border so we don’t want to 
get into the kind of constant surveillance of people and I don’t 
think people would accept that. But when it becomes reported 
or known through an audit that there’s tax due and payable, an 
attempt is made to collect that tax. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I understand one of the areas in 
which we do monitor out-of-province purchases is house 
packages. I wonder if you could indicate in what other sorts of 
areas there is some attempt to monitor out-of-province 
purchases and for which the sales tax has not been paid. 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Ongoing field and desk audits, Mr. 
Chair, are conducted to ensure that tax is remitted properly by 
firms with head offices outside Saskatchewan but which carry 
on business in the province. And this includes retailers, 
construction firms, and the oil industry, so that for example if a 
construction firm comes in or an oil rig is going around that is 
from outside the province, we try to assess tax with respect to 
that activity. And specifically, if you have equipment that you 
haven’t paid sales tax on because you’re an Alberta company 
for example or Manitoba, a certain assessment would be made. 
Not the entire amount of the tax but pro-rated with respect to 
the life of the equipment used in Saskatchewan relative to its 

useful life or something like that. 
 
And in 1997 about 550 field and desk audits were completed on 
non-resident firms and $11.4 million was assessed. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I understand this past year that SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) was considering no 
longer carrying snowmobiles because of the poor experience 
with snowmobiles. They do not have to be registered unless 
they’re being . . . that registration is virtually voluntary and that 
snowmobiles purchased outside the province were generally not 
being registered, and the surprising percentage of those that 
were registered resulted in insurance claims shortly thereafter. 
 
Is that in fact the problem with the licensing of snowmobiles? 
And if so, where is the Department of Finance at — are we 
losing a lot of money still over snowmobiles purchased outside 
the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, to the member: I think the major 
concern with respect to the snowmobiles and the change that 
was made by SGI, or is being proposed by SGI, relates to 
pay-outs on the insurance side — I suppose from the Auto 
Fund— as distinct from concerns with respect to people 
purchasing snowmobiles outside the province. 
 
But having said that, certainly where that occurs that is a 
concern for the Department of Finance and we would want the 
sales tax to be paid on an out-of-province purchase of a 
snowmobile, whether it was registered or not. 
 
But in specific answer to the member’s question, the changes 
being proposed by SGI are not driven by the Department of 
Finance. They relate to insurance costs that have been paid out. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The attempt earlier this year, Mr. Chairman, of 
the Department of Finance to make art donations to public 
galleries in the province the subject of the provincial sales tax, I 
understand that has been suspended. Can you confirm today 
whether that is still being contemplated or has that been 
permanently scrubbed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well there’s been some misunderstanding 
in that regard in that I can tell the member, Mr. Chair, that the 
policy that the tax should be collected on donated works of art 
from outside the province is not something that has been 
brought in by this government. In fact I believe that has been 
the policy since 1937. 
 
And I don’t want to be partisan with the member because the 
member knows that I don’t like to be political. But the fact of 
the matter is that in 1937 when this policy came in, the 
member’s party was in power — that was 1937. But we won’t 
hold the member responsible for that because the member 
wasn’t very old in 1937. But in any event, the statute has been 
in place since 1937. But then I’m told no tax has ever been 
collected on art donations by non-residents. 
 
But to get specifically to the member’s specific question, is this 
going to be the policy? No it is not going to be the policy. I 
wrote the gallery in North Battleford, the Allen Sapp Gallery — 
which I might add I’ve had the pleasure of visiting, and it is 
certainly not only a wonderful building, but full of wonderful 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

art in the city of North Battleford — and advised them and the 
other art galleries that that certainly is not the policy and we 
don’t intend to levy any such tax, nor has it been levied since 
1937. 
 
Although I do understand that in answer to some inquiry, there 
was advice sent out that that was the policy of the government 
since 1937. But I have made it very clear that we don’t intend to 
levy any such tax. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, will the minister advise if there 
are at present negotiations being conducted with first nations’ 
governments regarding the issue of provincial sales tax and 
whether there’s any possibility of an amicable resolution to the 
issue of provincial sales tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think, Mr. Chair, to the member, 
there’s every possibility of an amicable resolution. What form 
that resolution would take, I’m not able to advise the member 
because of course there is a process of negotiation going on 
right now that involves the first nations people, the federal 
government, and the provincial government. 
 
We call it a fiscal table and the intent of that table is to try to 
discuss and hopefully resolve issues of mutual concern 
including not only matters of taxation but matters of 
responsibility for first nations people, the role the federal 
government should play in terms of funding band organizations, 
first nations’ governments, and so on. 
 
So as the member can appreciate, those discussions will 
continue. And the member asks the question, is there a 
possibility of an amicable resolution? That is not only a 
possibility but that is our hope. So we hope that at some point, 
but this isn’t today or next week, but perhaps in the next few 
years, we will achieve a resolution of these issues. 
 
But I want to take the opportunity, while I’m on my feet, just 
very briefly to say that there is a lot of misunderstanding, I 
might add not on that member’s part because that member from 
North Battleford I happen to know from personal discussions is 
very familiar with these issues, as are some of his colleagues. I 
know the member from Athabasca has written a very good 
letter in some of the media, dealing with this issue. 
 
But I want to say this, that we have people that will go around 
saying that “Indians don’t pay taxes.” And I like to point out to 
people, and I know the member does too, and I think it’s good 
to point this out to ourselves and to anyone watching today, that 
we have in Saskatchewan three groups of aboriginal people. We 
have the treaty Indians, the non-status Indians, and the Metis 
people. 
 
The non-status Indians and the Metis people pay every tax just 
like anybody else does. And people will often say that Indians 
don’t pay taxes; it’s really not true. The treaty Indians pay just 
about every tax, but sometimes they get a break on sales tax, 
sometimes they don’t pay income tax if they worked on reserve 
for a reserve organization. And it is very, very rare that an 
Indian person actually doesn’t pay taxes. In the vast majority of 
cases they pay all of the taxes. 
 
I was at a meeting of one of the uranium companies and they 

were explaining how many Northerners and natives they’re 
employing in the uranium mines in the North. And the woman 
making the presentation made the point, and I remarked to her 
afterwards that this could be stated more often, that they had 
many first nations people that worked in their mines. And then 
she said, and contrary to popular belief, every one of them pays 
income tax. Of course a treaty . . . these are treaty Indians she 
was talking about. A treaty Indian person working in a uranium 
mine or anywhere else off reserve pays income tax to the 
province and the federal government the same as everybody 
else. 
 
So I’m going far afield from what the member asked, but I 
know the member probably doesn’t mind, in the sense that 
we’ve got to start having a factual debate about this issue, so 
that we can have a reasoned and reasonable debate in our 
society as we try to resolve the issue and other issues that exist 
around Indian taxation. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the Minister of Finance 
for that explanation and I certainly realize that negotiations can 
not all be made public and there is some delicacy in them. But I 
do want to raise one specific issue surrounding negotiations and 
that is, that as you know, some people are proposing that first 
nations people be, quote, “forced to pay the sales tax off reserve 
but that all on-reserve purchases would be tax-exempt.” 
 
And it strikes me that because of the establishment of urban 
reserves, that it would in fact be very damaging to our 
communities to have that sort of agreement. And I’m 
wondering whether part of the framework of an agreement 
would be a universal application of taxation even if . . . say the 
taxes collected on reserve would then in turn be remitted back 
to the appropriate first nations’ government, or if the 
government is in fact contemplating what is being suggested by 
others, that this province would have a patchwork whereby tax 
would be applied in some communities and not in others, or 
some parts of our communities and not in others. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, I would say, Mr. Chair, in answer to 
the question, that I think that we all have to proceed very 
carefully so as not to create false economies or to set up 
competitive . . . to put some people at a competitive 
disadvantage if I can put it that way. 
 
And what will be the outcome of negotiations remains to be 
seen. And we don’t have any specific solution in mind. We 
approach the table with an open mind and we want to discuss 
the issue. Certainly we feel that we have to arrive at a solution 
that is reasonable and seen by all of the people of the province 
to be reasonable as well. And I suspect that that solution is not 
necessarily a simple one, that there are some complications and 
implications involved, and we have to look at those very 
carefully, proceed in good faith, but certainly with a view to 
arriving at a fair resolution of these concerns. 
 
And I have every confidence that if various parties approach the 
matter in good faith, that in due course we will have a 
reasonable solution to outstanding issues related to not only 
taxation but financing of first nations’ activities in our province. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Minister, I believe the MLA for Athabasca 
would like to ask some questions in this area. 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again welcome to 
your officials and we hope that the answers that we get here are 
not politically driven but certainly factual in nature, and looking 
forward to your responses on some of these matters. 
 
On the issue of Indian taxation of course I take a special 
interest, and I certainly appreciated your comments on the 
difference of the aboriginal people in general, that there’s 
non-status, that there’s Metis, and that there’s first nations or 
treaty people that make up the mosaic of the aboriginal people 
in the province. And just out of curiosity, of course, the party 
you referred to of course is the party to my far right in terms of 
the silly notion and political games they play when they say 
Indians do not pay tax. They should pay tax. And of course 
right away you put the people that we’re dealing with in a 
defensive mode. And that certainly doesn’t do anybody any 
justice, especially the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I really in essence support and endorse the position that 
you’re taking that we have to sit down and we have to talk these 
things through. We have to provide factual information. And we 
certainly have to present a fair picture to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as a counterbalance to the whole argument we’re talking 
about, if in the event that you say okay if that’s the way you 
want to go, have you got any basic assumption as to what you 
could collect if you did charge the status Indians’ tax on all 
non-reserve purchases? And how many years would that take if 
we enforce that collection to eliminate the $15 billion deficit 
that the Tories left this province in? 
 
(1715) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I wish to say, Mr. Chair, to the 
member, that in my remarks earlier with respect to the reality of 
Indian taxation, the fact that most Indians pay most taxes, I 
certainly did not wish to be heard to say that there are only 
some people or one political party where people hold this view. 
I think there are a number of people in our province that hold 
this view and I wouldn’t say that any one political party or any 
one group necessarily subscribe to this view. I don’t see it as a 
partisan issue in that sense and nor would I want to be seen to 
be critical of any particular political party in that sense. 
 
I’m not able to give the member an answer to the question of 
how much money might be involved if treaty Indians began to 
pay PST (provincial sales tax) on purchases off reserve. It’s 
very difficult to answer that question because there might be a 
situation where the purchases would be moved to reserve over 
which the province has no jurisdiction. So there might not be 
any net gain in that event or certainly the amount of a gain 
would be difficult to assess. 
 
I would also point out that we have had a long-standing 
arrangement with treaty Indians whereby treaty Indians pay fuel 
tax and tobacco tax for purchases that they make on reserve 
which is not the case in other provinces. And they remit that 
money to the provincial government so that we are being paid 
by treaty Indians taxes that in other provinces are not collected 
from them and at the same time they’re not paying the PST off 
reserve. 
 

So it’s a matter that has several sides to it. We shouldn’t 
over-emphasize it in the sense that we’re not dealing with the 
majority of taxes not being paid by first nations people. I don’t 
think the situation is as simple as some would say it is. What 
we’ve got to do is realize I think that in the long run we’re all 
members of the same community. We’re all part of the same 
province. We’ve got to cooperate with each other, proceed in a 
reasonable fashion. 
 
And certainly it’s my hope that as we sit down with the federal 
government and the Indian bands to discuss these matters, that 
we will be guided by good faith and an attempt to resolve any 
of these matters in a reasonable fashion, in a fashion that would 
be seen by all the people of our province to be reasonable as 
well. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think the key 
point that you’re trying to stress here is that we have to 
certainly give this whole process fairness. We have to give this 
process some thought, and above all else we have to make sure 
that the process we speak about when we talk about this whole 
matter is that it be responsible. And I certainly agree with you 
that we don’t bring the political scenario in there because that 
puts everybody in a defensive mood. 
 
But certainly the big question that we have as a province is that 
of course everyone has to contribute. I think that’s a general 
feeling and everybody has contributed. So in saying that and 
certainly alleviating some of that stress and responding to your 
comments, I also want to advise you that there may be a few 
students watching this particular part of the Assembly 
proceedings. Of course as you’re aware, we have this channel 
back in Buffalo Narrows, La Loche, and Ile-a-la-Crosse, and a 
number of people have taken an interest in this. And just out of 
curiosity sake, Mr. Minister, what are the five top expenditures 
of the province? 
 
And secondly, is interest being paid one of those high 
priorities? And how much in interest do we pay per day on our 
provincial debt? And where does this provincial debt come 
from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, in answer to the question, the 
top expenditures of government . . . first of all, number one is 
health care. Health care we spent $1.72 billion higher than 
we’ve spent before and it’s about 38 per cent of everything we 
spend. So that’s very high. 
 
The next highest is — if you combine post-secondary education 
and K to 12 education — we spend approximately $1 billion. 
So that’s the second highest is Education. And then the third 
highest would be servicing the public debt, $725 million per 
year which is about . . . almost exactly $2 million a day, that’s 
interest on the accumulated debt of the government. 
 
And that, I’m happy to report, has been going down. Last year 
we spent 756 million and I believe at one time it was $860 
million — just interest on the debt — $2 million a day today. 
Going down because we’ve been paying the debt down. So 
that’s the third highest expenditure. 
 
The next highest expenditure of government would I believe be 
Social Services, which is $540 million. And lest anyone thinks 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

that Social Services only means social assistance, it does not. 
Social Services encompasses more than just paying social 
assistance costs, although those costs form a big percentage of 
what Social Services would pay out. 
 
The fifth highest expenditure of government would be 
Highways and Transportation. And this year we will be 
spending $218 million, which is an increase over last year, 
which last year was an increase over the year before. 
 
So the big expenditures would be Health, Education, interest on 
the debt, followed by Social Services, followed by Highways. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Would you be able to explain the top five 
sources of income that the provincial government has at their 
advantage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Well, I’d refer the member to page 66 
of the budget address. I appreciate the fact that the member is 
concerned that the public watching this on TV have the 
information too, and I agree with the member that that is 
valuable. 
 
Looking at this — the largest source of revenue for the province 
is individual income tax, that is about $1.26 billion per year, 
followed by sales tax which is $768 million. Those would be 
the top two. 
 
The non-renewable resources — oil and such — bring in about 
$611 million, which includes 367.5 from oil, anticipated. We’ll 
see what happens there, given the price. 
 
The fuel tax brings in $375 million, and transfers from the 
Government of Canada will bring in approximately $835 
million. 
 
So those would be the five largest sources of revenue, although 
there are many other sources of revenue that I haven’t 
mentioned. But those would be the largest ones. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — So, in essence, if we look at the scenario of 
what you pay on your debt — which is $2 million per day, 
roughly 700-and-some million dollars per year — plus the fact 
that on your provincial sales tax you really have, in essence, 
you have the same amount coming in through the provincial 
sales tax. 
 
So in a scenario in a perfect world — not sayings it’s perfect — 
but you could ultimately say today that if you did not have this 
huge debt hanging over your head, that you could actually 
operate this government without a provincial sales tax revenue 
base coming in. Is that a correct assessment to make? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes that would be generally correct. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — So in essence the $2 million per day is 
primarily because of the debt that was accumulated, which a 
huge portion of that came in during the 1980s. And in 
Saskatchewan we could in essence be PST free, had it not been 
for that huge debt hanging over our head. 
 
And that’s the point I’m trying to make today, is that as a 
province we certainly want to participate in the economy and 

have as many people come to the province and the creation of 
many jobs as you possibly could have. And you look at our 
neighbouring province of Alberta, where they seem to be 
booming, the economy is moving, and who knows how much 
longer it will take to reduce their debt, so that’s generally a 
threat to our well-being as a province. But primarily the debt is 
something that’s hanging over our head and at the rate that 
we’re going, Mr. Minister, how many more years do we have to 
look at this debt? Given the scenario that we have today with 
the low interest rates and relatively . . . take into account the 
commodity prices in terms of their up-and-down swings, what 
year would you suspect the province on this current track to be 
out of debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I certainly agree with the member, 
Mr. Chair, that debt is a serious issue and the interest charges 
are a serious issue. 
 
In terms of paying off the debt, that’s a difficult question in the 
sense that whatever period of time we’re talking about is more 
than the term of any one government or even a couple of terms. 
It’s probably, you know, somewhere in the realm of 15, 20, 25 
years, in that kind of range. But so many things can happen in 
that time period, depending on how the economy performs, the 
variety of changes that can occur in the world, that it’s very 
difficult to be more specific than that. 
 
But I also would say that, although the level of debt that we 
have in Saskatchewan is too high, the level of our public debt, 
there is some level of debt that is quite appropriate. I’m not able 
to say exactly what that would be, but it’s, I think, sort of like 
running a household. We all think it’s reasonable to have a 
home and have a mortgage on our home that we can pay off 
over time. And similarly it’s okay for the government and the 
Crown corporations to have some level of debt and perhaps 
we’ll never be debt free, perhaps we’ll get our debt down to a 
reasonable level. 
 
But certainly we all know that our debt at this point is too high, 
so we need to still reduce it somewhat. But it would take quite a 
long period of time to pay it off entirely. Perhaps to get to a 
more reasonable level of debt would take a shorter period of 
time than the period I’ve talked about. But we’ll be talking 
about well into the next century certainly. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess the 
final point I want to make — and you can keep it a simple yes 
or no — Alberta has a significant advantage over us being PST 
free. There’s no provincial sales tax and that has all kinds of 
extreme positive benefits for that particular community, the 
business community, and the working class. Everything seems 
to work when you have this provincial sales tax being 
eliminated. 
 
And I guess my point — again, a simple answer yes or no — 
that if we did not have this debt, we could in essence afford to 
be PST free in Saskatchewan. Thereby giving our long-term 
health as a province a greater chance of success and certainly 
being on an even basis with Alberta in terms of competing for a 
good show of the western economy, so to speak. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well looking at the sales tax issue alone, 
the answer would be yes. If you didn’t have a debt and you 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

didn’t have interest charges, you could afford to eliminate the 
sales tax. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, last year we were experiencing 
some positive improvements in the employment situation and 
the number of persons working in this province. We seem to 
have stalled now. And I understand we’re moving at a 
significantly slower level than both of our adjoining provinces. 
 
I wonder if the Minister could explain for us what the reasons 
behind this are? And what prospects he expects in the next 
several months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in answer to questions earlier, I 
indicated that not only I and the government but others — the 
banks, the economists, the investment dealers, and Moody’s 
financial house — believe that there will be economic growth in 
the range of 2.7 per cent this year in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, notwithstanding any negative aspects of our economy, the 
positive aspects of our economy mean that more people will be 
employed in the sense that when you have economic growth, 
generally speaking you will have some increased employment. 
 
(1730) 
 
I can tell the member, Mr. Chair, that according to officials in 
the Department of Finance, in the first four months of 1998, 
Saskatchewan created 13,450 net new jobs — that’s probably 
compared to the period in the previous year — mainly full-time 
employment. In fact part-time employment decreased. So that’s 
good news. 
 
Youth employment was up 3,725 in the first four months of 
1998 compared to 1997. Retail trade was up 5.8 per cent in the 
first three months of ’98 compared to ’97. Wholesale trade was 
up 21 per cent in the first two months. Housing starts jumped 48 
per cent in the first three months. And the population increased 
2,743 people, January ’98 compared to January ’97. 
 
So in the first four months, actually when we look at what 
happened, what we have statistics for, a lot of the indicators 
were very positive. And you know we’re all hoping that it will 
rain that we won’t have any more frost that things will go okay 
in terms of commodity prices. And the fact is that we still 
anticipate, and most people agree with us, that we will have 
economic growth. Things are actually going fairly well in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so all I can do is repeat what I said earlier, that we expect 
there to be economic growth. We expect to meet the projections 
we set in the budget. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — But can the minister explain though why we 
are doing significantly poorer even than Manitoba on 
employment growth and of course only a small fraction of the 
figures we see coming out of Alberta? Presumably the oil 
downturn has hit Alberta worse than us and yet our increased 
employment in this province is I think a quarter or a fifth the 
figures from Alberta and say . . . and less than Manitoba. 
 
Can the minister explain why we have not been able to keep 
pace with our sister provinces? 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, I would point out to the 
member that in May of 1998 the number of people employed 
rose to 485.4 thousand people, so more people than have ever 
been working before in the history of our province. Now that 
was an increase of some 17,000 people working over the 
previous month so the job growth has continued. Certainly there 
are more people employed in May of ’98 than were employed 
in April of ’98, and more people employed in May of ’98 than 
were employed in May of ’97. The figures aren’t necessarily as 
dramatic as the ’97 figures over ’96, but my point is the trend 
line continues to be that more people are employed. 
 
With respect to Manitoba, I know that in 1997 Manitoba’s job 
growth I don’t believe was what we had in Saskatchewan. So 
looking at longer periods of time and looking at the trends, 
Saskatchewan has been doing relatively well in terms of job 
creation. And as I said there are more people working in the 
province of Saskatchewan today than ever before in our history. 
Our economy continues to create jobs and we want to simply 
continue to go in that direction. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, we seem to be doing as good a 
job at educating our young people as any province in Canada, 
but what we are not doing is retaining our educated young 
people. And this has led, apparently, to us having the lowest 
retention of university graduates of any province in Canada. 
 
Now this might be understandable to compare ourselves to 
Vancouver or Toronto, but when you compare ourselves to 
Manitoba or the Maritimes, it seems more difficult to 
understand why the low retention rate. And I wonder if the 
minister could comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, historically that has certainly been the 
case in Saskatchewan. But I would like to point out that there 
are some positive indicators suggesting that there is some 
change occurring in our economy. Specifically, for three years 
running, Saskatchewan has created more jobs for young people 
— that is, people between the ages of 15 and 24, described as 
youth — than any other province. We’re rated as the best place 
for opportunities for youth to obtain work. 
 
The youth unemployment rate, which is still too high at, is I 
believe, about nine and a half per cent. I think three years ago it 
was about 15 per cent. And we have reduced the youth 
unemployment rate quite significantly. So when you look at the 
number of jobs being created for youth, the figures are good; 
the number of youth unemployed, the figures is better than 
they’ve been. 
 
Saskatchewan, relative to other provinces in the last three year 
— the independent forecasters say that we are doing the best 
job for young people. And in 1997, I’m happy to report, more 
youth moved into Saskatchewan than moved out, I’m advised. 
It’s the first time that’s happened in a long time. 
 
So we could do a lot better as a province, not only the 
government but the business community, all of us, to create 
opportunities for young people. But the good news is we’re 
doing a better job creating opportunities for young people than 
we’ve done in a very long time in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you to the minister and his officials. 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

Subvote (FI01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (FI02), (FI04), (FI03), (FI06), (FI05), (FI07), (FI08), 
(FI09) agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (FI09) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Votes 175, 176, 177 
 

Votes 175, 176, 177 — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 

Servicing the Public Debt 
Government Share 

Vote 12 
 

Subvote (FD01) — Statutory. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d just like to 
thank the official opposition and the members of the third party 
for their cooperation and their participation in this discussion. 
 
And I’d like to thank the officials from the Department of 
Finance for all the hard work they do, not just today but each 
and every day. 
 
And they do a very good job. And I think we all appreciate the 
work they do and thank them as well as the other members of 
the legislature. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
thank the minister and his officials for coming in today and for 
the previous days that they were in, for answering our 
questions. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, and, Mr. Minister, your staff, 
again thanks for sharing the information. I’m sure the 
information and the exercise we’ve done this evening will be a 
benefit to some of the students watching. I know they may have 
a thousand other questions, but we certainly have access to you, 
so we’ll pass them on to you. And thanks once again. 
 
The Chair: — There are two statutory votes that we just have 
to read into the record too and we’d like to do it while you’re 
here. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Vote 153 

 
Vote 153 — Statutory. 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Vote 150 

 
Vote 150 — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Chair: — Before we start I would ask the minister to 
introduce his officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have with me, 
Deputy Minister Stuart Kramer. On this side, Dave Phillips, 
assistant deputy minister of operations. Behind me, Shelly 
Vandermey, executive director of corporate services; Dennis 
Sherratt, director of fish and wildlife; and Dave Tulloch, 
corporate development unit. 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to agree but we have to ask you some questions first. And 
whether we agree or not will, I guess, depend on the answers. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to thank you and your officials for coming 
in again this evening. I know that we’ve had this opportunity to 
discuss some of the issues once or twice. The minister says four 
times. Well I know that some of those times were extremely 
short. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d like to start off with one of the things we 
hadn’t dealt with previously and that was forest fire fighting. I 
believe you’re budgeting somewheres in the neighbourhood of 
$28 million for forest fire fighting so it’s obviously a major 
expenditure in your department. It has a very grave economic 
impact to this province when there are forest fires. 
 
If you look in 1993, where one fire burned over half a million 
acres, that covers a lot of territory, Mr. Minister. It means a lot 
of economic losses for . . . directly for the timber that’s lost but 
also for the future for those areas, for the tourism, for the 
hunting, for the trapping — all those side services that one 
doesn’t necessarily think of initially when you talk about forest 
fires. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could describe for us exactly 
how your forest fire fighting operations operate. What are the 
procedures? What happens when you receive a call that there’s 
a fire? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly forest 
fires, at this time of the year, are gaining a lot of attention not 
only here in Saskatchewan but in neighbouring provinces as 
well. We’ve had about 414 fires to date, which is almost four 
times the normal amount for this time of the year. 
 
You indicated that our budget is around $28 million for forest 
fires. That is based on the long-term average. Last year, for an 
example, I think we spent about $22 million but we’re already 
approaching our budget figure at this time of the year, and of 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

course we can use the extreme case of 1995 when we spent over 
$90 million. 
 
We have changed the way that we attack fires in recent years. 
We’ve focused on initial attack which does take more upfront 
investment but in the long run it does save time and money and 
forest. And by getting at the fires quickly, we are able to put 
them out quickly. For an example, we only have three fires 
burning out of control as of today out of 1,414 fires. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. When 
you talk about initial attack, how do you do that? Do you have 
people riding around in airplanes looking for fires? Are you 
using spotters on the ground, in towers? Exactly how do you 
find the fire initially to do the spotting? Are you using 
lightening strike detectors? What’s the mechanism? Then when 
you’ve found a fire what’s the procedure to go in to fight it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, we have a very sophisticated 
way of tracking lightening strikes which is a cause of most 
fires; and we’re able to pinpoint them with accuracy through 
use of computers. And we can keep our equipment — mostly 
helicopters and bombers, water-bombers — ready to go. 
They’re loaded and ready to go at the first call. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well do you have people in the 
helicopters on patrol? Do you have fire-fighting crews in those 
helicopters? Or what happens? Are they located at some base 
relatively close or spread across the province, the northern half 
of the province? How do you do that? 
 
(1745) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We have bases scattered across throughout 
the north. And we have people manned at these bases 24 hours 
a day so that no matter what time the call comes in we are ready 
to dispatch equipment and manpower. And this is a great 
improvement over the way we used to deal with forest fires. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So you don’t actually have people in the 
air roaming around looking for fires, you wait for a lightening 
strike detector to indicate that there is a potential problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We do have some patrols in the area. If 
perhaps . . . if it’s a very dry area we also still have some towers 
which are manned as well to locate the fires. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — When there’s an indication of a 
lightening strike on your equipment, do you send a crew out to 
that spot? Do you send a spotter plane out to that spot? How do 
you detect whether or not there’s actually a fire on the ground 
after there’s an indication of a lightening strike? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We do have fixed-wing aircraft available 
all the time to check out lightening strikes. But if it’s in an 
extremely dry area — which it has been this spring, in the 
north-west in particular — we dispatch loaded patrols, which is 
helicopters and a crew and the water bombers, as quickly as we 
can. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So every lightning strike then results in 
a fire, does it? 
 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Every lightning strike, Mr. Chairman, does 
not necessarily result in a fire. But again if conditions are very 
dry, we’re in the area, we follow up on them all. If it’s a wet 
season, of course the fires are not as prevalent. We check for 
smoke following such storms. But if it’s a dry lightning storm 
and a dry year, we’re sure that there will be fires following. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me 
that there is technology out there available that would perhaps 
assist you beyond the lightning strike indicators. Certainly 
that’s a worthwhile project. But you can detect heat sources on 
the ground using infrared equipment and other surveillance 
techniques. 
 
Why not use that kind of technology before you send the men in 
onto the ground to indicate whether or not there is actually a 
problem there? You simply fly one of your spotter planes over 
with this equipment to detect whether or not there is a heat 
source. That would save you the necessity of sending men and 
your bomber equipment to a location where there may not be a 
fire, therefore keeping them available to the locations where 
there actually is a need for them. 
 
Are you using infrared detectors at all in the North to look for 
fires after you’ve had an indication of a lightening strike? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, we do use infrared 
equipment to go out and check an area after a storm has gone 
through. And the technology in this is very well, but on a hot 
day we do get false alarms and such like. But we do use 
infrared equipment to try and detect if there is something 
smouldering down on the ground level in the forest. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, it would seem to me, Mr. 
Minister, that the appropriate time to use an infrared detector 
would be at night when those kind of heat sources would give a 
greater indication compared to the surrounding terrain which 
would have cooled off a bit under normal circumstances. Do 
you use the infrared equipment at night? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, we appreciate the member’s 
observations, but because of the remoteness of the area and no 
traffic control, air traffic control, it would be simply just too 
dangerous to be out at night, on a dark night especially, with the 
use of helicopters. But we do get out at first light and certainly 
cool weather results in the infrared equipment working better 
but we do use it, we get good results; it helps us to get at the fire 
quickly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, it would seem that 
you’re not going to be doing this flying around O’Hare airport 
when you’re looking for forest fires in the north. I’m not sure 
that concern over . . . a great deal of concern over air traffic 
control situations is appropriate. If you have one aircraft up 
looking for your hot spots with an infrared detector, I think it 
would be very little likelihood of any problems with conflicting 
aircraft unless you’re sending out a whole herd of them to run 
in a line to do a sweep. But surely you don’t need that many. I 
don’t know how good this equipment works, but from 1,000, 
1,500 feet you should be able to make a fairly significant 
sweep, cover a large amount of territory. And simply using 
satellite guidance, GPS (global positioning systems) you could 
make a good track and determine all the problems. 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1743 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, this time of the year it’s 
light up north by 3:30, 4 in the morning. We are able to get out 
at that hour and go until 11 at night using natural light. And we 
have no problem in keeping up with checking out areas with the 
infrared, so probably we simply don’t need to fly those few 
hours of darkness up there, and for safety reason, we prefer not 
to. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What kind of aircraft do you use for 
these kind of patrols, for both the fire spotting, for the infrared, 
and what other kinds of surveillance you’re doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, for the loaded patrols we 
use the larger Bell helicopter to get people and equipment into a 
site. For the scanning with infrared surveillance we use smaller 
helicopters and also some fixed wing. And for the infrared we 
use smaller helicopters. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What is the 
cost of operating a helicopter versus a fixed-wing aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The fixed-wing aircraft fee is about $200 
an hour; smaller helicopter is about $600 an hour; and you get 
the larger helicopters — the Sikorsky’s which are loaded and 
can carry a lot of equipment and people — you could be up to 
$2,000 an hour. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, when you’re using the infrared 
equipment to do spotting with, wouldn’t it be more economical 
to use the fixed-wing aircraft? Some of these aircraft can fly at 
relatively slow speeds. I’m not sure what speed you’re flying 
your helicopters at, probably 100 miles an hour or thereabouts. 
Fixed-wing aircraft can do that also, and wouldn’t it be 
certainly more economical? They can in general get to the site 
quicker. You can spend as much or more time on site using a 
fixed-wing aircraft and while you may have to do some more 
manoeuvring to pinpoint the location, you could spend a third 
. . . three times as much time on the site and still end up with the 
same dollar cost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Our fire patrols choose to use the smaller 
helicopters, Mr. Chairman, because they are more efficient to 
get around, to make short turns, stop, and in fact drop markers 
down to assist the ground crew in locating the fire. So just 
through experience and costs, our people believe that the 
smaller helicopter is more efficient and more equally cost 
efficient as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, if it comes to 
putting down markers, surely if a large water bomber can drop 
their load within a hundred feet of initial point of attack, with a 
smaller aircraft they should be equally accurate if not more so 
because you’re flying at a lower speed. 
 
I think the idea — just because of markers that you’re using the 
helicopters — would be an inappropriate excuse for that 
particular area. There are other types of aircraft? What kind of 
aircraft are you specifically using? Are you using 185’s, Cessna 
206’s? What are the kinds of aircraft that you’re actually using 
up there for a fixed-wing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — For the fixed-wing aircraft we basically use 
what’s available. It’s quite often a Cessna 185 or 310. 

(1800) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I used to be a 
pilot. I wouldn’t want to say I am any more. But there are other 
kinds of aircraft available that give you better sight pictures 
than what the Cessnas do even though they are a high-winged 
aircraft. You have limited visibility over the nose . . . if you 
have bubble windows in them, reasonable downward side 
vision. But there are other types of aircraft available that 
actually have bubble noses in the front that allow you to get a 
very good visibility of what’s in front of you, what you’re 
flying over, as well as the sides. Have you been using any of 
those types of aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well we have used aircrafts described as 
you have suggested there, but basically we’re up North, we 
contract who we can, and we will use what we can and what’s 
available. And we’re not certainly set in just using Cessnas for 
an example. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well if you’ve used the other aircraft — 
I’m not even sure what kind they are, I don’t remember just 
what the names were in the magazines that I saw. But, if you 
have used them, what were they and what was their cost in 
relationship to the other — both helicopters and fixed-wing? 
And what was their efficiency in light of both helicopters and 
other fixed-wing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Again, Mr. Chairman, one of the makes of 
the planes the member describes is a Partonavia. We used to use 
one of them and for whatever reason we don’t use it any more, 
probably just simply not available. But again going back to the 
small helicopters — quite often these fires are just smouldering 
and we have to hover over a site to exactly pinpoint it through 
the GPS system because we need to be within a few yards in 
order to direct the fire crew there, especially if smoke and an 
obvious fire is not available. 
 
So as I say, our experts chose to use the smaller helicopters 
rather than the fixed wing in using the infrared to locate a fire. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — If, I don’t remember the name again — 
Pan something or another — that you had available, you 
mentioned . . . If those were available, would you be using 
them? 
 
And secondly, on the helicopters, when you send up the larger 
ones with the men on board, have you already pinpointed the 
fire by that time to send them, or are they sort of on a hunt for a 
fire? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The loaded helicopters will head for an area 
maybe 100 miles away if smoke has been reported in an area 
and we know there’s obviously a fire. But the loaded helicopter 
would not go out after a lightning strike and with no signs of a 
fire. We’d send a surveillance crew out first. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you. You mentioned that 
your fire fighting takes place from dawn until dusk. It would 
seem to me that if you’ve been fighting a fire for half a day or 
longer, and you’re starting to get it hopefully under control in 
that time, why would you stop at night? That would simply 
allow the fire to regenerate itself at night. With the cooler 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

temperatures it would be easier to fight the fire. If you have a 
higher humidity, which would keep the fire suppressed 
somewhat, would that not be the time to carry on and continue 
fighting that fire, to get it under control quicker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, the member is certainly 
correct. The ground crews, the caterpillars, the ground crews, 
continue to work through the night in order to bring fires under 
control. It’s just for the safety that the water bombers and some 
of the aircraft is not used. With the combination of smoke and 
clouds, it’s simply not safe. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I was 
under the impression that the ground crews weren’t fighting at 
night either, so I’m glad you corrected me on that. 
 
When the ground crews are out there fighting and you’re using 
. . . not so much the water bombers, is what I’m thinking, but 
the helicopters, do you re-supply the ground crews with water 
using the helicopters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Yes, if water’s not readily available for the 
ground crew, helicopters will take what we call water bladders 
— it may be sort of a plastic container with about 400 gallons 
— we’re able to pinpoint these and put them down for the 
ground crew to use. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So the ground crew then has to travel 
back and forth from wherever the fire was at to wherever this 
bladder may be situated. Is this bladder situated within hundred 
yards, 200 yards of the fire, or is it back a mile or five miles — 
what’s the situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Again if a natural supply of water is not 
available, these bladders are put as close to the fire as possible, 
pinpointed in consultation with the ground crew where would 
be the best place, the handiest place, to set this pad down. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So in a situation of rough terrain, it may 
be some distance away from the fire to find a level location to 
put it down. The reason I’m asking is because it was in a movie 
sometime I saw where the helicopters were actually dumping 
the water into the fire-fighting equipment from the air. Do you 
use those kind of facilities at all, or is it available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — I think, Mr. Chairman, the member saw this 
in a movie, and it’s only done in the movies. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, if your helicopters 
are so good they can drop a marker within a few yards of the 
fire, surely they could dump a couple hundred gallons of water 
in the back of a vehicle of some kind that you’re using to haul 
fire-fighting equipment around with. You may have to have 
filters on the top of it or something to screen out any debris that 
may have been in the water on the pick-up, but it would seem to 
me that would get your water there where it’s needed as quick 
as possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, Mr. Chairman, our helicopters 
certainly can take buckets and dump the water on the fire, and 
as I say, we find these bladders to be more efficient; we’re able 
to pinpoint them where we want them to go, and we don’t risk 
drowning somebody on the ground so to speak with a big 

bucket of water. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure 
if they are busy fighting a fire they wouldn’t mind getting a 
little water on them once in a while; it would probably be 
somewhat refreshing. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you’re setting up your programs to fight 
fires, who do you work in consultation with? Do you work in 
consultation with the local governments? Do you work in 
consultation with the local administrators — with the farm 
community; the fishing camps; the hunting camps; the people 
who are living in the area? Do you work in a coordinated effort 
or is it simply the department doing it’s own thing up in the 
North? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that is a good 
question. And the only reason our fire patrols are as successful 
as they are is because we work very widely with a wide 
cross-section of people. We work with the communities, the 
forest companies, the Indian bands; we work with other 
government departments when there’s a fire in an area or fires 
in an area. We have Emergency Measures Organization, 
Department of Health, Highways, Social Services in these 
communities and it’s a community effort, and certainly with the 
mayors of the villages. We work with everybody that we 
possibly can in an area. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — One of the areas that was pointed out to 
me as a problem — and you can perhaps enlighten me on this 
— is farmers along the forest fringe pushing brush piles and 
then burning them. Does that create a fire hazard for you? Does 
it create a problem? Have there been any fires started in this 
manner? And do you work with the farm community to control 
these kind of burns so that they are a controlled burn and that 
they don’t get away and start any forest fires? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, the member is amazing with 
coming up with good questions here today — as usual I might 
add. 
 
What we do along the forest fringe, especially in the spring and 
fall when burning might be looked at by adjacent landowners, is 
we issue permits. And of course, if conditions are very dry, we 
simply do not issue the permits, or a permit may be issued 
under certain weather conditions. But we do monitor that and 
continually in the spring and fall especially. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Do your crews ever assist in these kind 
of burning? Just because you need a piece of paper to throw the 
match on to the brush pile doesn’t necessarily mean it always 
happens. So, do you work with the farmer so that they can solve 
their problems while keeping your problems to a minimum? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well we do look for cooperation with the 
landowners along the forest fringe, and certainly if somebody 
ignores a permit we are able to lay charges if a fire is lit and 
escapes into the forest or onto other property. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well have you had any fire start from 
the brush piles that have been lit by farmers along the forest 
fringe? 
 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Yes, spring is the time when burning does 
occur, and with a dry spring like this a few fires along the forest 
fringe were lit, with or without permits, and escaped. And as 
you well know, in your area as well as my area, fires got away 
whether stubble fires or whatever. It was a very bad spring. And 
I think most people will take into consideration the dryness of a 
situation before they do light a match, and again we’re looking 
for cooperation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well have you issued any summonses 
this spring or over the last year for people who started fires in 
such manners without permits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, we’re not sure on that 
answer. We would be glad to get back to the hon. member with 
the response on that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s sort 
of like one of your other areas of responsibility — the local 
garbage dump. In a lot of communities you’re not supposed to 
be doing any burning there but there sure seems to be an awful 
lot of lightening strikes. And you can drive past almost any 
town dump and there seems to be some smoke rising from it, or 
the garbage is freshly burned off because of lightening when 
there hasn’t been rain for a month. 
 
So you know those accidents seem to occur and I think it’d be a 
lot better to work in cooperation with the people along the 
forest fringe to deal with their necessities, to protect but still 
dealing with your needs to protect the forest. And I think, in 
those areas, some cooperation might help everybody out and 
particularly when you have your crews already in place, perhaps 
they simply need to . . . they could use some experience in 
fighting some of these fires, and simply deal with them in the 
brush pile if you have new people involved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — I’d like to use this opportunity to commend 
our forest fire fighters. We’ve spent about $28 million this year 
on 400-and-some fires, Alberta has spent $62 million on 
500-and-some fires — so we’re quite impressed with the job 
our people are doing. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You say you 
have your aircrafts spotted at various locations across the north 
when it comes to fire-fighting. Are these at central locations? 
Do you have strips that you use outside of those central 
locations? I know that in previous years — going back 10 years, 
20 years, 30 years — there were a number of strips put in along 
the north to use for fire-fighting. Are those still maintained and 
used or are you simply using a few central locations? 
 
(1815) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, the strips the member refers 
to are still in use and, of course, with an example this year the 
north-west is a hot spot whereas the north-east is not so bad. 
We’ve focused most of our crews in there and we’ve positioned 
our crews wherever there is an air strip and a community that 
we can work out of. So we do move around, depending upon 
where the pressures are. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Have you 
used any of the agricultural spray planes — some of the larger 

air tractors and those kind — that could carry water that aren’t 
used normally in the spring for agricultural spraying? This is 
the time of the year they start to get real busy. Have you used 
any of those in the past to fill your needs that you’ve had with 
fighting the forest fires in the north in the early part of the 
season? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, we have found that the 
volume of material that can be transported by the agricultural 
spray planes for an example does not offer much service to us. 
We may use DC-6 planes as water bombers which have a much 
better capacity than the smaller planes from the agriculture area 
of the province. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How much 
water would a helicopter be able to deliver on site if you were 
using it to supply water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The helicopters we use can deliver about 
150 gallons of water. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, some of the larger agricultural 
sprayers could deliver a lot more than that. Now they can’t sit it 
down right in one spot obviously, but some of the large air 
tractor units could deliver probably up to 500 gallons in a load. 
I don’t know how practical they would be? That’s why I’m 
asking. But have you looked at those and given some 
consideration to using some of the large spray equipment that is 
available in southern Saskatchewan early in the season to fight 
forest fires in the north? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, we find greater efficiencies 
with the DC-6 planes that can carry 1,200 gallons of water in 
one trip. And we just simply have not got into contracting 
farmers’ spray planes, for an example, to help us with the fires. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s my 
questions on forest fire fighting, although perhaps I should ask 
one more. What is your estimate going to be this year for the 
cost? You say you’ve already spent approximately what you 
budgeted, $28 million. We’re a month, to a month and a half 
into the season. We have a long time to go yet. What is your 
projected cost for fighting forest fires this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, we are away 
above average, almost four times the number of fires than a 
normal year, and we are approaching our $28 million budget. If 
it turns wet, we could be close to budget. If it stays dry, we 
could be over. So we have really no idea of predicting where 
we’ll end up. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, although 
I can’t say that was a very comforting answer. 
 
It’s been dry. The forecasts that I’ve seen do not project us to 
get a whole bunch more rain — storms basically. So I think it 
might be safe to work on the assumption the weather we have is 
the weather we’re going to have. And so perhaps you better 
start talking to your colleague a couple of . . . well normally 
who would sit a seat and a half behind you there, and dig into 
his wallet and come up with some more money for you, because 
I think you’re going to need it. 
 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Mr. Minister, one of the other areas you deal with is parks and 
tourism. I wonder if you could give us some indication of what 
your priorities are this year for parks; what your projections are 
for tourist visits; and how the tourist visits compare from 
out-of-province visitors to in-province visitor . . . what you’re 
projecting for this year and how that compares to last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member is correct 
in identifying parks as being a very important part of people’s 
lives here in Saskatchewan. Last year we had about 2.2 million 
visitors to our parks. This year the May long weekend showed 
an 84 per cent increase in the visitors to our parks, largely 
because of the weather. 
 
Our parks are very important and a year ago we increased the 
funding for capital structure replacement by $1.7 million, and 
this is for roads, essential buildings, waterworks, and a number 
of these projects are underway this year. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you can give me some indication of a breakdown of in-province 
and out-of-province visitors to our park system. And while 
you’re on your feet, and since you know my area fairly well, I 
wonder if you can give us some indication whether you’re 
actually going to ever do anything with the Christopher trail 
running through Kenosee . . . Moose Mountain Provincial Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, Mr. Chairman, about 80 per cent of 
our park visitors are from in province and especially along the 
Alberta border — Meadow Lake, Cypress Hills — we do get a 
lot of visitors from Alberta. But of course we get visitors from 
all over the world to our parks. 
 
And, as the member indicated, there’s a number of trails and 
facilities that have gone . . . sort of been allowed to deteriorate, 
and that’s what we are trying to do is fix, first of all the most 
essential services — the water, sewage, roads, buildings, power 
— and by all means we want to certainly look at the other 
recreational facilities as well, and we will do that as money 
becomes available. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well those are the issues for the 
summertime, but how about some of the winter trails — the 
ski-doo trails and the ski trails — that take place in the parks 
throughout the wintertime. Are you carrying on with providing 
winter trails, ski-doo trails, in the parks or is that something 
that’s being dropped by the wayside? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Because our winters are usually so long, 
winter recreation is very important. We are committed to 
maintaining our winter activities — snowmobiling, 
cross-country skiing — and we work with the local snowmobile 
clubs. On a provincial basis we work with the Saskatchewan 
Snowmobile Association in maintaining longer trails which go 
beyond the parks. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Are you continuing to provide grooming 
for those trails and providing those trails, both ski-doo and for 
skiers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well we have winter activity such as 
snowmobiling and cross-country skiing; we do groom the trails. 
Again the type of winter would dictate whether the trails are 

groomed satisfactorily or not, but we do certainly pay attention 
to this and do the best we can. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like 
to move on to another area, since you also deal with wildlife 
mitigation projects and some of the government lands in that 
way, dealing with elk breeders and some of the exotic animals 
such as . . . 
 
I know that your department is having some discussion with the 
farmers in the Alameda area, I believe, dealing with the 
mitigation lands around the Alameda dam. Mr. Minister, they 
have a concern there that the wildlife officials want to reduce 
the access of cattle to those lands. And fact is the proposal is to 
allow . . . I believe it is 10 animals per quarter section once 
every three years. They have a great deal of concern with that, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
They believe that that will: (a) restrict the number of animals 
that they can carry over from year to year. Two, that those lands 
that are left for that two-year period with no grazing will simply 
become a fire hazard, and that on the third year when the 
grazing does become . . . the land becomes accessible to 
grazing, that the grasses there will not be of the kind that the 
animals particularly want and so therefore won’t be good 
grazing. 
 
Is there some way that this type of policy can be mitigated to 
allow perhaps better access — to restricting smaller parcels to 
that kind of a policy — rather than the entire watershed that 
Environment has access to in their dealings with the mitigation 
lands at the Alameda dam? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, as the member well knows, 
10, 12 years ago when this project was being brought in, part of 
the licensing agreement would be that X number of acres of 
land would be purchased and planted for wildlife values and set 
aside for wildlife. And what we are doing is certainly working 
with the community and using grazing as a management tool. 
And we certainly don’t want to move too quickly. 
 
At the same time we appreciate the concerns that the 
landowners had — probably the same ones that used to own this 
land at one time. So we’re prepared to work with the 
landowners and community. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, are you prepared to meet 
with the landowners from that area? They have met with the 
Minister of Agriculture on this very issue. Are you prepared to 
meet with them to discuss some possible arrangements? 
 
They have a number of issues that . . . changes they want to see 
made to increase the, not even necessary to increase the 
numbers of cattle allowed on a quarter section at a time, but to 
allow access more often rather than once every three years. 
That, you know, some portion be set aside so that grazing could 
still carry on on other portions of the quarter section, and those 
types of scenarios. They have an . . . I don’t remember what it is 
15, 20 different items that they would like to discuss. Would 
you be prepared to meet with them at some point to try and ease 
some of their concerns? 
 
One of the items that was of concern to them — there is 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

approximately 20 or 25 landowners that are involved in this and 
they’re going to be restricted down to six landowners having 
access to these parcels of land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, our door is always open. 
We’d be happy to meet with the representatives from this group 
of landowners. If you want to have them call my office, we’d be 
glad to set up a meeting. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. One of 
the other agricultural issues that involves your department is the 
elk breeders. And there is some tension between your 
department, the elk breeders, and agriculture. The elk breeders 
want their animals classified as domesticated animals, falling 
under agriculture, whereas your department seems to want to 
retain them under your classifications as wildlife. They have 
some concerns and how that’s going to impact with their 
industry? 
 
It’s obviously a growing industry; it’s a high-dollar industry. 
More and more people are getting involved in the elk programs. 
In fact it’s just not elk, but the elk breeders are the ones that are 
expressing their concerns right now because bison are also 
involved. They would like to be regulated under the Agriculture 
department as domesticated animals. What is the reason that 
your department wishes to retain that type of administrative 
control? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly concur with the 
hon. member that the game-farming industry is expanding very 
rapidly. The number of animals on game farms is increasing by 
about 20 per cent a year, which is a phenomenal growth for any 
industry. Elk, deer, and other native wildlife species in the 
province, there can be conflicts. And because of this, sir, my 
department will remain involved, and I would like to let the 
hon. member know that we’ve had a very good rapport with the 
executive of the Saskatchewan Elk Breeders Association. 
We’ve come up with a new policy. And certainly what the elk 
rancher does with the animal on his ranch is under the purview 
of the Department of Agriculture, but when there’s conflicts 
between escaped animals or wild intruders up against a game 
farm fence, we will be involved. 
 
And also the export-import protocol, we will be involved, as is 
virtually every other jurisdiction in North America. The 
Department of Natural Resources monitors the import-export, 
and of course that is because of the ever-present threat of 
disease coming into the province and this would be devastating 
to not only the wildlife, but to the game farming industry as 
well. 
 
(1830) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We certainly 
want to carry on with a healthy industry in this province, but we 
don’t want to unduly restrict it so that it doesn’t have the 
opportunity to grow. I wonder if you can give me some sort of 
indication as to how many wild elk there are in this province 
and compare that to the number of domesticated elk that are in 
enclosures operated by farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Our best estimate is we have about 12,000 
elk in the wild. And this spring there was around 14 to 15,000 

elk on game farms, and with the offspring we could be up to 
18,000 elk on game farms by this fall. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Haven’t heard of too many hunters 
finding them. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes. As my colleague said, maybe your 
estimates on the wild elk are a little high. Nobody seems to be 
able to capture any in the fall. It seems that the farmers are 
doing a better job than the wild animals are at reproducing and 
maintaining the economy of this province in the matter. 
 
I have some disagreement though with you when you use the 
term game farm. In my mind it conjures up a farm in which 
somebody goes hunting. And I know that a number of people 
have expressed concerns about that, not in the way that you’re 
using it to describe elk farms, but have some concerns about the 
idea of being able to go to a farm and shoot an animal. So 
perhaps some other type of terminology would better describe 
the farms that raise domesticated elk or fallow deer or bison or 
some other types of things that we normally think of as being 
wild animals but are actually in enclosures and being farmed 
and raised in a production-type manner. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the other areas that you’re also involved in 
is recycling. And we’ve seen a number of initiatives in that area 
— finally paying money for Tetra-Paks, which you had 
collected money on for a considerable period of time but had 
not provided any return on those deposits. You’re also now 
charging for oil, you’re charging for filters, you’re charging for 
tires. 
 
I wonder if you could give me some indication of . . . where are 
the recycling depots for oil, for filters, and for tires? Nobody 
seems to know where they are or how you get a hold of them. 
Quite a few people, both in industry and agriculture, are saving 
their oil, are keeping the things that they have to pay these 
deposits on, and yet they have no idea where they return them 
to or what happens to them. They’re just simply piling up on 
their farms and in their businesses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to clarify the 
hon. member’s opening statement. We are not charging 
consumers for oil, filters, tires, and what have you. It is the 
industry that is doing that. And we appreciate the industry 
taking the responsibility to get this recycling up and running. 
 
And what we have is, with tires, the groups like the automobiles 
association, Canadian Tire, and others are actively collecting 
this $3.50 a tire and are processing tires. We processed 
hundreds of thousands of tires already and we haven’t got to the 
stockpiles, but we will be getting there. 
 
With the oil, the program came into effect last fall and the 
industry has only two depots set up, at Outlook and Weyburn so 
far. But they are actively setting up more depots and we are 
discussing with them the idea of collection trucks going around 
to farms and collecting the used oil and filters, which will be 
very handy to farmers. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well it would be nice if they were 
coming around doing that, but I don’t know of any that are 
actually doing that. And I’m sure if they show up at my 



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

doorstep they’re going to want me to pay something for that. 
When I’ve already paid once for that issue, now I’m going to 
have to pay again to dispose of it. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Minister, you’re saying that industry is 
doing this. Well I see the heavy hand of government behind it 
also, pushing — that either you do this or we’re going to make 
you do it, and here’s the rules under which you’re going to do it 
if we do it. So while you may say that industry is taking the lead 
role in this, I think they’re doing so with the carrot-and-stick 
approach, with a very small carrot and a very large stick — that 
either you will do this or we will regulate it and you will be 
forced to do it. 
 
Because, Mr. Minister, I had a phone call from one of my 
communities here earlier this spring where the person was 
complaining that his competitor in town wasn’t charging the $5 
fee for tires — he was charging it, but his competitor was not. 
So he said either this changes or I’m not going to be able to 
afford to do it either. 
 
So you’re collecting the fees, and yet when I visit or drive past 
the dumps in my constituency, there’s tires there and lots of 
them. So the consumer is being taxed $5 on this tire, or 3.50, 
whatever it is. There’s no disposal of it. It simply goes to the 
dump. So where does the money go? And who gets the tires? 
And where do they go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
Saskatchewan Scrap Tire Corporation, this is a group of 
industries that have got together to recycle tires. When you pay 
that $3.50, that is to cover for that tire to be recycled. 
 
As I said we haven’t got enough money in the coffers yet — or 
at least the corporation hasn’t — to deal with the backlog of 
tires, but we will be. And as far as being critical of recycling, 
I’d like to remind the hon. member that we have 20 million 
litres of used oil which is disposed of improperly. 
 
And as the member may know, when property changes hands, 
often an environmental audit is being conducted before a 
lending institution will loan money. And I think that everybody 
wants to get these products out of the way. Many communities 
have banned the disposal of tires in their dumps. 
 
And we are making good progress. And through cooperation — 
I realize we’re just getting started up — but hopefully within a 
matter of a few months or a year or so, we will have much 
better success rate and quicker responses to the people who pay 
these levies. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, far from being 
critical of the actual recycling, I’m being critical of your 
department for charging the fees and not doing the recycling. 
 
You’ve been collecting the tax money off of it, but you haven’t 
been providing the corresponding service. Because obviously 
the tires are still lying at the town dumps and around the 
province. The oil is still sitting out in businesses and farmers. 
It’s not being recycled. 
 
We’re being charged for it — but it’s not happening. And your 
department obviously did not have the programs up in place and 

running when you started to collect the fees. That’s what I’m 
being critical of, Mr. Minister. 
 
When are we going to be able to recycle those tires? When are 
we going to be able to recycle that oil? When are we going to be 
able to recycle those filters? The Tetra-Pak, the deposits on that 
have been in place for just about five years. Only this year — 
and they’re not even being recycled yet — they’re being 
collected, but I’m not even sure they’re being recycled yet. So 
when is the program going to be available for the tires, for the 
oil, and for the filters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, we do not 
see a penny of this fee on the used filters, oil, tires. It is industry 
driven. We believe in free enterprise, that the businesses will 
look after the disposing of their waste products. And as I said, 
it’s got some growing pains but we are making progress and we 
ask people who have a supply of oil on their farm or whatever 
to be patient. We want to get to it as quick as we can. In areas 
like Lloydminster, Canora, Humboldt, there are trucks going 
around picking up used oil from farmers. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You 
mentioned that when land is sold or transferred that it’s starting 
to . . . you need an environmental audit on the situation. And 
that’s certainly the case, because banks are not prepared to lend 
money now without an environmental audit. But what happens 
when you can’t get a clean bill of health? Who is responsible? 
Is it the landowner that is responsible to make the 
determinations? If that landowner doesn’t clean the land up, 
does your department step in and say, here is an environmental 
concern; you will clean it up. What happens in those situations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well the member has come up with another 
very good issue in who is responsible for cleaning up a piece of 
property. Is it the current owner? Is it the former owner when 
that pollution occurred? Is it the local community, who received 
benefits from, say, a service station with a leaking underground 
fuel tank? Is it government? And that is something we are 
grappling with, environmental liability. And it’s a big issue and 
every case is different. And sometimes it’s quite simple. If you 
can pinpoint the polluter, the polluter pays. But when the 
polluter is gone, it’s a much different story and we are working 
with industry stakeholders to try and come up with a solution as 
to how we can best deal with these issues which leaves an 
innocent victim, the current owner, holding the bag. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. But when 
you know of a situation, do you order it to be cleaned up or do 
you just let that situation sit there and exist until somebody goes 
to the bank and wants to transfer title of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, where there is a clear 
indication of who the polluter is and the damage is obvious, we 
can order — and have done so — to have the polluter clean up 
the site. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, the reason I ask is 
because I know of a particular case that occurred at Carlyle. 
There was an order to do a clean-up; partial clean-up was done. 
Now the land . . . the owner wants to transfer the land. The 
Environment Department won’t give it a clean bill of health, but 
neither will they issue an order demanding that it be cleaned up. 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

So in some of these situations, obviously the orders don’t 
happen because this particular landowner is — I would suspect 
is — an exception, because he wants an order to clean it up. 
Because he in turn will pass that bill on to the previous owners, 
but he can’t do that until he gets an order to do a clean-up. 
 
So what we need in this particular case — and I’ll pass the file 
over to you — is an order to clean up a site where it was a spill 
from a leaking fuel tank. And so this is one of those areas where 
an order is needed. Now I suspect most people who have 
underground fuel tanks that leak don’t want orders; but this 
particular person does. So I will pass that file on to you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We would be pleased to receive the file. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Go back to the 
wildlife now. I’m not sure if you’re aware of it, but last winter 
there was some concerns in the area north of Moose Mountain 
Provincial Park with wolves that were causing havoc with some 
of the domestic animals in the area. There were a number of 
beef cattle that were killed. There was some horses that were 
killed, and I know of at least one domestic elk that was killed. 
 
Mr. Minister, what’s the policy on wolves in southern 
Saskatchewan when they’re harassing livestock? Can you shoot 
them? If so . . . or dispose of them? If so, at what times of the 
year and under what manner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, the incident the member 
refers to is a case of four timber wolves ranging far out of their 
range down to the Moose Mountain Park area. Two of the 
wolves that we know of were shot, and certainly any landowner 
can shoot a predator that is harassing or chasing or killing its 
livestock. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. One of 
the concerns that were expressed to me was that it’s very 
difficult to actually catch the animal in the act. So is it 
acceptable to dispose of the animals that are in the 
neighbourhood that are suspected of causing these problems or 
do you have to catch the animal in the act? And I ask this not 
just with wolves, but also with coyotes which are becoming a 
problem. I had a phone call last week where coyotes dragged 
down a colt and had eaten the hindquarters out of it and the colt 
was still alive. 
 
(1845) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The member refers to the control of 
coyotes. Again, if you’re losing chickens and you see a coyote 
in the yard, you don’t have to see the coyote with a chicken; 
you can shoot the coyote or trap it. So common sense is to be 
used. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well what if most of these people are 
operating their livestock operations not just in their yards but in 
their pastures and over their land. Are they entitled to also 
dispose of coyotes in a manner on their property even though it 
may not be within their yard site? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, yes, you can control predators on 
your land but to go on to other people’s property it’s a different 

story. To hunt or trap on other people’s property you need to get 
permission. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. 
Outfitters are also under your purview and your responsibility. 
There is a number of concerns, and we met a couple of weeks 
ago with an outfitting group that had some concerns. 
 
How many outfitters are there in the province that are operating 
with licences or certificates, or whatever it is that they receive? 
And what’s the best estimate of outfitters that are operating in 
the province without the official sanction of the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We have about 540 outfitters in the 
province. This includes both hunting and fishing outfitters. And 
if somebody suspects somebody is doing illegal outfitting we 
ask them to give us a call. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well I’ve been told about areas and 
people that complaints have been laid against, but you’ve got to 
catch them red-handed. And the department doesn’t have a lot 
of personnel to go into these kinds of investigations, therefore it 
seems to be of limited success in actually trying to pursue these 
types of operations. 
 
One of the areas though that might be . . . that the department 
could work on, would be in the issuance of recreational permits 
in the North, where you’re allowed to have a cabin on a 
particular lake and to operate out of those areas. This seems to 
be sort of an area where people have an opportunity to perhaps 
stretch the rules a little bit there and rather than just simply the 
individual and the immediate family — it all of a sudden 
becomes all of the aunts and uncles and neighbours and friends 
and anybody you went to school with 50 years ago that can use 
these facilities. 
 
What does the department do to check up on these, that they’re 
actually operating within their permits, and what do you do 
when you find they’re not operating within those permits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, as the member knows, the law is only 
as good as the people respect it. With reference to two things: 
the illegal outfitting, we have carried out undercover 
investigations and laid charges. With reference to the 
recreational outfitting, or lease, and money is changing hands, 
we rely on people letting us know if there’s a problem. We will 
investigate, and we may not be able to solve everything, but we 
certainly will try to. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What are the restrictions placed on a 
recreational lease? Who can use it? Can any number of people 
utilize those facilities or are they restricted in some manner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — For recreational use, Mr. Chairman, 
discretion is used. Basically your guests, your family, your 
friends, can use the recreational lease but there shall be no 
money changing hands for profit. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well that’s pretty hard to regulate, if 
you can allow anyone in on that lease. That transfer of any 
funds, if that’s what’s happening, could occur 500 miles away 
and not anywhere near Saskatchewan or near that location, so it 
would be very difficult to track that. 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Has there been any consideration given to limiting the number 
of people who can access these recreational leases? Not the 
lease itself, but rather the number of people that can access the 
wildlife resource out of those locations during any particular 
year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well again common sense is required here. 
The individual has a recreational lease for his personal use and 
to invite family, friends to come and share the natural values of 
the area. Obviously if it is overused there is going to be 
impacts, but these people require licences for hunting and 
fishing like everyone else. And again we rely on people to use 
good judgement. Rather than bringing in 500 people, we may 
suggest 15 to visit a remote area in the North, for an example. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — But if you have no method of control or 
tracking, or there are no regulations in place, I’ve heard of 
situations where an outfitter is on a particular location and may 
be allowed to have five people in or ten people in a season. 
Whereas a recreational leaseholder on the same area can have 
two dozen people in there during the season, be that hunting or 
fishing — depending on what the circumstances are. If there is 
no control on it, then your regulations are currently not being 
observed, and it doesn’t seem that the department is doing a 
whole lot to try and deal with the situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — If overuse of a recreational lease is causing 
impacts on fish, for an example, we can change to 
catch-and-release policy. But I guess it’s similar to you renting 
a hotel room, and you might invite two or three people to come 
and visit you, or you may invite a hundred. I mean, there’s 
some common sense required, and obviously as the number of 
people is impacting the site, there’s a problem, whether it’s a 
hotel room or a site as you’re referring to. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well Mr. Minister, if I had a hundred 
people in my hotel room, the manager would soon step in, and 
we’d all be gone that day. He wouldn’t wait to the end of the 
season to say; well no, you’ve been a naughty boy, you 
shouldn’t have had that many people in your hotel room. 
 
So Mr. Minister, that’s the problem. That kind of on-site 
management is not taking place. And because you don’t have 
the number of officers out there to actually do that, I don’t 
expect them to visit every recreational site every day. But if you 
had some regulations in place to deal with the number of people 
that were allowed to utilize the site, the amount of game that 
was to be taken out through that particular location, be it fish or 
big game or birds as the case may be, I think some of those kind 
of things would mitigate some of the problems that we may 
very well be facing. Have you given any considerations to those 
kinds of regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, like the hotel manager, if 
we get a complaint, we investigate it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again, still 
with outfitters but on a different venue. You’re talking about 
changing the structures for outfitting — that you’d go into 
partnerships with the outfitters though the SOA (Saskatchewan 
Outfitters Association) to do some certification . . . professional 
body sort of in place. When that happens, Mr. Minister, if it 
does happen, who would be setting the fees that would be 

charged to a licensed outfitter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The province would be setting the fees in 
consultation with the outfitters. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would the 
entire amount of those fees be remitted to the province or would 
the administration be taken out by the SOA or the organization 
that would be dealing with the certification? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, we are just in the process of 
working with the outfitters to come up with policies, fees, and 
ways that we can better operate the outfitting industry. Our goal 
is to consult with all of the outfitters, not just the SOA, and we 
will certainly do that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Hopefully you 
will do that because obviously the SOA does not represent the 
majority of outfitters. 
 
If this proposal does go forward, who would be enforcing the 
bylaws that would affect the certification of outfitters and what 
kind of penalties would be in place to deal with those? Would 
the penalty simply be the withdrawal of the certificate, therefore 
the outfitter would no longer be entitled to carry out an 
outfitting operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, we have not got to that 
stage yet. It’s certainly one of the obvious issues we need to 
deal with, and we will be working with the outfitters, the 
government departments, and other stakeholders to see how we 
best develop this policy. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 
concerns I would have with this policy would be that you would 
end up with a limited number of outfitting permits or licenses. 
Sort of end up in a situation like marketing boards with milk. 
Where — while it’s not legal to sell the permit — with 
marketing boards and milk you can’t sell your quota, but you 
sell the cow for an exaggerated price which reflects the actual 
market value of the quota. And I have a concern that this move 
may head down that road in that direction. 
 
And I think it would be important to make sure that that doesn’t 
happen, that there not be a limit to the number of outfitters that 
have legally licensed operations in this province. Because there 
is a number — and I don’t know what that number would be — 
of illegal operations in this province. So we have room for 
expansion of the legal outfitting operations in this province. 
 
So if a limit was to be placed on there at some time, because 
people being people, they’re going to want to maximize their 
returns. And by limiting the number of outfitting operations, or 
the legal outfitting operations, increase the value of that asset. 
So I think it’s important that we not get into that area of quotas, 
that there be a fixed number of licences. Rather it simply has to 
be if you can make your operation work within the 
requirements — and I understand that we have blocks that you 
set aside for people to outfit out of — within that requirement, 
that there should be no limits on the number of licences that are 
available. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We appreciate your comments and it’s 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

something that we’re well aware of and we’ll be working with 
the industry on. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 
other areas that you’re somewhat involved with, and I’m not 
sure just to what extent, are the drainage situations. I’m 
thinking particularly of the Langenburg area where over the last 
number of years there’s been some concerns of draining some 
of the wetlands in that area on farmers’ lands and sloughs and 
that, and draining it into the Assiniboine River and on into 
Manitoba so we run into a conflict of interprovincial 
jurisdictions there. What is the status of those proposals and 
does your department deal with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The member has raised another, yet 
another, very important issue and that’s the whole issue of 
drainage of wetlands. And with Langenburg east, the province 
of Manitoba has raised the flag as well as some citizens and 
there is a basin-wide study going on there to see how we best 
might manage water, which is often a very scarce and precious 
resource. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. It seems 
whenever anybody’s talking about water, Manitoba always 
raises a flag until they run a little bit short and they want a 
whole bunch. That’s what happened on the Rafferty-Alameda 
projects, with the Garrison Diversion, with the proposals of 
Darling Lake in North Dakota. It seemed that Manitoba had 
concerns until all of a sudden they were short on water and they 
wanted North Dakota to open the taps up. 
 
So what is the situation along the Assiniboine River with the 
drainage from the Langenburg area? There is some drainage 
already taking place. It’s been indicated to me that some of it’s 
not legal drainage but that those people don’t want their 
neighbours further upstream to be allowed to drain because then 
that would impact on their drainage operations that they already 
have in place. Is this being held up by Manitoba or is it a 
national thing that’s holding it up? And if so, how long is it 
going to take before those are resolved? 
 
(1900) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Certainly the people downstream in 
Manitoba have concerns. Because it’s an inter-provincial river, 
the federal government’s involved and we expect the study to 
go on for at least another year or two. And meanwhile there’s a 
freeze on drainage in the Assiniboine basin. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, there’s also some 
concerns about land use studies going on up in the north-east 
area dealing with some of the provincial lands. Is there a study 
going on up in the area to determine land use policies, whether 
hunting camps can be placed in that area by individuals to use 
as such? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We have a stakeholder group of over 20 
individuals representing various interest groups to come up with 
the land use plan for the Pasquia-Porcupine, and we’re making 
great progress. And this is a way of doing business. We want to 
have everybody’s input into an area and develop a land use plan 
before one industry walks away with everything. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Well according to a letter I received 
here, this study started in June of 1995. How long is this study 
going to take, because obviously people are waiting for 
decisions to be made and for things to happen up in that area. 
That’s three years now, surely some determinations have been 
made and some plans have been finalized as to what’s going to 
happen with this area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Good news for the hon. member. This 
particular land use plan should be finalized within the next 
couple of months. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. 
Hopefully that part of those land use decisions will be to allow 
the area to also be used for recreational use, such as hunting and 
fishing. I don’t know if there’s fish in that area, I’ve only 
hunted up in Pasquia Hills. Besides, I’m not much of a 
fisherperson anyway so it wouldn’t do me any good to go 
fishing. So hopefully hunting will be a part of that. 
 
I know that some of my colleagues want to ask you a couple of 
questions. Thank you, Mr. Minister, and officials. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The question 
that I have came to mind about a day or two ago and there was 
an ad on one of the Saskatoon radio stations where the WWF 
(World Wildlife Fund) was pleading for funds to get involved 
in Saskatchewan. And I’m wondering what your position is as 
head of the department, on having some international 
organization come in and tell us what to do, and if you’re aware 
of what their intentions are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The World Wildlife Fund is a national 
organization with many members here in Saskatchewan, and we 
certainly work cooperatively with all interest groups, 
provincially and nationally, that have some interests or 
relationship with SERM. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I guess I have some considerable concern 
about some of these international organizations that have some 
very strong directions that are fairly contrary to most people in 
this particular province coming in and telling us what to do. 
They do have some . . . And the ad went on to say that they will 
have some ideas for the Smoothstone-Dore Lake area. And I’m 
wondering what information you have on that and whether 
you’re onside with what they want to tell us to do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We are working on a land use plan, Mr. 
Chairman, for the Dore-Smoothstone Lake. We believe the end 
result will be: there will be room for logging; there’ll be some 
areas which should be set aside; there will be some recreational 
opportunities. Again we want to accommodate as big a variety 
of interests as we can. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Because these organizations tend to be able 
to create some very vivid and colourful and effective 
advertising programs, and they do this on any issue where they 
want their point of view brought into place. Are you prepared to 
put the Saskatchewan people’s position ahead of their position, 
or are they going to be telling you what to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We certainly consider the views of groups 
like the World Wildlife Fund, the Canadian Wildlife 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Federation, etc., when we’re doing business. Now, for example, 
some people would like over a billion acres set aside around the 
Dore-Smoothstone area. This simply will not happen. And what 
we will do is come up with a balanced land use plan which will 
contain some protected areas to meet the concerns of a number 
of people in Saskatoon who frequent that area and appreciate 
the wilderness in the area. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And I guess I’m one of those people that use 
that area, because I shot my first moose there some 25, 30 years 
ago and have had many good times in the area over there both 
fishing and hunting. So I have some definite concerns there as 
well. What happens to an outfitter that happens to have territory 
that overlaps or coincides with the area the you want to set 
aside or that the WWF is going to ask you to set aside? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Certainly groups like outfitters will be 
grandfathered into a land-use plan. And just because an area is 
set aside from say logging or mining does not mean that hunting 
and fishing will not be allowed in the area. That should be 
determined by the land-use committee. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The ad goes on to make statements that 
there’s all sorts of critical game groups there and that what they 
want to accomplish is change those members and they have 
examples, such as I think they have the cormorant, that they 
said is basically endangered out there and they’re concerned 
about it. Is that particular bird in trouble over there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The example of the double-crested 
cormorant, they definitely are not endangered. There are some 
in the Dore-Smoothstone Lake area, but we’re not worried 
about protecting them necessarily. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I think that underlines 
exactly what my concern is. There is no problem with that 
particular bird and yet that organization is holding that up as a 
bird that’s in difficulty and so people are supposed to send their 
money in and support their programs. And I think as soon as we 
start to listen in Saskatchewan to those organizations, making 
those kinds of statements that aren’t valid as you’ve just 
underlined, I think we’re in trouble of managing our own 
resources as the people of Saskatchewan want it. 
 
I do have one other question, and this one was brought to me by 
one of my constituents, and it deals with hunting regulations 
and maybe a crossover of hunting regulations and traffic 
regulations. 
 
I believe when you’re riding an ATV (all-terrain vehicle) you’re 
supposed to wear a helmet. But you’re travelling in a hunted 
area and you are going out there to hunt so you’re wearing your 
white or your red cap and this sort of thing. What do you wear? 
Do you wear the red cap or do wear the helmet? Who’s going to 
win that one — SERM or SGI? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all you’re not 
able to hunt from an ATV. You’d be travelling to or from a 
particular area. If you want to pursue this with us we can get a 
more detailed response back on that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. It’s not quite as simple as that 
because under the statement and the situation we’ve created, 

you could legally have on a white helmet which is totally 
dangerous because that’s the same reason that you’re not 
allowed to wear a white toque or a white hat in hunting season. 
So you create situations in there that are very difficult. But as 
you said you’re giving it some thought, and I’ll check with you 
sometime when you’re sure what could happen in that situation 
or which department would win that one. And that concludes 
my questioning. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just have a 
couple of questions, Mr. Minister. One of them, I . . . And the 
Department of SERM, how many women are working in that 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We will take notice, Mr. Chairman, and get 
that answer for you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. I had a number of 
calls lately in this area. I understand that SERM has been taken 
to Human Rights by some women in this department and it 
seems to me that there is an unusually large number of 
complaints from women in this department. Have you been 
talking . . . have you got any knowledge of this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We certainly disagree with that 
observation, but if you have some examples we’d appreciate 
hearing from you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — We will discuss it later then, Mr. Minister. 
Would you give me some information on the Porcupine Pasquia 
forest management area. There was some discussions and some 
actual surveys or meetings held around the province about this 
area when they talked about Arran area. Has there been a final 
decision made on that area, and has there been discussions with 
the outfitters and groups in that area once the decision was 
made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated earlier the 
plan will be completed in a couple of months. Outfitters have 
been a very important part of this process and they will be 
grandfathered into the land-use plan and all of the other 
components will be built in as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, at the time there was 
discussions about bear-stands and that type of concerns from 
outfitters. Has the final decision been made on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Existing outfitters that use bear-stands will 
be grandfathered in. The stands can remain. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
this winter we discussed snowmobile trails across Crown lands, 
and the fact that there was a fee charged to clubs to actually put 
signage up on Crown lands. Has there been further discussion 
on that item? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We have met with the Saskatchewan 
Snowmobile Association as late as last month; we will continue 
to do so. And of course the issue is keeping the trails up and 
we’re working cooperatively with the organization using 
various avenues to maintain these trails. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’m not sure if this is the 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

question that should be directed to you, but with the new rules 
about licensing snowmobiles there has to be . . . people have to 
actually take a test to be able to operate one. The information 
isn’t available to people yet to find out where they can go to 
actually get this licence or have their test. Is this something 
that’s going to be looked at by your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Certainly safety of recreational equipment, 
the operating of them is very important. That is an SGI issue 
and the information will be coming out I’m sure as the program 
develops. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, just a few short questions, but I think it’s a follow-up 
to what we’ve talked about other years. 
 
The first thing I’d like to know about is — you’ve had ongoing 
meetings with the liability issue of underground tanks. Could 
you maybe fill me in on whereabouts you are, what stage that is 
in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — As the member knows, Mr. Chair, this is a 
very complex issue and as we discussed with other members, 
every case is different. We are still developing, after the report 
was brought in by the stakeholders, some details and guidelines. 
We haven’t got them completed yet. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but I believe 
that Bill Albert, president of the EFA (Environmental Fairness 
Association) and people like Greg Rushka, vice-president, and a 
number of the members are very disappointed that nothing is 
happening. It seems like this is going on and on and on and I 
believe they’re starting to get to the point where they feel that 
you’re just giving them the run-around, Mr. Minister. 
 
Do you not even yet at this point accept as government some 
responsibility for the costs incurred with and the liabilities that 
go along. Does the government itself have any liability in your 
mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, the government may end up 
with some liability, but we believe, and the group believes, that 
the polluters should pay. Now if the polluter is no longer 
around, then we have to look at other alternatives. So we have 
not ruled out government being totally out of the picture as far 
as the money goes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but I guess 
when you say the polluters should pay, I agree with you, but 
then who made the money off the gas when it was sold? The 
service station owner at that time probably made the least 
money of anyone involved. The oil company made a fair dollar. 
The government of the day made as many dollars as they 
wanted to tax, whether it was federal or provincial. And the 
person that was running the service station . . . probably lucky if 
he made a meagre living out of it. 
 
And in some cases that’s passed on many times, as you’re well 
aware of, Mr. Minister. We might be four or five generations 
past, completely different people, and in some cases, unless 
things have changed, these people are still responsible for those 
pumps. I know a number of businesses in this province, and so 
do you, that have closed down; are not in business. There’s 

towns in this province that do not have service stations for no 
other reason . . . because they’re scared of what could happen 
with these underground tanks. 
 
(1915) 
 
And I would hope, Mr. Minister, and I would, you know, I 
would like a reply, why the hold-up? I know it’s complex but it 
isn’t going to get any easier the longer we go. These people 
need to know. And our little towns, I can think of Togo and I 
know there’s a number of them in the province, I believe about 
a quarter of them in the province have shut down. 
 
And when you know . . . Mr. Minister, you’re from a small 
town; you know what happens to that town when we don’t have 
service stations there. It’s another nail in our coffin in rural 
Saskatchewan. So we just can’t have that happen, Mr. Minister, 
and I think by delaying this . . . every day we delay it is costing 
us in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well you’re certainly correct, and one of 
the beneficiaries of the service station over the years is the oil 
companies. And we are still negotiating, trying to get the oil 
companies to come on side and pick up some of the liability 
costs, especially on orphan sites. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are the oil 
companies, any of them at all, at the table discussing this? Are 
they receptive at all to the idea or are they just shutting you out 
completely? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The petroleum association is meeting with 
us ongoing and recognize the problem, and we’re hoping that 
some dollars will come across the table. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, are 
we still digging tanks up in the province at a fairly heavy rate? 
Where has that tapered off a bit, or where are we with the clean 
up of the underground tanks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, there’s still many 
underground tanks out there, abandoned or out of date. We have 
categorized these: (a) pose a great environmental hazard — 
we’ve dealt with all of those; (b) are intermediate — we’re 
working on those; and the (c) which are no immediate problem 
— we’re not too worried about those yet. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well that brings 
me kind of to another question I had then. Do you have ratings 
for the service stations that are left out there — like (a), (b), (c), 
(d), and so on? And if so, how do you get to that rating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Yes, we do have a rating. And it is based 
on risk, closeness to the community, water lines, type of soil, 
etc. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Now I want 
to go to the other subject of leakage. And I’ve had a number of 
complaints from service station owners over the cost to them, 
the people that come out and check them, and I have a lot of 
other complaints I’ve had. They definitely do not agree with 
some of the numbers that are coming out. 
 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Who pays — let’s start this way — who pays, and how much 
do they pay for having their tanks checked? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The service station owner is expected to 
pay, and to have a year-round monitoring system installed, it’s 
about $200 a year. We believe, most communities believe, that 
this is not too much to pay to ensure that the leaks are not 
occurring. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is there any 
appeal process then? If the service station owner feels that his 
tanks are in very good condition, and does not agree with the 
numbers — and I’ve had this happen in a couple of cases, 
probably you have too, where the service station owner also 
keeps track, because there’s a fine line out there for our small 
service station owners. They don’t have money to waste. And 
they would pick up quite quickly if it was any sizeable amount 
of leakage out of those tanks. And yet whoever is coming out to 
check them, whether it’s a firm that’s hired by whoever, comes 
up with a great amount of leakage, or whatever the word would 
be, Mr. Minister. Is there an appeal process that they come back 
with? Or is that set upon them and said no, this is exactly . . . 
what we’re telling you is the way it is even though that many 
service stations owners, I think, don’t agree with your numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We are in constant communication with 
service station owners. If you know of anyone that would like 
to us reconsider their circumstances, have them get in touch 
with us. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
would like to ask a few questions of the minister. 
 
Minister, I draw your attention to the Cypress Hills Provincial 
Park first of all. So if you want to get your mind set in that 
direction. I know that you have been suffering from a cold so I 
don’t need long answers — just honest ones. 
 
We are faced, of course, with having a meeting up in the 
Cypress Hills this coming Friday where I’m sure that people 
will be asking me some of these specific questions. And if you 
can help me with the answers tonight, it’ll be really good if I 
could deliver those answers to those folks that day. 
 
Now in the park, as you will know, the forest stand is in excess 
of a hundred-and-some years old. There is a high risk of fire in 
that stand of forest. We have an awful lot of cabin owners that 
have cabins in the area. We have a lot of people that visit every 
year and stay in the campgrounds. There is some serious 
concern that if a fire were to break out, there isn’t a proper exit 
program. Sort of an EMO (Emergency Measures Organization) 
approach is what we’re looking at here. And one of the things 
that the people are asking for, and have asked me to inquire 
about, is whether or not you would grant them the opportunity 
to put in another fire exit so that they could evacuate the area in 
the event of a fire. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We would be happy to discuss with the 
people of the park another fire exit. I gather we are working on 
one. We would be pleased to hear their comments. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, I think you heard their comments, 
Minister, and they do think that they already need to have this. 

They’ve had meetings. They’ve had discussions. They’re quite 
sure that they need to have this. But what they need from you is 
an assurance that you will work with them to provide an exit 
that will work, and one of course that will continue to enhance 
the beauty of the park as well. They’re very concerned about 
that as well. But they will need the assistance of the department 
to get authority to be able to do that. Could you commit to 
something like that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We will provide a written answer very 
quickly with the commitment that we are working on this. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Also in the park of 
course you may be aware that they are at the present time 
working on improving the golf course, and one of the 
suggestions that will be discussed on Friday is about the use of 
the water from the lagoon to irrigate the golf course. Some of 
the ranchers and people there are expressing concerns about the 
quality of that water. Can you assure us that you have done the 
necessary research and that your department or someone will be 
doing the necessary checks on this water to make sure that it in 
fact will be environmentally safe and safe for human beings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — The water will be fully treated and we will 
be at this meeting as well to explain in more detail. We’ll also 
look forward to public comments. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — I appreciate your commitment to being at the 
meeting, Minister, and certainly we’ll be glad to see you there. 
And hopefully we can resolve some of these problems. I just 
want you to comment as well on the park. As you are aware, 
just to bring you up to speed with my line of questions here, 
that in the Cypress Hills there have been leases to cattle 
producers for many, many years. In fact, I think since before the 
park was started cattle were there. And of course the leasing 
program has worked very well. It has served to use in a 
harvesting method some of the grasses that otherwise would 
become too tall and provide for a serious fire hazard. By having 
this type of grazing we have protected the natural flora of the 
ecosystem, as well of course as providing the opportunity for 
people to raise those cattle and to have some income. 
 
They need to know, though, what your policy is towards 
fencing, because some of the fences are starting to fall down. 
And they’re having trouble getting their fences into good 
enough shape so that they can keep the herds separate from one 
ranch to the other. And so do you have a fencing policy that you 
would like to briefly describe, or do you have a new policy that 
you’re considering? Or how can these ranchers provide a 
method of keeping their cattle home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Fencing is the responsibility of the rancher 
and we ask that it be done in full consultation with the park 
staff. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — We understand that the fencing would be the 
responsibility of the landowner or the land lessee, Minister. 
Unfortunately there have been some problems in agreeing with 
the park staff as to how these fences should be built and where 
they should be built, and under what circumstances. Ranchers 
have a different idea about how it should be done and it’s more, 
I think, related to the way cattle look at fences and whether or 
not they’re going to stay in them. 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

Parks people, of course, would like to have them hidden or not 
there at all, I suppose. And I’m glad that we have that kind of 
concern. However, we need to know whether or not there’s a 
policy that will directly spell out a way to prevent confrontation 
between the ranchers and the park people that are presently in 
charge. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We have a parks advisory committee, 
which meets with the park manager frequently. And again we 
are prepared to work with the ranchers and each situation will 
be different, the terrain, the vegetation. This is a park, but 
grazing is an important management tool. We’re prepared to 
work with all of the ranchers. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Now just to get away from the park for a 
minute, Minister. We understand that in recent days there has 
been a bit of a gas leak in the town of Maple Creek. I don’t 
know if anybody’s contacted your department about it or not. 
My understanding is that they’re not sure where the leak came 
from but what has happened is that some of this gasoline may 
have leaked into the drinking water system. 
 
I guess my question on behalf of the people of Maple Creek is: 
would there be some assistance in that type of clean-up, and 
have you been working on monitoring the water supply to make 
sure that it is safe for human consumption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We are aware of the problem in Maple 
Creek. We are working with the community and we will 
endeavour to get it cleaned up as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister, I have a letter here from 
Mary Jane Saville. She is the Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ 
Association zone 4 director. And she writes on behalf on 
concerned people in zone 4 with regards to the ecosystem again 
in the Cypress Hills, on a larger scale than just the park area, the 
entire Cypress Hills range. 
 
I think I’ll quote just a paragraph or two from her letter so that 
you can understand where she’s coming from: 
 

It is with concern and regret that I learn of the intentions of 
the Government of Saskatchewan to allow, and even 
encourage, the exploration and development by the Oil and 
Gas Industry of the Cypress Hills native grasslands area 
within the R.M. of Maple Creek #111. I am also, in light of 
the announcements made February 20, 1998 by the 
Premier . . . with regard to the . . . (preservative) Areas 
Network, and the Prairie Conservation Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan, surprised by the news of such development 
intentions. 
 

Mr. Minister, what action is your department taking to preserve 
the natural grasses and to, I guess, serve the needs of Mary 
Jane, the stock growers, and the people of the grain area to 
make sure that the ecosystem is not destroyed in this way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We appreciate the support and cooperation 
of the Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ Association. I would like 
to, Mr. Chairman, respond in writing to this particular letter and 
we’re certainly prepared to discuss the issue of concern with the 
local ranchers out there. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. I’ll be more than happy 
to table this letter so that you can have a copy of it to respond 
to. I have just a couple more questions. I’ll quote another 
paragraph from the letter to make sure that you know what 
you’re committing to. She goes on to say here that: 
 

The . . . (mix of) prairie and fescue prairie habitat of the 
Cypress Hills area are a large contiguous block, and have 
been . . . (the) domain of cattle ranchers for the past one 
hundred eighteen years. This area has very few roads, 
(and) very little development of any kind. This area is to a 
high degree in a very natural state, thanks in no small part 
to the traditions and management practises of the local 
ranching community. Consequently, this area is also the 
domain of numerous native floral and faunal species, many 
of which are in status threatened, or even endangered, 
elsewhere. 
 

The letter, Minister, goes on with that kind of approach to the 
problems and as you can see it’s a very lengthy letter and has a 
lot of concerns worth taking note of. One of the more important 
ones that I would like to paraphrase for you is the fact that these 
people are not interested in making a lot of profit. They’re quite 
happy to take care of the natural beauty of the hills, to take a 
living simply from the cattle industry, which is very meagre, 
compared to the profits that could be taken out of oil and gas, 
even the rents and the leases. So their concern is not money; 
their concern is to preserve the natural beauty and the species 
that are in that part of the world. 
 
(1930) 
 
We know from past experience that scientists have come in and 
discovered that there are species in the native hills, the Cypress 
Hills . . . that are only found in Saskatchewan in that location of 
the province, in the Cypress Hills. So I think she has a valid 
point in asking for your assistance to preserve this area. And as 
she says: 
 

The natural beauty of the area will be greatly affected as 
well, and significant land-formations and natural features 
are in danger of unnatural disturbance. Ranchers fear as 
well the disruption of natural springs and other water 
sources, which are essential both to themselves and the 
area wildlife. This area is also replete with heritage 
resources. Archaeological resources, taken together with 
this area’s unspoiled beauty and its association with the 
traditional cattle ranching, effectively make the whole area 
a Heritage Landscape. Its value to the people of this 
province in its current undisturbed state is unestimable. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, I think that paragraph really says it all. And 
I think that if you take a look around the world, at some of the 
places that had pristine, natural areas destroyed by industry, we 
have to come to understand that economies are important, 
paying off deficits is important, but if we destroy all of our 
natural habitat there won’t be any natural habitat in the years to 
come. 
 
And so while you’ve committed to answering the letter, I 
appreciate that, but I would appreciate a comment on your 
commitment to preserving these heritages and these 
archaeological structures and all of those things that were 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

mentioned in this letter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We certainly are committed to protecting 
representative natural areas, unique features such as 
archaeological sites. And Cypress Hills is well known, as you 
say, as a very unique and important area. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve just got four or 
five points I wish to make in terms of SERM. And I’d like your 
support in developing an industry that you’re probably 
primarily responsible for, although there may be some 
overlapping from Economic Development. 
 
And of course that area, Mr. Minister, is commercial fishing. 
There’s a number of people in the North that still view 
commercial fishing as a very viable industry and that’s some of 
the reasons why we asked you throughout this session various 
questions on Doré and Sled Lake, for example. Some of the 
trade subsidy and also some of the fish farming activities that 
are needed. 
 
And of course, what are you doing to put some of these lakes 
. . . to build them back up in terms of restocking lakes? 
 
And one of the areas I wish your support on as the minister 
responsible for SERM that could have some impact and bearing 
from other areas is in reference to the farm plate eligibility 
problem that some commercial fishermen are having a problem 
with. There’s been some changes in which commercial 
fishermen are not being allowed to classify their vehicles as 
farmers and this of course was apparent a couple years ago. And 
I got a letter from a gentleman from Ile-a-la-Crosse, Charles 
Buffin, dated May 13 in which Mr. Buffin states: 
 

I see fish farmers are eligible, that we as commercial 
fishermen should be on there too because we harvest the 
fish for the summer months during the spawning periods, 
spring and fall. 

 
And the quote that he also made, Mr. Minister, is, “commercial 
fishermen are being cut back by quotas.” 
 
And what Mr. Buffin is trying to say here is that commercial 
fishermen should be given as much opportunity as the fish 
farmers are in the province to classify their vehicles as farmers 
in that sense. What he wants to do is try and make the 
commercial fishing industry a viable industry and this is the 
reason why he has written this letter to us to ask for your 
support. 
 
And of course you take it on to cabinet and certainly get the 
minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan), the minister responsible for Economic 
Development, to see some of the challenges related to the 
commercial fishing industry of northern Saskatchewan. Can I 
have your opinion on that for a minute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well I do know that commercial fishermen 
and farmers fill out the same income tax. This is an 
SGI-specific issue, but if you would forward a copy of the letter 
we’ll certainly look into it and find an appropriate response. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. And, Mr. Minister, in the old 

days in the ’60s and perhaps even the ’50s, there was a lot of 
talk around Buffalo Narrows that the commercial fishing 
industry was really quite frankly taking off. I think there was 
three commercial fish plants, there was a number of people 
working . . . there was a number of people working at the 
plants, and certainly out harvesting fish. 
 
And now it seems that many of the commercial fishermen are 
having a tougher and tougher time trying to make ends meet. 
You see the fish prices staying pretty well the same while the 
cost of fuel and the cost of help and all the different costs of 
supplies, they’re all going up as we speak. 
 
So I guess the question I have is, as the Minister of SERM, 
what are you prepared to do to assist in the establishment or 
re-establishment if you will of the commercial fishing industry 
of northern Saskatchewan so it could be a proud industry? It 
could be a vibrant industry, and it could be a big industry for 
northern people once again. I think it’s a very, very crucial 
industry, Mr. Minister, and you do have some authority, you do 
have some power, to put in legislation or put in certain aspects 
involving government support to try and develop and build up 
this industry. Could you respond as to what you are prepared to 
do as minister to help that happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, first of all, the commercial fishing 
industry, Mr. Chairman, is very important to the people of the 
North. To respond to your request we, last year, stocked 54 
million fish in 212 different water bodies in the province, many 
up in the northern part of the province. Unfortunately as you 
indicated the price of the product just isn’t what it used to be 
and this is largely due to the dumping of off-shore fish on our 
markets and also the distance to get the fish out of the North to 
a processing plant. But I can assure you we’re working with 
Alberta and Manitoba to try and come up with more answers for 
the commercial fishermen. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Another thing as well, Mr. Minister, in terms 
of the actual sites in northern Saskatchewan perhaps — and I 
certainly commend your effort to try and develop the tourism 
industry — and that there may have been some concerted effort 
in trying to develop the lakes and restock the lakes that have 
tourism potential. 
 
The other point I’m trying to make is that — in two good 
examples is that Dore Lake and Sled Lake situation — where 
we posed questions to your written questions, the fact that some 
of these beaver dams and the overgrowth along the rivers that 
feed into Dore Lake are blocking the water from coming in 
thereby the Dore Lake levels are dropping. And of course Dore 
Lake has a tremendous amount of support and benefit to the 
people of Beauval, Dore Lake, and Sled Lake, and as a result of 
this blockage there’s little water coming in. 
 
But I was very surprised to see, Mr. Minister, there’s nothing 
being done that’s pro-active to correct the problem so that you 
know the Dore Lake levels could start climbing again and the 
fish stock could begin to rebuild. And certainly that could help 
the commercial fishing industry of those three particular 
communities. So would you respond as to what plans that you 
have in the event that northern people or certain groups bring 
forward concerns to you as Minister of SERM to help them 
address some of their long-standing issues such as developing a 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

proper environment for fish to thrive in and grow for both the 
tourist users and certainly, especially for the commercial 
fishermen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, water levels of course are 
dependent upon the rainfall and snowfall and everything goes in 
cycles. I would suggest that Sask Water may be contacted to 
look into Dore Lake water levels. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — I think basically, Mr. Minister, I think the 
people of the North deserve a more comprehensive strategy 
than what you just offered here today. Again there are some 
problems that they can identify. And many fishermen’s co-ops 
have regular meetings and they have discussions amongst 
themselves and with various SERM officers. 
 
And I would suggest that perhaps we would make a greater 
effort and place a higher priority on how we can develop the 
fishing industry. Especially for the commercial fishermen, it is a 
big concern. And Mr. Minister, we’re certainly looking for a 
more proactive and more comprehensive strategy to the 
problem that I address this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We, as I say, view the commercial fishing 
industry as very important. We offer $25,000 to the fishermen’s 
co-ops to help organize, get together, and exchange ideas with 
us. We also provide a $240,000 subsidy and transportation of 
the product to the markets. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. What I’ll do 
is I’ll forward the letter from Mr. Buffin to you so you’re able 
to address this particular problem. I’ll have a page come pick it 
up in a few seconds. 
 
But nonetheless, it is a problem in northern Saskatchewan . . . 
that we have to do all we can to develop the commercial fishing 
industry because it offers a tremendous advantage. And I know 
a number of families in northern Saskatchewan, especially in 
Buffalo Narrows . . . that commercial fish. They’ve had a long 
history of commercial fishing. They’ve had a number of 
industries that have benefited from that. For example, the 
Hanson family certainly have a long history with fishing. And 
you also look at Waite Fisheries— that has a history of 70, 80 
years in the making. So commercial fishing does offer a 
tremendous value and benefit to northern Saskatchewan. And 
we quite frankly, Mr. Minister, have to pay more attention and 
place more focus on that industry because it certainly needs it. 
 
Now just bouncing around the map . . . and I’m quite pleased to 
see that you are taking a proactive position and I certainly hope 
that you’re open to ideas and suggestions on how we can 
accomplish that. And we’ll certainly forward that offer from 
you — if I’m to understand that’s an offer — to the commercial 
fishermen on how we can help accomplish what they all want 
us to do, and that is to develop a more competitive and 
attractive commercial fishing industry in the North. 
 
Again bouncing around the map, I’m going to the northern 
hamlet of Missinipe. And I want to read this out, a few excerpts 
from this May 7 letter. And it’s in reference to the Megan forest 
area, and I think it’s very important I stress this today, to show 
them that we have made you aware of the problems and that 
certainly you can’t say well we weren’t totally aware. 

So I’ll quote from the letter, various parts. Quote: 
 

Our community’s economy is based almost entirely on 
tourism, particularly tourism activities which rely on an 
intact ecosystem in order to remain viable. 

 
Another quote, Mr. Minister: 
 

A recent resource use study done in Alberta showed that in 
the long term, tourism generated more economic activity 
and benefits for local residents, as well as the provincial 
economy than did logging. 

 
And we go to another extended quote here, Mr. Minister, in a 
letter, and it states: 
 

Unlike logging in regions to the south of the pre-Cambrian 
shield, clear-cutting on the thin soil in the proposed area 
will result in extreme erosion and very slow regenerative 
growth. In the meantime the thousands of visitors who 
have been coming to the area to experience some of the 
most highly rated wilderness in the world will go 
elsewhere, a disaster for those who depend on tourism. 
 
As well, traditional land-use, particularly trapping, will be 
disrupted entirely. 
 
Finally, the Heritage valley, with many historic canoe 
routes through the area, will be lost. And unexcavated fur 
trade and aboriginal archaeological sites will disappear 
forever. 
 

And then certainly they put their final touch on the letter with 
these last two quotes: 
 

At present, no area co-management plan exists for lands in 
question, due largely to the failure of the province to 
consult with stakeholders. 
 

And the second quote: 
 

Consultation after having already sold logging rights to a 
company is unacceptable. Our solicitor has informed us 
that once a contract exists between the province and a 
logging company, we will have little or no ability to act nor 
to save the integrity of this section of the Churchill River 
basin ecosystem. 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, that’s a letter from Lewis Layton, the 
mayor of Missinipe, and these are some of the concerns that he 
had in relation to the region around Missinipe. And I was just 
wondering what action has been taken to date to hear the voices 
of concern on this matter. And have you had meetings with a 
group that has been impacted by this decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have been up in La 
Ronge twice this last few weeks to meet with the people — as 
well as my staff and officials. I am happy to hear what the local 
people have to say. As a result we have cancelled any logging 
opportunities in the area until a complete land use plan has been 
developed which we’ll be getting within a month or so. So the 
logging is off and there’ll be a land use plan developed where 
everybody will have an opportunity for input. 



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

(1945) 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Just to wrap 
up here. Again I want to thank you and your officials for your 
time, and I must say again that the key point that we’re trying to 
make in this presentation to SERM is that certainly during the 
forest fire fighting season we know that many of your men are 
out there working and doing their very best. And unlike some of 
the questions that you fielded today, every heart of that 
fire-fighting team is necessary, right from the man that shuts off 
spot fires, to the chopper that transports people in and out of 
danger, and supplies in and out of the fire-fighting area. And 
that part we certainly understand. 
 
And I want to publicly commend your employees, the people 
certainly in our area, that have done a tremendous job. And I 
also want to publicly show our appreciation for the fact that the 
huge majority of these people are local native people that have a 
lot of experience, and we certainly hope that you continue on 
with that trend because once you have that experience and you 
hone their skills with further training, it does nothing but please 
the people and certainly give our forest fire . . . a fighting 
chance at trying to stop these from damaging communities and 
homes and affecting people’s lives. 
 
And a second major point, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve got to do 
something about the particular problem with the commercial 
fishing industry. It’s an industry that, as I mentioned before, 
that the people of the North are familiar with. They’ve lived 
with it for many, many years. They’ve created thousands of 
jobs and created dollar upon dollar for their own use and they 
control the industry and thereby benefit the most from the 
industry. 
 
So you look at the balances between logging, look at the 
balances between tourism in terms of fishing, then you throw 
into the mix the commercial fishing industry. And of the three, 
it appears that the commercial fishing industry is simply not 
getting its due diligence and due attention that it needs. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Minister, I would highly recommend and 
encourage you and will continue monitoring the situation that 
you do something for the commercial fishing industry. It 
desperately needs it and it’ll have a lot of benefit for many years 
to come. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, may I first ask 
you what plans the department has to commemorate the 
officials of your department who were killed in the plane crash 
in January of 1997? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Yes, the hon. member refers to the tragic 
plane crash of a year and a few months ago. Last fall we 
dedicated a campground, the Kevin Misfeldt Campground at 
Blackstrap Provincial Park near Saskatoon where Kevin 
resided. And later this month we’ll be dedicating a quarter 
section of wildlife development fund land with a cairn for 
Wally Kost, the other employee who was killed. And this will 
be in the Blaine Lake area and the families will and have 
attended both of these functions. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Do you have a date on the dedication of the 
land near Blaine Lake? 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, that will be Friday, June 19. 
Please contact my office, we’ll give you the details. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Would the minister indicate if an exemption 
for Ducks Unlimited is being contemplated under The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, and what the situation is in 
terms of Ducks Unlimited regarding The Saskatchewan Farm 
Security Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Ducks Unlimited is a very important 
organization working in Saskatchewan. We’ve got a very good 
working relationship with DU (Ducks Unlimited), and this is 
one issue surrounding the Farm Land Security Board that we 
are still working on, to resolve with a number of government 
departments as well as Ducks Unlimited. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — With the advent of large scale elk ranching, 
does the minister foresee a division in responsibility for elk, as 
between the wild population falling under SERM and the farm 
population falling under Agriculture? Or do you foresee that elk 
will continue to be considered part of our wildlife resource? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We believe that any component of game 
farming, elk farming, that may impact on wildlife — we will be 
involved. Certainly the processing and the fencing in of captive 
elk will be under the purview of Department of Agriculture. 
And as I said, we’ve worked with the executive of the elk 
breeder’s association and they seem to be fairly comfortable 
with this solution. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Do you have any concerns, though, that in the 
relatively confined spaces where elk are farmed that disease is 
more of a problem because of elk ranching and could escape 
into the wild population? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Disease is certainly always a major concern 
and that is why we have import-export protocols. And disease 
to captive elk will be more of an impact on the rancher than it 
will on the wildlife. So by working together we want to ensure 
that we have the strictest and the best situations for game 
farming in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Would the minister indicate the situation with 
the Bronson Lake recreational area, and what plans there are for 
that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — On the Bronson Lake rec. site, we’ve had a 
treaty land entitlement by the Thunderchild First Nation. 
They’ve had two or three opportunities to acquire part of this 
recreation site. They have come back to us requesting a smaller 
portion of the original parcel — less than half — about 14,000 
acres versus 32,000. 
 
And we’ve given them an extension, another 18 months; to try 
and settle third party interests, as they are required to do so in 
this smaller portion. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — So is the Minister saying that a significant part 
of Bronson Lake recreational area will continue to be in private 
hands, as well as that portion that will go to the first nation for 
TLE (treaty land entitlements)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Yes. The significant portion, Mr. 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

Chairman, will remain in Crown land, which will be available 
for everyone to experience and enjoy. And if the land 
entitlement is settled, agreed upon, a portion of the site will be 
removed from the Crown package. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — What is the situation with Meeting Lake? How 
much of that is anticipated to go for treaty land entitlement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman. We’ll get you a 
written response, hon. member, for that question. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
I’ve got a couple of questions for the Minister before we move 
on here. 
 
Mr. Minister, just recently I’ve had a number of calls, and I 
think maybe your department has had calls. Certainly last fall 
we had a problem with wolves in the area that I represent — 
just north of the Kenosee Park — a problem with some elk. Elk 
breeders had brought it to our attention. We’ve raised them with 
you back last fall. 
 
And then again this spring now we’re running, wolves not 
necessarily, but certainly coyotes have been a major problem. 
And I just had a call from a couple of cattle producers along the 
Pipestone, just south of Broadview . . . have actually lost some 
calves to coyotes. 
 
And the question comes up, that arises is, what is your 
department doing to deal with the concerns? It seems they’ve 
called department officials but basically have been . . . while 
officers have taken the calls, no real attempt has been made to 
help the farmers address the problem. 
 
One of the issues that one of the farmers suggested was baiting 
stations. I think the comment was, well go out and shoot the 
coyotes. But it’s not all that easy unless you happen to be right 
there. And I’m not sure what we did in the past. 
 
So there’s two questions I want to raise here — one in regards 
to coyotes. What’s being done to address that concern? I think it 
was kind of restricted to the south-west last year but it’s 
certainly moved into our area. And another one is a significant 
problem with the gopher population and the inability to get 
access to the strychnine poison that used to be available. As I 
understand, that is now pulled off the shelf. And if that is — I’d 
like it clarified. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We are jointly working with agriculture 
groups — sheep growers, cattle producers, and the Department 
of Agriculture — to come up with ways and means. We may 
consider bringing in trappers. We will not go back to the 
widespread use of 1080 baits as it was in the ’50s. And with 
respect to the gophers or ground squirrels, most indications are 
that the numbers are down. But if there’s pockets where there 
are ground squirrels, we urge people to get in touch with us. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well, Mr. 
Minister, that may have been the case last year. And I have no 
idea where they come from. At least they’re good sport for 
some young fellows who want to go out and pop some gophers 
off. They had a good . . . my sons had a good time yesterday 
afternoon just clearing some off. And it was amazing what was 

out there. And you’re right — the last couple of years they 
haven’t been a problem, but they’re a major problem. And of 
course, with the dryness, we find a lot of pastures are fairly 
bare. There isn’t a lot in them. 
 
With the gopher population out there, some producers really 
have some major concerns. They’ve indicated they’ve gone to 
the RMs. I forget what’s available right now but what they’re 
putting out really isn’t doing the job. And the old 1080, 
certainly, mixed with oats, did a lot better job than what we 
have here, when it’s in the hole. So I guess they’re disappointed 
and they’d like to know what do they really do to address this 
problem. Because as it stays dryer, the gopher population is 
going to . . . Certainly they seem to do better when it’s dryer. 
Just as we’re going to have problems with grasshoppers, is the 
next thing in our area. 
 
Mr. Minister, another question, and it comes from a response 
you sent back to a letter I’d sent you back in January in regards 
to big game damage. While you’ve announced an increase and 
an agreement with the federal government in regards to better 
big game damage, this question is basically asked in regards to 
shelter belts and the damage to shelter belt trees and livestock 
feed. And I think your response here is that . . . I believe you’re 
saying that certainly shelter belts are not covered under the big 
game damage program. And I think, Mr. Minister, there’s a lot 
of work and effort goes into trying to build, especially when 
you start getting into ornamental trees, types of trees that, if 
there’s some damage to them, you lose that tree completely. 
Caraganas, there’s no big problem; they’ll just keep going. But, 
Mr. Minister, what is your department doing to address some of 
the concerns being raised in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, there simply is not a 
program in place. We are always looking at new ideas but 
there’s no program in place to cover the cost of shelter belts and 
trees in farmyards. And I appreciate the concern . . . that people 
have that experience, damage. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, coming back to 
a question that my colleague from Cannington raised a few 
moments ago in regards to tires and the fee on tires, the 3.50 
environmental tax that is currently being charged on tires by . . . 
and I’ll say some. Because I checked with a couple of dealers 
tonight and a couple of small tire retailers who have just 
decided they’re not going to charge because they find the 
retailer down the road, their competitor, is not charging. But 
they all . . . every once in a while someone shows up at the door 
asking them if they can pick up all the tires and if they’ll pay 
them to haul them away. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the department doing to address this 
concern: (1) if indeed we want to recycle tires, why isn’t the 
department building a program in; and (2) why have we got a 
recycling fee being charged by some retailers and not by others? 
 
Now you’re saying it’s retailers themselves. Is someone taking 
advantage of this and where’s the money going? And how 
much money has come to date out of that $3.50 charge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — With regards to the scrap tires, we are 
aware of the problem of some people being in, and some not, 
and we are dealing with that. We’re working with the 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

association; we want to fix it. We want to have everybody 
complying. We thought we’d try the voluntary approach first. 
And I don’t have the figure of how much money has been 
brought in, but over 600,000 tires have been recycled under the 
program. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, exactly what is the program? I 
think that’s one of the major concerns out there. I just see 
retailers just . . . they’re starting to build up tires because they 
can’t deliver them. In some cases some communities are still 
allowing storage at their waste disposal sites, but most 
communities aren’t now. So the retailers are left trying to pile 
these tires up. One community, they’re building a fence around 
the property, that’s how many tires they’re starting to collect. 
 
So what’s obviously happening out there, Mr. Minister, is while 
you’re talking about a program to recycle, there’s nothing really 
in place to address this. It’s almost a hit and a mess . . . a miss. 
And at the end of the day, you get to the point where you’re 
saying; well what do we do with these? And maybe you’ll find 
somebody who comes along and says, well I’ll give you two 
bucks, take them off my hands, and they leave. And next thing 
you know they’re in one big tire pile that by accident, by 
lightning strike, is up in flames. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is going to be a major problem unless the 
department establishes a clear-cut policy, and to say it’s 
voluntary — you’re saying it’s voluntary. Basically, what 
you’re saying then is the department is initiating it but hasn’t 
really got a program in place because you don’t know how to 
handle it. Is that what’s happening? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — No, I believe the program is working very, 
very well. As I said, we’ve recycled over 600,000 tires. Any 
tire, where the $3.50 is paid on, is picked up and recycled. And 
as I mentioned earlier, we have not got to the stockpiles. 
There’s lots of tires out there, but we look at getting all of these 
tires out of the environment and recycled eventually. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, one more area I’m just going 
to follow up on. I listened with note to Mr. Roger Phillips, and I 
tend to agree. I chatted with . . . in fact; I’ve heard another 
person make the same comments. Again out of the Monetary & 
Economic Review, there’s a couple of major headlines in here. 
This is February 19, 1998, going to the Kyoto treaty: “Should 
America be forced to submit to the Kyoto treaty?” I’m 
beginning to wonder, Mr. Minister, if this whole idea of the 
ozone layer and the environment is not one big hoax that we’re 
all getting caught up in . . . so that we’re just jumping on. 
 
And we’re talking . . . the gentleman here who has done a lot of 
scientific study and he’s talking about, I think, one of the things 
we hear about is global warming. Well, if we’ve got global 
warming, it certainly was nice to have a nice winter this past 
winter but I think the last couple of winters previous to were . . . 
there were some fairly cold temperatures. But I want to read 
something from this article. It says: 
 

Do you believe that the world’s climate is actually 
changing? 
 

And the comment is: 
 

It is a fact that during the first half of the century, the 
temperature did increase slightly as a result of a warming 
period that began back in the mid-nineteenth century. Then 
about 1950, the temperature began declining and has been 
declining slightly through the last half of this century — 
the net effect of the entire century is an increase of about .3 
Celsius degrees. 
 

It even goes on to talk about carbon dioxide; the fact that while 
carbon dioxide emissions were increasing, the temperature was 
actually cooling. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think we’re . . . while I agree we need to protect 
our environment, I agree also it’s good to recycle. There’s 
nothing wrong in recycling. Sometimes I begin to wonder if 
government’s elected representatives and bureaucrats don’t start 
falling into a trap where someone else has created a scenario, 
where they’re building their own little world and livelihood. 
And I think, Mr. Minister, we jump at things before we’ve 
actually got a full solution in place. And that’s what I come to 
when I talk about the tire recycling and what have you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So, I’m not going . . . while I’d like to get into this in more 
depth and I think there are lots of individuals who would like to 
talk about it, I think some of these articles like the Monetary & 
Economic Review, February 19, 1998 and January 19, 1998 
might be interesting reading material. Maybe even some of your 
department officials who are looking, who have some real 
concerns in this area, might be interested in picking up that 
information, reading it through, and seeing somebody else’s 
perspective rather than always listening to the Greenpeaces or 
the do-gooders of this world. 
 
Mr. Minister, while I said I’d like to get into further depth I just 
wanted to make you aware of this and bring this to your 
attention as well. And I think I would suggest that the 
department of the environment in this province as well — when 
we’re jumping to conclusions and asking people to do things — 
that we really begin to set up programs in place that will meet 
the needs rather than saying, we want to set up a recycling 
program but we really haven’t figured out how to do it yet . . . 
have the program in place before we start charging and asking 
people to start recycling. 
 
Give them something because I believe people will involve 
themselves in recycling if they know exactly how the program 
is being administered, where the tires or the plastic bottles or 
everything are going. And the argument that I get on a daily 
basis, especially when I drop into the service station, we hear 
about the environmental tax and everyone’s . . . that’s one thing 
that nobody really appreciates because they’ve had so many 
problems trying to decide okay, what do we really do with this, 
Mr. Minister. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Minister, 
talking about those tires jolted my memory about a constituent 
that called me just the other day asking if there is a used oil 
collection depot in the south-west part of the province that they 
could access. This would be used motor oil that farmers are 
collecting from their tractors and that sort of thing. Is there a 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

depot or any place that they can drop that off or take it to in 
south-west Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, there is no depot yet but 
there are private companies which will take oil. If he wanted to 
get in touch with us we’ll see if there is anybody in the 
south-west in the oil collecting business. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think what I heard 
you say was that you’d be prepared to give us a list of the 
private people that you’re aware of so that we can search them 
out, and we will take you up on that commitment so that I can 
pass that list on to the folks that ask. 
 
Mr. Minister, earlier today you would have heard me refer to 
Perry Anton’s environmental problems, which you have dealt 
with for quite a long time in an attempt to get this problem 
resolved. There were a couple of concerns in the last letter that 
Mr. Anton and his wife have supplied to you folks in 
government. These two concerns as I understand them boil 
down first of all to wanting to be sure that the judge that might 
be appointed to this process would in fact have some assurance 
that the people that needed to be examined or talked to would 
have committed to being there. And we need to, I guess, 
alleviate his fears so that he’ll take the job — that he will in fact 
be able to do his job by having access. 
 
We have had suggested to us that a list of names might be 
added to that terms of reference sheet. The names being of 
course the people that would be contacted that have agreed that 
they would show up and testify and give the information to the 
judge. That way the judge would know those folks are coming 
because they’ve committed to it. And Perry Anton of course 
and his family would know that those are the folks that are 
going to show up and both sides of course could negotiate, 
adding names to the list if somebody happens to be missed. And 
that way we can be assured that the process is fair and that no 
one that has information would somehow be left out of the 
process. 
 
Could you give a commitment to attempting to resolve this 
problem along those lines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chair, we certainly are prepared to 
continue working and trying to resolve the concerns that Perry 
Anton has. And Poco Resources, the oil company involved 
here, has indicated that they will cooperate fully in answering 
and providing any information that they can. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister, I appreciate that 
answer. I’m sure that Mr. Anton will appreciate it, as probably 
will the judge. Although I think perhaps a judge, being a lawyer 
from background would say that we should pursue this with a 
little more definite answer. What we’re asking for is a 
commitment that we would allow a list of names to be attached 
to the terms of reference so that we can be sure that nobody is 
missed in the process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — I would suggest, Mr. Chair, that the hon. 
member get in touch with me and we pursue this potential list 
of names. We’re prepared to work with you on that. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Deputy Chair. Well, Minister, 

because I already have had a commitment from one of the other 
ministers to follow this particular line of compromise, I’m 
going to say to you that — unless you correct me — we will 
assume that you will be going along with the commitment made 
by the other ministers to provide this kind of an opportunity so 
that we can get on with the process of solving the problems 
with these pollution things that have happened to the Anton 
ranch. And that particular list we talked about doesn’t seem to 
be an onerous task to put together. And I think it would relieve 
an awful lot of stress on the people that are concerned, in this 
case the judge in question, who probably would not take on a 
job that he felt he couldn’t do right, because he would look like 
a fool if he were to conduct an investigation without having the 
opportunity to talk to the principals that are involved. 
 
So I also want to ask you about the other issue that was raised, 
and that of course is the issue of Mr. Anton, if he did receive 
from this process a decision made by the judge that someone 
owed him some money. Whoever someone might be, the 
government or a gas company or someone else — if that 
decision were made and the principal who was to pay the 
money refused to pay it, Mr. Anton’s fear of course is quite 
simply that he’s already broke. And the only recourse he would 
have then would be to pursue this matter through the courts 
which of course is why he hasn’t been able to resolve the matter 
to begin with, because he’s broke. If he had any money he 
would have pursued this company through the courts. 
 
And quite frankly, when a farmer is broke, you can’t do that. So 
the justice system is denied to this family as it is to many 
farmers and ranchers and many other people in our society, 
because they don’t have money. Legal aid won’t help you in 
this type of situation because this is not the kind of case that 
they handle so that’s not an option. 
 
And so, Minister, in order to alleviate the fears that this process 
will simply put him into a position where he has to once again 
go back to the courts where he doesn’t have any money to be 
able to do that with, what we need is some kind of an assurance 
that there would be money available to him, either to be able to 
pursue it through the courts or have somebody else do it on his 
behalf, or have the money paid by the oil and gas industry if 
they’re found to be responsible, through some other vehicle. 
 
Minister, I suggest to you that the Energy and Mines minister 
has such a fund which every oil and gas company pays into 
every time they drill a well in this province. It’s an insurance 
fund. They pay a premium on every well. It goes into that fund 
to pay for misdemeanours or misadventures or errors or wells 
that have to be abandoned in case of bankruptcies. Those kinds 
of things are all paid for from that fund at the discretion of the 
minister under an Act that clearly states that the minister has 
that discretion, that authority and that power — the Minister of 
Energy and Mines that is. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister of the Environment, in order to assure that 
the taxpayers are not on the hook on this, would you give your 
assurance that you will work towards using that fund as a 
backup — not necessarily the payment fund — but the backup 
fund to be used in the event that some of the players might 
refuse to pay a judgement made by a judge? If it happens to be 
Mr. Halvorson, fine and dandy. That would be his decision if he 
happens to take the job. Would you make that kind of a 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

commitment to Perry Anton and to the people of this province 
who are concerned about our environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chair, there’s potential for various 
outcomes of this review. We look forward to the review getting 
under way and we will deal appropriately with the results, 
recommendations, of the report. I personally or this department 
does not have access to the fund contained in Energy and 
Mines. I understand that there are many stringent guidelines as 
to when that fund can be utilized. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Mr. Minister, would you rather that if 
there is an award made by the judge in question, if he does 
decide that someone should pay, is it your opinion that the 
government should pay for this out of taxpayers’ money or 
what vehicle would you use if there’s a judgement made that 
the government is at fault here, has some liability, which 
department of government do you think should pay for it? 
Should the government pay for it out of taxpayer money or 
should they use the insurance fund that the oil and gas 
companies have had to put their premiums into? Who should 
pay for this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well again there’s a hypothetical question. 
If the review clearly shows that the government is at fault then 
we will pay, and that has been indicated. Poco Resources, the 
company has indicated that they will be cooperating in this 
review. They have not made a commitment to pay 
automatically, however if the finger strongly points to them, I 
would suggest that they probably would be compelled to 
seriously consider paying for damages. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, thank you, Minister. I appreciate your 
answer and the fact that you commit that the government will 
pay if that’s what the judge finds. Okay, so suppose the judge 
decides in his mind that Energy and Mines should use their fund 
and that is his recommendation. Would you support that 
recommendation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well obviously the Minister of Energy and 
Mines would have to respond to that. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, you’re here and I’m here and 
he’s not. And you are the minister of the Environment, and this 
is an environmental problem, and it’s a very serious 
environmental problem. As you will recall, I think I delivered to 
your office a copy of what we now know in this province as the 
Louisiana report, some 32 pages of a report done by reporters in 
the Wall Street Journal. 
 
That report of course indicated that the oil and gas basin of 
Saskatchewan and Alberta is very much similar to the one in 
Louisiana. And the problems that we have in Louisiana are the 
ones that we are now starting to experience in Saskatchewan 
and Alberta. Their oil field having been developed 50 years 
before ours, naturally the results of that have accrued so that we 
can study it in order not to make the same mistakes. You will 
recall, Minister, that we have serious disease problems breaking 
out as a result of the environmental contamination. 
 
(2015) 
 
So my question to you, I don’t think, was out of bounds for you 

as the minister in charge of our environment. I don’t think my 
question for you is at all difficult. You have said — and I 
appreciate what you said — you have said that if the judge finds 
that the government has responsibility, you support that the 
government would make that payment. That’s the taxpayers’ 
money. 
 
The next question naturally to follow is if that judge made the 
same determination that somebody owes money but it should be 
taken out of the Energy and Mines fund, why would you not 
support that? I give you that question back, as the major 
responsibility to the environmental . . . necessities that surround 
us in our fast emerging world of commerce and development 
and the deterioration of our environment to the point where the 
natural society of Saskatchewan has presented you with a major 
brief stating their concerns just as recently as this past winter. 
Their concerns stated very clearly that all of the water and all of 
the air and all of the soils of Saskatchewan are now at risk, at 
very high risk. 
 
And so to make a commitment that you would simply want the 
people that made the mistakes — if that’s what the judge says, 
that they’ve made mistakes — that you would want them to be 
the ones to pay for it as well as the taxpayers? So is that such a 
hard leap of faith to make, to simply say you would support that 
the fund be used, that the oil and gas companies have put up as 
an insurance fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chair, if the judge recommends that the 
fund be used to compensate Mr. Anton, and we can legally and 
appropriately tap the fund to do so, I see that we would 
probably do so. But I remind you that the next minister up for 
estimate is following me. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister, be assured I will ask 
him the question, there’s no question about that. And I expect a 
positive response from him too, Minister, because I think he 
recognizes the seriousness of this problem, and the need to have 
it resolved, and the need to have closure to what has become a 
very personal and draining problem for one family but which 
represents the needs of all of society around us. 
 
And I’m quite sure that when we get to the Minister of Justice 
and to the minister of SaskPower and the minister of 
SaskEnergy and the minister of SaskTel, that all of these people 
are going to start to recognize the need to work harder in the 
area of preserving our environment and that we have to do that 
by starting with some of the people that have fallen through the 
cracks in our society, as the Antons have. 
 
We have examples, Minister, not only in Alberta, now in 
Saskatchewan, of people who have had similar problems to the 
Antons. So this is not now an isolated case and it’s no longer a 
precedent-setting case; we actually have documentation of cases 
where people have been paid by the oil and gas industry for 
animals that have died as a result of consuming the pollutants 
that are produced in and around and in association with the 
industry. 
 
And we shouldn’t be too hard on the industry for having had 
that happen occasionally, because in life we can have mistakes 
and we can have hazards that will happen. We just have to be 
sure that we do all of the things possible to minimize those 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

things so that we don’t destroy the very things that we all need 
to live with. And what we need to live with of course is clean 
water, clean air, and clean food. And if we pollute our soils and 
pollute our water and pollute our air, we as a species are the 
next to be extinct; we will die. Human beings, mankind, will 
not exist if we continue to do this. 
 
I’m not an alarmist, I’m not even much of an environmentalist, 
and I can’t even believe I’m the guy standing up saying this 
because I’ve said for years we shouldn’t get too panicky and we 
shouldn’t cause people to be alarmed too much. But it doesn’t 
seem that we can get the attention of governments and officials 
unless we take an extreme point of view. 
 
So, Minister, I appreciate your answers for the Antons and on 
behalf of the Antons. Be assured that we will give your answers 
both to them and to the judge in question. I hope sincerely that 
this process unfolds as we have worked on it so hard, yourself 
included. And I compliment your officials and yourself for the 
hard work you’ve done to try to bring this to a conclusion, and I 
know we’re not there yet, but I know we can get there. Because 
if we have a will there will be a way and I know the other 
ministers in their hearts — deep in the bottom of their hearts — 
believe that this issue needs to be solved and resolved and will 
do everything possible to see that that happens. And so I thank 
you once again. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, from crude oil to fish oil; a couple of questions 
regarding Last Mountain Lake. Mr. Minister, of course as you 
would recall, in the spring of 1997 we had record water levels 
on Last Mountain Lake. In fact many cabin owners . . . and 
what have, you were bracing against losing their property and 
their cabin. This year you pretty near need a set of binoculars to 
see the water from the cabins. And I’m wondering if you could 
comment on what that does to the fish habitat in Last Mountain 
Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well, as you well know, the water levels 
depend on spring run-off largely. Actually the water levels now 
are more normal. Of course last year they were very high. And 
the fish have survived through wet and dry cycles before, so 
we’re not certainly overly concerned. But if we do find a 
reduction in numbers we will adjust our fishing opportunities 
accordingly. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Minister, the level of Last 
Mountain Lake does not go by the run-off in Last Mountain 
Lake. It’s affected by the lower Qu’Appelle Lakes and Last 
Mountain is used as a reservoir to maintain water levels in the 
lower lake. And a lot of us that live along that lake, a lot of us 
that irrigate out of that lake, a lot of us that farm beside it, a lot 
of us that like to enjoy the wildlife habitat including the fish, 
don’t particularly much care for that scenario. 
 
Now you’re probably thinking in your mind, well why doesn’t 
he ask Sask Water these questions? Well I do and I have. And I 
keep hearing that . . . well we’ll consult with you. We’ll make 
sure that you’re one of the persons that we come out and we 
will talk to. I think that last spring, Mr. Minister, as I watched 
the waters rise and I watched the fish at an area in the lake 
called the Liberty arm where we recently had some money put 
in from many sources to refurbish a dam there. 

And then this spring I watched the fish trying to come up and 
banging their heads against the boards on the dam, and not 
being able to get up. And I see last fall after we complained 
about what was going to happen to the water, they take the 
boards out, let all the water out of the arm. What happens to the 
fish then? 
 
And I have a hard time understanding that that kind of poor 
management does not affect fish habitat in that lake. 
 
And I’m wondering what kind of conversations that you have 
with Sask Water to ensure that this type of nonsense can be 
stopped, and that we start looking at Last Mountain Lake as 
something other than a reservoir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Perhaps we can get back to you more 
specifically on the Liberty arm issue. We are aware of it, and 
we would be pleased to provide a more detailed response to 
you. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Okay. I will take you at your word on that, 
and I’ll expect quite a detailed briefing on that, whether it’s in 
person or whether it’s through writing. 
 
I’m also addressing the concerns of the local municipality — 
that being of Big Arm — who this spring, I know the reeve in 
particular spent hours on the phone trying to talk to someone in 
your department about how to solve this problem. 
 
And I’m not sure that they ever did get a satisfactory answer. I 
think we were referred eventually to someone in Swift Current, 
which I’m sure would be very familiar with Liberty — which is 
four hours away — and the problems that we have there. 
 
So I’ll leave this one lie for now, Mr. Minister, and I’ll look 
forward to some discussions. And I hope they’re a little more 
. . . your department and yourself are a little more truthful and 
forthcoming when you say that you will talk to us, than Sask 
Water has been. And I’ll look forward to that dialogue in the 
future. 
 
Subvote (ER01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (ER02), (ER08), (ER15), (ER04), (ER09), (ER10), 
(ER05), (ER07), (ER03), (ER11), (ER14), agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
Subvotes (ER08), (ER04), (ER09), agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and his officials for coming in this evening 
and the other evenings, and for answering our questions. 
 

General Revenue Fund 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Energy and Mines 
Vote 23 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right I have Ray Clayton, who’s the deputy 
minister of Energy and Mines. To my left, Bruce Wilson, the 
executive director of petroleum and natural gas. Directly behind 
me is Dan McFadyen, who is the assistant deputy minister of 
resource policy and economics. And to his right, George 
Patterson, who is the executive director of exploration and 
geological services. 
 
(2030) 
 
Subvote (EM01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I have to assume that since you haven’t had very 
many opportunities in this session to be on your feet, that you 
would be looking forward to this. I’m surprised that your 
colleagues are already trying to silence you. Perhaps you have 
something to say that they don’t want you saying. So perhaps 
that’s their motivation for trying to button your lip already. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, we do have some, we do have some 
questions for you. I’d like to start off with dealing with the 
policies involving oil and taxation, oil and gas and taxation. 
We’ve seen a significant drop in the price of oil. Your Minister 
of Finance is estimating $17.25 for a barrel of oil, U.S., West 
Texas crude. This obviously is not the case; has not been the 
case this year. I didn’t catch the prices today, but I believe there 
somewheres in the $14 range, significantly less than 17.25. 
 
Now while it may not have a serious impact actually on the 
budget, because the federal government will pick up any 
shortfalls maintaining us as a welfare state, it does have an 
impact though on the other things that happen in the oil 
industry. If oil stays down below the $15 level or even just 
slightly above that, we see a serious decrease in the amount of 
drilling that happens. 
 
And while that impact hasn’t hit yet, in the sense of drilling 
licences not being used at the present time, now that road bans 
are off those things start to drop off. In fact I was talking to a 
fellow today who, while not in the drilling end, is in the 
production end and contracting and construction. He was saying 
that one of the people he was talking to had one job left. He has 
no more jobs lined up for the rest of the summer at the present 
time because the drilling is slowing down. So those are the kind 
of impacts that happen when the price of oil drops, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So what plans, what proposals does your department have in 
place to counterbalance that drop in the oil price . . . to ensure 
that we continue to have the construction, that we continue to 
have the drilling, the construction, and the production jobs, and 
all the auxiliary things that spread out from that — so that that 
continues in this province that that economic activity continues 
to give the people of Saskatchewan that benefit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To the member from Cannington, I think what he 
has recognized this evening in referring to my enthusiasm for 

estimates is what my colleagues have recognized, and perhaps 
that’s what you might have been referring to. 
 
With respect to the price of crude, as we all know, there’s been 
a bit of a market downturn, and certainly we’re hopeful that that 
will come back later on in the year. I understand the OPEC 
(Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) countries are 
looking at their production and where they might head for that. 
I’m understanding that there’s a meeting later this month that 
might in fact have some bearing on the market, drive the market 
up hopefully. 
 
With respect to your comments on the welfare state, I want to 
tell you that this government has worked long and hard to 
ensure that our revenue flows are in the positive, in the positive 
end as opposed to downward. We’ve eliminated deficit 
budgeting, which you will know — and I’m sure as a 
conservative, hopefully at least a fiscal conservative would 
support us in those efforts — balanced budgets year after year. 
 
As well I hope that you’ll recognize the fact that we’ve worked 
for two years with the oil and gas sector in terms of our royalty 
and taxation structure. We’ve made some changes that were 
partly to anticipate a downturn in the market, which has taken 
place, to make our industry more competitive. Those royalties 
vary with the price, but ultimately we’re a small player in the 
market-place and we can’t determine or dictate what the 
markets are going to be paying for oil. 
 
Certainly there will be some impact on the province in terms of 
jobs, but I guess what we are doing is we’re working with 
industry to ensure that we get our share of the development that 
takes place and hopefully it won’t have a dramatically negative 
impact on our economy. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, while you certainly don’t 
have the capabilities to set oil prices — that’s set by the world 
market and that reflects the availability of oil, not just in 
Canada but around the world — but where you do have an 
impact is in the ability to influence expenses, and expenses are 
an equal part of the equation to price. If you lower the expenses, 
that allows for more . . . a better return on the total value of it 
and that encourages people then to invest. So your government 
does have a very direct impact on oil, while not on the total 
price, at least on the difference between expenses and that price. 
 
So that was my question to you. What avenues have you been 
exploring in your department and what recommendations have 
you been making to cabinet to deal with that spread between 
expenses and sale price? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say to the 
member that we have, as I indicated, been working for two 
years in anticipation of fluctuations in the market-place and 
attempting to ensure that we’re competitive in the oil and gas 
sector. 
 
And part of the recommendations that I have already made to 
cabinet were announced on February 9. And I’m sure the 
member, coming from an oil-producing area, will be aware of 
them. I can go into detail in describing them but I’m not sure if 
the member wants that. Only to say to the member from 
Cannington that they were very well received by the oil and gas 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

sector, not only in the area that you represent, but in the 
south-west part of the province and in the Kindersley-Lloyd 
area as well, the rest of the oil-producing area. 
 
With respect to competitiveness, there’s only so much that can 
be done with royalties and taxation, and I think the member 
understands that. There are other external costs that are part and 
parcel of developing the oil and gas sector. I’m sure he’s aware 
of that as well. But I think what we’ve been able to do is create 
an environment where the activity has been and, if the markets 
are appropriate and the conditions are appropriate, will to 
continue to take place. 
 
Last year there was, what was it, 3,900 wells drilled — a record 
year in this province. And I think that speaks very well for the 
relationship we’ve been able to build with industry and the 
costs of operations that we’ve been able to put together as a 
package for them. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. While 
you did make some changes to the royalty structure, your 
changes were made to what could be considered new oil — oil 
wells that were drilled from the date of the announcement 
onwards. They had no impact on those that were already in 
production. And it’s the monies generated by that oil is what 
drives the drilling programs and the exploration for the next 
year or two. It’s not the new wells that are drilled; it’s the old 
wells that continue to produce, that provide the income to 
provide for the new drilling. So your changes, I don’t believe, 
had any impact in that particular area. 
 
So while you may talk about competitiveness, you have to also 
look at what the overall royalty structure is in this province 
versus Manitoba, North Dakota, Montana, and Alberta. And we 
continue to have the highest royalty structure of any of those 
jurisdictions. So when the dollar values — dollars are tight — 
they look some place else to do that exploration. And it’s not in 
Saskatchewan, I submit to you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Yes, there was 3,900 wells drilled last year when oil prices . . . 
because they were budgeted for from the previous year. So you 
don’t look at the ’97 prices. You look at the prices in ’96 to 
determine how much profit and how much monies were 
available, and at that point in time there was good money 
available. And that’s why those programs were put in place that 
happened in 1997. Now for 1998, you’re looking at the 
programs that were put in place based on the prices from 1997. 
But it’s easy to shut the tap off; it’s more difficult to start it up 
again. 
 
And so when oil prices go down, the oil companies can shut off 
the drilling programs. They have a great deal of difficulty in 
starting them up when the prices are down. They don’t 
anticipate that the price of oil is going to be $25 in the year 
2000 so because we’re only getting 12 or 13 or 14 today, we’re 
going to do that drilling. They do some but they don’t do near 
as much as they would do in the case when the oil prices were 
$18 and they’re expecting them to be 20. Because they have a 
wider margin to work with and that’s not available today, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So when you look at the competitive situation of Saskatchewan 
for all of the oil royalties, how does that compare with our 

neighbours, with Manitoba, with Alberta, with North Dakota, 
with Montana . . . that we’re competing with for those jobs and 
those dollars? How do we compare there, Mr. Minister? I don’t 
think we compare very well. They have a royalty structure that 
encourages people to invest in their areas. And it’s not just the 
royalty structure. You look at the price of energy here when you 
look at the price of natural gas costs, when you look at the price 
of electricity, when you look at fuel. All of those types of things 
play a role, Mr. Minister. So it’s just not the price of oil. It’s 
just not the royalty structure, although that royalty structure 
does play a very major role when you’re talking about the 
competitive nature that this business is involved in. 
 
So while you lowered the price of oil, the royalties on new 
drilling, you haven’t impacted that old oil that was being 
produced which generates the income to go out and do that 
exploration. What are you doing for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I guess what I would do is let 
the facts speak for themselves, Mr. Chairman. So far this year, 
in 1998, there have been 585 wells drilled in that four months 
and so I think that speaks for something — 1998, in the first 
four months, there were 818 . . . in ’96, 493; ’95, 413; ’94, 508; 
’93, 324. Last year we drilled 3,932 wells. The year before 
2,903, the year before 2,149, and so on. 
 
So I think those facts pretty much speak for the fact that the 
investment that has already happened in this province, and 
recognizing the activity is going to be based on the price, you 
know that as well as I know . . . markets that we can’t control 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But let me tell you what I think is important for you to 
understand. The environment that we created with industry has 
created, in 1997, $1.75 billion of investment; in ’96, 1.436; in 
’95, 1.045, which shows a very dramatic growth in the 
investment that’s taking place in this province. 
 
The employment figures I think as well speak for themselves — 
1997, direct and indirect, just under 20,000 jobs; ’96, 17,000 
jobs; ’95, 15,000 jobs. So I think, as you will have to admit and 
as much as it might hurt you to admit, that this government has 
done a very good job in terms of working with the industry to 
create incremental investment and employment. 
 
But I think as well, you’ll have to understand that the royalties 
and taxation fluctuate based on the price of crude. They go up 
when the price goes up; they go down when the price goes 
down. We have anticipated market shifts and there’re going to 
be . . . 
 
Now I don’t take a pessimistic approach to the industry at all 
because I think they want to invest here because they know 
we’ve got a resource that’s going to develop a good rate of 
return for them. I think they’re very pleased with the quality of 
workmanship and the people who work in the oil and gas 
sector; we’re a hard-working bunch of people here in 
Saskatchewan. They find it a very good place to invest. 
 
And I think that’s going to continue, but I as well, I take the 
approach, and I believe that you’re going to see an upturn in the 
markets. I think you’re going to see the price of crude increase 
and hopefully that will help to get our industry moving again. 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, even using your own 
numbers, you’ve seen almost a 30 per cent drop in the amount 
of drilling from last year, and the investment correspondingly 
will drop off. And it’ll drop off even more next year because the 
oil price will be reflected, not so much in this year’s drilling, 
but in next year’s drilling. Because the funds allocated for the 
drilling this year were those funds that were generated in ’97. 
 
When I look at the price of oil — this is the RBC Dominion 
Securities market outlooks. The balance for the second quarter 
of 1998, according to them in U.S. prices, was $14.84. They’re 
estimating for the third quarter — $15.84, fourth quarter — 
$16.59. So the prices are rising. But the balance for the entire 
year is $15.87. A far cry from what your minister was 
suggesting what . . . they were going to generate of $17.25. 
 
(2045) 
 
At the 15-plus dollar mark, you do get drilling. But there are 
those companies that will not be investing at our area at those 
prices unless the expenses drop off. If there is some lowering of 
their costs so that they can expect to make some good returns, 
they will come and drill under those circumstances. But they 
will hold off for a year or two or more, as the case may be, in 
drilling here . . . depending on the land holdings they have if 
those prices stay down. They will drill in a lower-cost 
environment than drilling here where there are higher costs, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And that’s why I’m asking you: what are you doing to ensure 
that our costs are lowered as far as the cost of drilling, and that 
being the royalties, that being all the other taxes involved in the 
energy costs — all of those items — what are you doing to 
approach the Minister of Finance in the cabinet to get those 
operating costs lowered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The royalties and taxation, Mr. 
Chairman, are certainly part of it. And I remind the member 
again, as the price of crude drops the royalties drop. It’s an 
automatic. That’s already built-in. It’s not something that has to 
be dealt with because we did it when we put the royalty and 
taxation package together. What we’re trying to do and we 
attempt to do working with industries, is to try and find a 
balance, a balance that’s fair. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. I can see 
that you’re going to be stuck on one track and not move off of 
that and that your royalty policies are the only ones that work 
any place. So we’ll move on to something else, Mr. Minister. 
 
One of the areas that always generates some concern is the 
dealings between the oil companies, the department, and the 
landowners. And there’s always a great deal of concerns with 
the surface rights associations about access onto the land . . . put 
in are allowed by the Surface Rights Arbitration Board. A 
number of people feel that the Surface Rights Arbitration Board 
doesn’t hold particularly the farmers’ interests in high esteem, 
in fact, it seems to try to diminish them as much as possible. 
That they’re mainly a tool of the government to perpetuate the 
will of the government, whatever that happens to be. 
 
Mr. Minister, because a number of the farmers have a great deal 
of difficulty in dealing with the Surface Rights Arbitration 

Board, are you looking at any measures in which to make that 
particular board more responsive to the concerns of the 
agricultural community? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the Act that the 
member refers to is under the purview of the Minister of Justice 
and those are estimates . . . it would be more appropriate to ask 
those questions of him in that he’s the minister responsible for 
that particular Act. 
 
I can tell you that the department takes a very proactive 
approach with industry. We meet with them, with their land 
men, to make them more sensitive and aware of the concerns of 
the agriculture community and the farmers. And as our industry 
goes and the Act grows and the activity has been increased, I 
think it’s reasonable to assume that there may be areas where 
there’s more conflict. I think that business understands that 
good relationships with the farming community and the people 
who are on that land and have been there for many, many years 
is only good business. I would suggest we probably have some 
bad apples and some situations where difficulties do occur, but I 
believe that the Surface Rights Arbitration Board would and 
should create a good balance between industry and the farming 
community. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, they should, but it 
seems that they don’t. Particularly the chairman of the board 
seems to have a very disagreeable attitude towards anybody 
coming forward and questioning the decisions that are made by 
that particular board, and that they’re simply spending too much 
time on these issues and that they shouldn’t be there in the first 
place. And there seems to be a great deal of animosity 
developing amongst those agriculturists who have to go before 
the board and have the chairman of that board deal with their 
issues. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the other areas that your department also 
deals with of a surface nature is seismic. Are you proposing any 
or thinking of any new requirements for seismic? The reason I 
ask that is in a number of areas the seismic operations go down 
the right aways of the roads, which causes a great deal of 
concern for the municipalities because then if it happens to be a 
wet season, the ditches are all rutted up; they can’t cut the grass 
in there. No one is compensated for this; it’s simply left up to 
the RM to deal with. 
 
So surely there must be some manner or mechanism in place 
that can ask the seismic companies to deal with either the RMs 
or with the landowners alongside of where they want to run 
their lines rather than simply giving them access, not on the 
road, but in the ditches of the road allowance, Mr. Minister, 
where they carry out their business. I’m not sure if there’s a 
requirement there for a licence or something to carry out a 
business on a road allowance, Mr. Minister, where they carry 
out their business. I’m not sure if there’s a requirement there for 
a licence or something to carry out a business on a road 
allowance, but they certainly are doing their businesses on the 
road allowance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it would 
certainly be my hope that the companies that are doing these 
activities in the different municipalities would be consulting 
and working with the different RMs to ensure that there is as 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

little conflict and as little disruption as possible. The industry 
pays an awful lot over a course of a year in terms of local 
taxation, and assists RMs in terms of road building and road 
maintenance. And I think for the most part they’re very 
sensitive to a good, positive, cooperative relationship with the 
municipal governments. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well again, Mr. Minister, it’s one of 
those situations where you would hope that that would be the 
case, but unfortunately there are too many examples to say the 
general rule is that they do seek cooperation. I think every . . . 
just about every RM you talk to has some complaints and some 
concerns about the seismic operations that happen within their 
boundaries. 
 
One of the difficulties is, is when the seismic company is doing 
items on speculation — in particular where there’s no paying 
customer that is already footing the bill — they run the lines up 
the road allowances on speculation and hope to turn around and 
sell it at some point, so they want to minimize those costs. If 
they run them up the ditch they don’t have to pay the 
landowners any fees because it’s on the highways or on the 
roads. If they go out into the farmers’ fields, then all of a 
sudden you’re dealing with access rights, you’re dealing with 
crop damages, and other kind of damages such as that. So they 
run them up the road allowances. 
 
Is there any requirement, Mr. Minister, for permitting, for 
licensing, or any of those types of government vehicles to 
regulate where the seismic is actually being carried out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that 
Highways has some regulations. I’m also told by my officials 
that they have to receive approval both from the landowner and 
from the municipalities. As well, any disturbance that they 
make they are required by law to clean up after themselves. If 
they don’t, what we would hope is that there would be an 
inquiry or a report made to the department and my department 
would deal with it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When they go 
to the municipality, can the municipality set provisions for 
access or are they simply required to set a standard fee and 
charge them accordingly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the department is 
aware of circumstances where municipalities have denied 
access to seismic operators so I would want to say that there 
must clearly be some kind of control in terms of the activity. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps some 
of the municipalities aren’t aware of the authority they can 
exercise then because I’ve received a number of complaints in 
those areas about the way the ditches have been left and the fact 
that they’ve been utilizing the road allowances rather than using 
the landowner’s properties. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the other areas within your jurisdiction — 
we’ve mentioned it earlier — was the royalty changes. You 
made major changes to potash, the royalty structure there. What 
kind of a dollar value did those changes generate as a decrease 
in royalties for the province, or, if production increased, what 
were the changes there? What would the decrease have been? 

What would the increase have been? And how did those royalty 
changes impact on other minerals such as gold or uranium or 
some of the other minerals that we produce? And I’m also 
interested in why there was no royalty change on coal. 
 
We saw a situation develop last year where SaskPower was 
looking at importing coal from Wyoming because of both the B 
(British thermal value) value of the coal from Wyoming being 
greater than the Btu values of our own coal but also because the 
costs were less. Now if the royalty structure had been changed 
on coal, perhaps that would have made our coal that we produce 
in Saskatchewan more competitive with the coal coming in 
from Wyoming and that Btu level may not have been that 
significant then. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, can you comment on those please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to comment 
on the coal issue and then respond to the potash issue. 
 
I am aware of course of some coal that came into Saskatchewan 
to do a test burn in some of the coal-fired electrical generation 
capacities, facilities in the province. That having been done, I 
can say that the department has been working on a revamp coal 
royalty structure, but not unlike potash, oil, and gas, these 
negotiations and discussions take awhile to put together. I’m 
hoping that we can conclude our review of the coal royalties in 
the very near future. 
 
What I can assure the member and people who work in the coal 
sector is that we’re going to be burning here in Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan coal and not Wyoming coal. There are hundreds 
of jobs in that industry. We’re well aware of them. We, as a 
department, will work to protect those jobs along with our 
Crown sector. It’s a resource that we think has a positive value 
and certainly we’re going to ensure the viability of that industry 
over the long haul. 
 
My officials are putting together the changes to your questions 
with respect to potash. I can say that the potash royalty structure 
was a very difficult piece to negotiate. There are basically three 
companies, three players now in Saskatchewan, with a 
divergence of interests and concerns. And so it’s not simple to 
put together a package that will satisfy the needs of all three 
players. 
 
But we, I think, have been able to achieve a good balance. 
We’ve reduced the overall rate from 67 to about 62 per cent. I 
think that it puts us in a very competitive position. The markets 
have been very strong for potash over the last year and a half, 
two years. This last quarter was a very positive quarter. We 
believe we’re going to have a very good year for sales in terms 
of potash. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well while your people are figuring out 
those questions, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could give us 
some indication of how our royalty structure on the potash 
compares to the royalty structure both in other provinces such 
as Nova Scotia, or with the U.S. — New Mexico, and the other 
producers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think it’s fair to say, Mr. 
Chairman, that we’re not viewed as being a low-taxed province. 



1768 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

I think it’s fair to say that we have tried to maximize the return 
for Saskatchewan people because that’s what we use to build 
highways and schools and fund our health care system. And so 
it’s our responsibility to maximize the returns as best we can. 
 
I want to say that the changes that we made to the potash 
industry, if you were watching closely, very shortly after we 
made our changes and announced our changes to the potash 
structures, there was over $400 million announced in 
investment in IMC’s (International Minerals and Chemical 
Corporation (Canada) Ltd.) plants in the province. We know 
that PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) as well is 
looking at upgrading some of their facilities. 
 
I want to say, as well to the member, we’re about 30 per cent of 
the international market in potash. We have a very high quality 
of potash. It’s received very well by offshore customers in 
China, Malaysia, and many different countries around the 
world. And they very much value the quality of our potash. So I 
think it’s fair to say that the quality of our resource adds to our 
sales. 
 
Our market shares, global market shares, have been maintaining 
and sustaining themselves. I think we’ve positioned ourselves to 
be very competitive in the world markets and I think that’s 
evidenced by what PCS, IMC, Agrium, are able to achieve in 
the world markets. We’re the largest producer in the world; 
we’re going to remain there. And hopefully if new expansion is 
required in the world market that will happen here, and it’s our 
intention to ensure that it does happen here. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You talk 
about the royalty structure — us being a high-taxed area or not 
being a low-taxed area — that’s certainly true. I don’t know of 
any individual in Saskatchewan who’d call us a low-taxed 
jurisdiction. 
 
You went on to say that the money that’s from the royalties is 
used to build highways. Well unfortunately you’re not building 
the highways. You talk about health care — well our health 
care service is deteriorating tremendously. Most people, if 
they’ve dealt with the service, have a complaint at some point 
or another, Mr. Minister, so I wouldn’t exactly brag that we 
have a high-taxed royalty because you’re building highways 
and looking after health care because most people would 
disagree with you at that point . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We are taking care of health care. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well the member from Lloydminster 
says, yes, you are taking care of health care. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, if your government is taking care of health 
care why do we see horror story after horror story on health care 
in this province? When you’re taking care of highways, why do 
we see chunks of pavement come flying up from vehicles 
smashing through people’s window and harming them? That is 
not the system that I would think you would want to be 
bragging about, Mr. Minister, nor the system that the member 
from Lloydminster should be bragging about. Rather it should 
be a system where people have access to health care, where they 

have highways that go someplace and that you can get there 
without your vehicle being destroyed. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I think the member is a little off 
topic. I think we’re on the estimates for Energy and Mines. And 
I would remind the hon. member from Cannington that we’re 
on Energy and Mines and that you would focus a little more on 
that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
talk about the asphalt industry in this province, which is from 
the oil industry, Mr. Minister. It’s one of the by-products of the 
oil industry and we can use it in this province, Mr. Minister — 
we can use it to upgrade our highways — but we don’t do that. 
We don’t use our own product here when it comes to building 
our highways, Mr. Minister. Why, we see chunks of highway 
flying around going through people’s vehicles — but why 
aren’t we using it in this province — why don’t we use the oil, 
the asphalt out of that oil, out of that heavy oil, in this province 
to fix our own highways, Mr. Minister? You talk about the high 
royalties — well spend some of it to fix our roads. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I asked the questions about the changes to 
the royalty structure on potash you didn’t provide me yet with 
the money, nor did you address the concern as to . . . What 
royalty changes did you make to the other minerals in this 
province, other than potash; other than oil and gas; other than 
coal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to begin 
by saying that the two areas we dealt with are potash and the oil 
and gas sector. We’ve still to complete our review of the coal 
royalties. 
 
And the member is right. And I don’t want to be argumentative, 
but when I referred to us as not being the lowest in terms of 
royalties and taxation on our resources, I make no apology for 
that. It’s our job; it’s our responsibility as legislators, as people 
who represent the people of Saskatchewan, to ensure that we 
get the maximum that we can in terms of return for their 
commodity, for their potash and for their oil and for their gas 
and for their coal. And for that I make no apology. 
 
I don’t think it would be appropriate for us to put the taxation in 
a range where we wouldn’t be getting and maximizing our 
return. In terms of your comments, and again I don’t want to be 
argumentative, but it often hurts me when I see the fact that we 
spend, servicing Tory debts on $750 million dollars a year, $2 
million a day that could be going into roads and other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. Since 
you brought up the issue of debt, perhaps we could go back and 
talk about the debt that was in place in 1982, because there was 
approximately $6 million in debt at that particular point in time. 
At an interest rate of 24 per cent, that grows very quickly, Mr. 
Minister — 24 per cent. That’s what the situation was in 1982 
when your government left power at that particular point in 
time. 
 
You’d like to forget that, but even the member from Regina . . . 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

I was going to say Regina Dewdney, perhaps it is Regina 
Dewdney, who was the Deputy Premier at one point in time, 
finally admitted in this House that that debt did indeed exist. 
Even though a good many of your members across there still 
don’t particularly want to recognize that fact, that a significant 
portion of the debt that was left there in 1991 was the debt that 
accrued prior to 1982, Mr. Minister. 
 
So when we start pointing fingers about who created the debt in 
this province, I don’t think there’s a political party in this 
province that can point their finger without having three or four 
pointed back at them. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you still haven’t responded to the question yet 
about the other minerals that are mined in this province. Has 
there been any royalty changes for those minerals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is no. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you very much for finally getting 
to that answer. Mr. Minister, on another particular issue dealing 
with your department and dealing with the supervision and the 
enforcement of regulations within the oil industry. How does 
your department determine when a new well is drilled? How do 
you determine when the royalties are due on it? How do you 
actually physically track it because an issue has been brought 
forward to me that a particular well — fairly new well in 
production — that the landowner was not receiving any 
royalties for it. When he contacted your department they had no 
record that it actually had ever been drilled. And yet it was a 
fairly new well and the oil was coming out of it. They were 
hauling it out by truck. So how does your department track that 
. . . to ensure that all the wells that are drilled in this province, 
that the royalties are being paid on them, that the landowner is 
receiving his fair compensation if he holds any mineral rights? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there is a 
process whereby the department tracks every step of a well’s 
development. First of all, a well has to be licensed. As it 
progresses into production and into removal of oil, the 
department has to be notified. And if the member opposite is 
aware of a circumstance where this hasn’t taken place, I’d be 
more than pleased to look into it if you’ll notify my office. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well I’ll pass the information on to you 
again because I did talk with your department once on this 
already. 
 
Now once a well is licensed . . . the permit is given, it’s 
licensed, it’s drilled. How long would it take for that 
information and from production information to work through 
your system to start collecting royalties? Is it one month, three 
months, six months, a year? What’s the time frame involved 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there is a 
requirement to report within 30 days and every 30 days after. 
There may be a small lag in terms of when the royalties are 
received. It would not be significant. We find that most of these 
are very much up to date. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. On a 
somewhat related issue, clearly dealing with horizontal wells 

but the same would apply for conventional wells, how do you 
make the determination as to whose oil it actually is coming out 
of the ground when you’re dealing with a number of freehold 
leases and each quarter, or even sometimes in subdivisions, 
hold title to the minerals? How do you make that determination 
as to who actually gets paid that royalty? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told by my 
officials you generally don’t see a Crown and freehold mixture. 
And that the players on a horizontal — the players usually have 
a pooling agreement that satisfies all of those concerns. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, perhaps in general, but there are 
occasions when those unitizations are not in place and that 
causes a great deal of concern when you’re drawing oil from 
adjacent locations with a different landowner, different mineral 
right holder. 
 
So is there some requirements that the oil companies have to 
test the various areas to determine their productivity or is it just, 
you know, the line is halfway through yours and halfway 
through mine so we each get 50 per cent? Is there some sort of 
determination made that way based on the porosity and the pay 
zones in the landholder’s area? Or just how is it determined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the officials have 
somewhat described the circumstance in many horizontal wells. 
Where there is a crossing, it’s calculated based on the length of 
the horizontal portion and how much is in which area. And a 
ratio would be struck — pretty much a simple agreement. 
 
A unitized area, I’m told the negotiations and the agreements 
can be very detailed. Each tract . . . if they do an analysis in 
terms of each tract, and what it contributes to the unit and based 
on that an agreement is reached. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. In those areas where there is 
no unitization yet, what role does the mineral right holder get to 
play in that determination? Do they have input? Can they 
present argument? Can they veto decisions that may come 
down? Do they get a role to play in that determination or does 
the oil company and the government make the determination as 
to what percentages go where? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that 
through the lease those powers are generally given to the 
operator. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So the lease holder or the mineral right 
holder would have no impact — no input then — on that 
determination. Once they sign that lease agreement the operator 
then makes whatever determination they wish to as to allocation 
of that production. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — In determining the conditions of the 
lease they do have input. But in terms of . . . the operator deals 
with the rest. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. Never 
having had the opportunity to sign one of those leases, I’m not 
exactly sure what they say on them, but I know I have received 
a number of complaints from people who believe that the 
allocations of those resources are being done improperly . . . 



1770 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

that the oil is being allocated to areas that may not have that 
production when you look at some of the other wells adjoining 
those particular pieces of property. 
 
Mr. Minister, when it comes to unitization, particularly in areas 
where you’re talking about horizontal wells, what rights does 
the land owner and the mineral rights holder have in refusing a 
unitization? Can they be forced into a unit? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, that would be very 
much what is written into the lease. It may be that in the lease 
the operator is given the authority to proceed with unitization as 
part of the lease agreement. The department is aware of cases 
where that authority has not been granted and that the owner 
has decided not to enter the lease. In that kind of an instance, 
what will happen is the unit will just form around them. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What happens though, Mr. Minister, in a 
case where you have multiple owners of the mineral lease. If 
you look at a lot of the old Scurry Rainbow leases, they were 
picked up by the government who now own approximately 80 
per cent of those mineral rights with the original landowners 
holding 20 per cent. That particular landowner would then . . . 
would they be in a position to state, as far as their agreement 
with the lease, that there not be a unitization, or would the 
government, being the majority leaseholder on that particular 
area, be able to force that issue . . . that unitization would then 
proceed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, my officials are not 
clear on the specific agreements as it relates to the issue you 
raise. What I will do is have the department check that out, and 
we will get back to you with a specific answer, because we’re 
just not aware of what the lease conditions might be. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. One 
question still on oil and gas. There are a number of zones 
beneath us; what are the provisions for the mineral-right holder 
and anyone wishing to lease mineral rights from that 
leaseholder when you come to dealing with the different zones? 
Is it possible for one company to lease the Mississippian, and 
another one to lease the Jurassic, or you know, various zones. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think, Mr. Chairman, two aspects 
to this: a private owner can do what he or she would choose to 
do. If they felt it appropriate to lease out different formations, 
then that would be an agreement they would make with the 
operator. 
 
With respect to the initiatives of the department, we have just, 
as you will be aware, implemented deep rights reversion, where 
the lower formations after the five-year period will come up for 
re-tendering and go back onto the market. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — This particular last effort will have no 
impact though on freehold mineral rights, will it not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, there’s no impact on freehold. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. One of 
the areas that does have an impact — I had a person in the 

industry today talk to me about it — is companies coming in 
from outside. And perhaps I should have addressed the issue 
with the Minister of Finance. 
 
But it seems to be prevalent in some areas, more so than others, 
with companies coming in from outside, using equipment that 
hasn’t necessarily had its sales tax paid on it in Saskatchewan, 
running licence plates that are outside of our boundaries, and 
those types of things. What effort does your department make to 
ensure that all the proper requirements are met for 
Saskatchewan in that particular matter? What does your 
department do to ensure that all the safety standards in 
Saskatchewan are met by operators who come in from outside? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, one of 
the tools that we have available to us — certainly this is under 
the purview of the Department of Finance, in terms of sales tax 
or percentage of tax paid on equipment — I think the area that 
we can be most effective in is moral suasion when we’re 
dealing with the industry and the people who are developing 
that resource. 
 
I think that’s one of the conversations that I have as often as any 
— that you’re developing a Saskatchewan resource, it’s a 
Saskatchewan mineral, you’re working in Saskatchewan, and 
we would be expecting you to be maximizing Saskatchewan 
content. 
 
I can’t say that I think we’ve been yet 100 per cent successful 
because we’ve got some difficulties in that regard. But I think 
as we continue to educate industry, that Saskatchewan people 
need to be working and developing Saskatchewan resources, 
and that we want to see a maximum of Saskatchewan 
equipment on those job sites, over a course of time we’re going 
to be more successful. 
 
It annoys the dickens out of me as well. And I’ve said this to 
industry and my department has shared this with industry. I got 
a call just the other day, an operation around Swift Current, 
where an Alberta contractor is in doing work on a 
Saskatchewan job. And it’s not a situation that we want to see. 
We continue to press to ensure that the Department of Finance 
is enforcing their rules and you know their responsibilities, and 
I’m sure they do. But our goal is to continue to educate the 
industry that we want them and need to have them maximize 
Saskatchewan opportunities. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Over the last numbers of years, Mr. 
Minister, we’ve seen a problem with the large diameter pipe 
going through this province with a number of explosions, leaks 
— what it your department doing to monitor those situations 
and to minimize their impact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think the member 
will be referring to the problems with ageing pipelines and 
stress erosion cracking. I can tell you that SaskEnergy is 
involved with the pipeline association working on those areas. 
Much of that is regulated by the National Energy Board— 
pressure limits and those types of things. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that industry is working very diligently in 
terms of SCC (Soil Conservation Council of Canada) problems. 
They’re looking for technology to detect . . . they’re working 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

actively on technology to detect potential problems. We all 
want to see the transportation of this commodity done in the 
safest fashion possible. 
 
I can say that my department is working with industry on 
creating an understanding of the problem, developing more 
knowledge. Prevention certainly is one of the areas that are 
important for all of us because it can be an area where loss of 
life can occur, and certainly we’re well aware of that. And 
we’re working diligently with industry to ensure more 
prevention and safe operations of those lines in our province. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What is 
happening within your realm of responsibility when it comes to 
mining? The price of gold is down. It’s creating some difficulty 
with the gold mining in the North. I know that Contact Lake 
was shut down. I don’t know if it still is. What’s your 
department doing along that line to encourage . . . Or if Contact 
Lake isn’t shut down, they were right on the edge of being shut 
down because of the price of gold being down. 
 
What’s your department doing to encourage further 
development of mining in the North and to . . . We hear about 
Saskatchewan companies doing mining operations around the 
world, but what’s happening in Saskatchewan in that area? 
Most people, in southern Saskatchewan in particular, never get 
the opportunity to see the mining in operation or to come in 
close contact with it, therefore they don’t have very much 
knowledge of that particular area. Exactly what is happening in 
the North when it comes to mining? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say on 
the outset, not enough. I think we have geological formations 
out there that have potential. I think it’s recognized, certainly by 
people within my department. And I think industry is starting to 
recognize that there are in fact opportunities. In terms of 
Contact Lake, if there is a difficulty at Contact Lake, it would 
be the lack of ore containing gold. That’s the problem. It was a 
marginal and a finite resource. The companies . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . they knew that when they started that mine. 
And, as is the nature of discoveries in Saskatchewan, they are 
somewhat marginal. So they are very . . . you know that it’s 
very sensitive to the royalty and taxation structure. Hopefully 
the gold prices will toughen up a little bit and hopefully we can 
continue to encourage exploration. That’s part of the key I think 
to the success of mining in northern Saskatchewan. There’s 
much more we can do and certainly it’s a focus of the 
Department of Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 
other areas of responsibility you have is Energy and Mines, so 
I’d like to deal a little bit with the energy sector. What is your 
department doing to enhance the energy production in this 
province? Not thinking necessarily of SaskPower but if you 
want to talk about SaskPower, that’s fine. But I’m thinking of 
items such as co-generation, wind, and solar energy, and 
alternatives to the conventional systems of generation of energy 
in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as you will 
know and as the member opposite will know, that is the 
responsibility . . . In terms of supplying a secure supply of 
electrical energy to the people of Saskatchewan, that’s the role 

of SaskPower. They have been looking at a number of areas. 
You will know that they have recently announced an agreement 
with the Bi-Provincial upgrader to generate something in the 
neighbourhood of 200 megawatts. If our industry and our 
economy in Saskatchewan continue to grow, there may be a 
requirement for, in the neighbourhood of 200 megawatts, 
incremental each and every year. 
 
With respect to alternate energy sources, I can say that my 
department is working with Natural Resources Canada, with our 
Department of Environment here in Saskatchewan, and with the 
federal Department of Environment in terms of CO2 reductions 
to work towards compliance with the federal agreement that 
was made in Kyoto, Japan. In terms of energy conservation 
initiatives, we’re working on modelling the economic impact of 
those changes in our province and we continue to cooperate 
with the federal government and other provincial jurisdictions 
in that regard. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You 
mentioned the 200 megawatts of generation capacity that’s 
going in with the Husky upgrader at Lloydminster. But it would 
be interesting to know just how many of those jobs were 
actually going to Saskatchewan people, where the people were 
actually living in Saskatchewan, and how many of those people 
are actually paying taxes in Saskatchewan? I think that would 
be an interesting number to know and perhaps you would have 
some indication to what that is? 
 
I know that when it comes to wind generation in this province, 
while we are certainly in some areas which should have the 
capacity to utilize that resource, very few people are doing so 
because of the cost of putting up a tower, but also the 
difficulties in getting an agreement with SaskPower to pay for 
any excess generation capacity that might be in place from one 
of those windmills. I have a gentleman at the south end of my 
constituency who actually has put up a windmill to generate 
electricity for his own business and is able to sell power to 
SaskPower, but only at a limited fee. Less than, I believe, less 
than what he would normally pay SaskPower if he was buying 
power from them rather than providing them with power. 
 
So I think we need to take a serious look at the arrangements 
that are made for those people who want to enter into wind 
generation so that it’s equitable for them and equitable for 
SaskPower. Obviously somebody has to pay for the 
transmission lines. SaskPower’s the person who owns the lines; 
therefore, they need to receive compensation for those 
transmission lines. But that the capacity to generate electricity 
be also recognized and compensated the same as SaskPower 
would compensate its generating stations if they were in that 
kind of a system where the carrier was paying the generation 
system for the power to provide to their customers. 
 
So I think we need to take a look at doing what we can to 
increase the amount of alternative energy sources that are 
available, Mr. Minister. So I wonder if you could comment on 
what your department is doing that way to try and enhance the 
development of alternative energy sources? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to 



1772 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

say that we would be — as a province and as people and as a 
government of the province — be looking for a greener source I 
guess of energy. And the problem I guess with wind energy is 
the reliability or perhaps the lack of reliability that may or may 
not be there. In terms of the cost of wind energy, it may be that 
some people are willing to pay a green rate for electrical energy. 
That might just be the case. 
 
I know that with deregulation soon to be facing the Power 
Corporation, they’re trying to minimize their costs of operation, 
their costs of generation, and certainly are looking at the 
cheapest source of electrical energy that they can find. 
 
It would appear, given the agreement of Bi-Provincial, that that 
would seem for them to be the cheapest form of incremental 
electrical energy — hence the deal has been struck. I think there 
are many opportunities. There are many other co-generation 
options in this province where you can take your by-product 
and turn it into a useful commodity. 
 
Weyerhaeuser in my home community has just recently made 
an announcement of an upgrade to their pulp mill or their paper 
mill, which paper mill will be generating an incremental 
amount of electrical energy — pretty much enough to make 
them self- sufficient. That kind of electrical energy will be 
getting rid of waste by-product of the pulping process that’s 
been sitting there since 1966. And it’s part of an environmental 
commitment that they made, but it also makes good business 
sense for them. 
 
So I think those are the kinds of opportunities that industry and 
the Power Corporation are looking for. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you talk 
about de-regulations and co-generation, I’m not sure that they 
necessarily need to be in the same sentence. 
 
Is your department or is SaskPower looking at the potential for 
having independent generation of electricity that would simply 
supply SaskPower with the electricity generated and not be 
owned or co-owned by SaskPower? If some private enterprise 
business wants to come in and co-generate that electricity at a 
lower rate than what SaskPower could do from its own 
generation or from putting up a new generator of some sort? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to 
say, and with my knowledge of the Power Corporation, they’re 
looking at all forms of electrical energy — whether it be wind, 
whether it be co-generation, whether it be smaller hydro 
projects — they’re looking at options. They’ve got all of their 
options open. And I think that that’s a respectable and 
reasonable approach to take. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, if 
someone came forward with a proposal to generate electricity at 
a feasible rate that would interest SaskPower, would you and 
your department be prepared to recommend — providing all of 
the safety factors and all of those things are dealt with — that it 
is a good project? Would you or your department be prepared to 
make the recommendation that this type of a generation system 
be allowed to proceed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, Mr. Chairman. The SaskPower 

Corporation is a separate entity, and we don’t get involved in 
that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, SaskPower has a 
monopoly in this province. And that monopoly is controlled by 
you and your colleagues in the cabinet, and the government. 
 
You said that when you come to look at generating capacities 
that you’re prepared to look at all options. So that is one of the 
potential options, Mr. Minister, that someone would come into 
this province and be able to generate electricity at a rate that 
would be of interest to SaskPower to distribute around this 
province. So I think it’s a valid option, that you said SaskPower 
would look at all of the options. 
 
So why do you just out of hand say no, you wouldn’t look at it, 
Mr. Minister? You said that SaskPower has nothing to do with 
this. Well they are the distribution system and currently they are 
the major generation capacity, but not the sole generation 
capacity in this province. Saskatoon generates its own 
electricity — or it did; I believe now they’re buying it all from 
SaskPower — but the co-generation with the Bi-Provincial 
upgrader is an example of co-generation, Mr. Minister. 
 
So why would you not be prepared to take a look at a proposal 
if it came forward, met all of the safety requirements, all of the 
things that need to be done in Saskatchewan? Why would you 
not take a look at that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think the member 
misunderstood me. I indicated earlier in my answer that I 
believe SaskPower is looking at all of the options. And I 
indicate to you and through you, Mr. Chairman, to the member, 
that it wouldn’t be done by Sask Energy and Mines because 
that’s not our role. That’s not a function of this department and 
that’s why we wouldn’t make a recommendation as a 
department. But as I indicated earlier I think SaskPower is 
looking at all their options. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I believe you said 
earlier in dealing with energy that it’s your role to ensure that 
there is a safe and adequate supply of electricity in this province 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I believe you said that it 
was your role to ensure that. 
 
SaskPower’s role is to deliver the electricity to our doors, yours 
and mine and everybody else’s in this province. So, Mr. 
Minister, I think the idea that to move one step beyond 
co-generation is not an unreasonable avenue to take a look at, 
and I would certainly hope that your government would indeed 
take a look at that if a proposal was to come forward. 
 
Another area, Mr. Minister, is CO2 (carbon dioxide) usage in 
this province. I’m not sure what involvement you would have 
with that but it certainly would fall . . . because it travels 
through pipelines. It’s used for enhanced recovery in the Midale 
oilfields. What is happening with that particular project? 
 
I know that there was a $2 billion announcement made 
approximately a year ago. I don’t know what the status of that is 
now. Is that proceeding? And when will it actually come into 
production? And when can we start to see the first oil coming 
out of . . . enhanced oil coming out of those recovery systems? 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, we just 
went through sort of where this thing has come to from the last 
time I talked with my officials about it and it was a pretty long 
list. If I remember all that I’ll be doing well. 
 
I can tell you that the National Energy Board is looking at the 
pipeline for approval and there’s no decision to come down. We 
believe that there will be a positive response to it. As you will 
know, this project was announced in June of 1997 — capital 
costs of in the neighbourhood of $1.1 billion so it’s a very large 
project, the largest that we’ve ever seen here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The line I understand is to be built beginning in the spring of 
1998, to be completed in the fall of 1998, and that production 
injection should begin in December of 1999. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of 
the areas to ensure energy availability in this province was the 
SaskPower caverns. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could 
indicate to us what’s the capacity of those caverns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I wouldn’t have 
those answers. Those would be best asked in Crown 
Corporations Committee when the corporation comes up for 
review. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Good evening 
to the minister and his officials. Mr. Minister, with respect to 
the sale of Husky Oil upgrader, could you just outline for us 
what was your role perhaps in the negotiations that led to this 
— your role and the role of your officials in your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I am a member of 
the Crown Investments Corporation board and was part of the 
discussions with respect to the sale. That would be a question 
that would be best asked when Crown Investments Corporation 
comes before the Crown Corporations Committee. Their 
officials negotiated and concluded the sale arrangements and we 
don’t have any of those details here. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, if you could 
clarify: none of the officials or yourself in your capacity as 
Minister for Energy and Mines had anything to do with respect 
to perhaps counselling individuals in CIC with respect to the 
sale of the Husky Oil upgrader — is that what we’re to 
understand here this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — That’s what you’re to understand. 
That’s how the process happened. CIC is responsible for the 
asset, they had the economic analysis done, and concluded after 
negotiations that it was in the interests of the province to sell 
the asset. My department had no role; I did as a minister sitting 
on the Crown Investments Corporation board. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the Minister, I’ve 
got to ask you irregardless, with respect to remissions that have 
been made to Husky Oil in the past, under The Corporation 
Capital Tax Act, the remissions there, and also with respect to 
the freehold oil and gas production tax. These have been some 
rather significant dollars that Husky has benefited from in years 
gone by. 
 
What will be the future with respect to that now that Husky Oil 

owns the upgrader in its entirety? Are these remissions going to 
continue, and if so, do they increase; do they decrease? If you 
could let us know what the situation is with respect to those, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there are no changes 
in those arrangements. They were part of the initial agreement; 
part of the contract that the government signed with 
Bi-Provincial. Bi-Provincial is a corporate entity. We no longer 
own shares in it, but those arrangements haven’t changed. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’ve 
been looking forward to asking a few questions about the 
Department of Energy and Mines, and in fact it turns out that in 
the province of Saskatchewan there are so many concerns with 
the Department of Energy and Mines one hardly knows which 
end of the pile to start with. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I think you left . . . we need to ask the 
minister to start with, what is your department doing to control 
the oil and gas pipeline failures in the province, and what are 
you doing about restoration of the soils and the environment 
around these fractures in these lines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, when there’s 
an activity that’s caused pollution with respect to a pipeline or a 
well-head, we’re certainly hopeful that it will be dealt with — 
cleaned up by the operator or by the pipeline operator, or the oil 
and gas company. In instances when that isn’t the case we 
would hope that it’s reported to the department, and we’ll 
ensure that it’s cleaned up. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to quote 
briefly from a letter in response to your answer. 
 

On May 18, 1998 I contacted your minister (and this letter 
is to the Premier and the minister of course is yourself) and 
indicated to him to come to my farm and have a firsthand 
look at a pipeline right of way that has sprung a leak. It 
was my belief that if (yourself) could have looked at the 
site of the leak, he could then explain to me why the new 
pipeline Act he is pushing through the House is in the 
public interest. 
 
The fact that he did not even acknowledge my letter leads 
me to conclude that public good is available to the 
government and to the industry but not to the common 
people of Saskatchewan. I’m directing this letter to you, 
Mr. Premier, in order to get confirmation that I have 
arrived at the correct conclusion. As of today, June 1, 
1998, the pipeline is still leaking and it looks like, in the 
public good, nobody cares. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, this pipeline has been leaking now for two 
months. It leaks natural gas accompanied by salt water that is a 
contaminant, along with whatever effluents are placed in that 
pipeline by the gas company in question. 
 
And so I would like to know, on behalf of this constituent of 
mine, why your department hasn’t done something about this. It 
has been reported to Energy and Mines. It has been reported to 
the company. And two months later, as far as I know, as of 
Sunday night — this past Sunday night, that’s yesterday — this 



1774 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

pipeline still leaks and no one has been there to look at it. 
 
Now this letters is to yourself, letters to the Premier, and 
nobody has looked at it. This pipeline was placed on this man’s 
land by expropriation in the name of the public good. Where is 
the public good to allowing this pollutant to continue to saturate 
the soil on this man’s ranch? What are you going to do about it, 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well first of all, what I’m going to 
say to the member opposite is any correspondence that comes to 
my office or to my department is answered. Our normal 
turn-around time would be less . . . two weeks on the outside. 
And I would like to know more details with respect to this 
letter, as the member has alleged it has not been answered. I’m 
not aware of any correspondence that’s outstanding. 
 
In terms of any conditions that have been reported with respect 
to a leak of either natural gas or salt water, it is the procedure of 
the department to investigate and to find a resolve. If the 
member can bring to my attention where that hasn’t been the 
case, I will ensure that it will be. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Well, 
Minister, this is not my allegation. This is a letter from the 
constituent that was addressed to you first of all. This next one 
of course was addressed to the Premier. I only have copies of 
them, because they supplied them to me. So these are not my 
allegations; these are the allegations being made by the people 
out in the country who have got the gas lines leaking with the 
salt water going into their fields. 
 
And if this gentlemen says that you haven’t done anything 
about it I have no recourse but to say to you that when he 
phoned me on Sunday night he informed me that he was very 
disappointed that this situation hadn’t yet been corrected. Now 
why would the man phone me up on Sunday night to tell me 
that he still has a problem if your officials had done their job? 
Obviously this has been around since June 1 because that’s the 
date on the other letter that went to your department way back 
then so . . . May 1, rather. So this thing’s been going on for a 
while and it had been leaking for a few weeks before he 
originally contacted you people because he tried to inform the 
gas company in question and the local authorities to see if the 
problem could be resolved at that level. 
 
Now obviously there’s a crack in the system and I think you 
need to take a look at that crack. I of course will ask the pages 
to have this photocopied and a copy of it given to you. And we 
will allow you of course to do your job. Now you have given us 
a commitment that you’re going to take care of it, and we hold 
you to that. 
 
I will suggest to you though that I have read a letter wherein 
one person suggested that because this was a gas line, a natural 
gas line, we shouldn’t have to worry about it. But the truth of 
the matter is that the line contains other products, mainly salt 
water, and natural gas of course is not collected in a pure form. 
And of course there are other chemicals that are added in order 
to facilitate both the drilling of the gas wells and the production 
of gas, and those contaminants get into the gas and into the salt 

water. So I will send this over and ask you that you will commit 
to seeing to it that this particular problem of pollution is 
corrected. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Is Subvote (EM01) agreed? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess the 
minister doesn’t want to make a commitment, so he’s not going 
to answer the question. Either that or he napped right through it. 
We will of course go on, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and the 
minister can answer both questions at the same time if he 
chooses to want to rethink his position. 
 
I have a letter, Minister, here from several people and I think I 
want to deal first of all with the one from yourself which was 
addressed to myself from yourself and it’s dated January 23. 
Now you heard me discuss with the Minister of the 
Environment the problems of pollution on Perry Anton’s ranch 
which is no secret to you. Certainly not anything that you 
haven’t heard before. 
 
And we discussed of course today the letter that we last 
received from Perry Anton that went to you people in the 
government wherein he expresses concerns as a result of the 
conversation that he has had personally with the judge who has 
been asked to consider taking on the review of the case. Now 
Mr. Anton of course has pointed out two areas of concern. One 
of course being that what does he do if he gets a judgement in 
his favour and the persons or companies or government or 
whoever that is named as the ones that should pay decide not to. 
 
So that led us of course to digging up this letter because it has 
been suggested that perhaps the government would have to pay 
out of taxpayers’ money. And while we think that that is the 
proper thing to do as a last recourse, we think it should be a last 
recourse. And we would suggest that The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act has provided for a fund that is in your 
jurisdiction that in fact should be used to pay for this kind of a 
payment should that eventuality occur as a result of what goes 
on in these hearings. 
 
Now back in January, Minister, we suggested to you that this 
should be the alternate place for this money to come from rather 
than out of the taxpayers’ pocket and you were good enough to 
write me a letter and quote a part of the Act, which I think it’s 
important that we read into the record, and then ask the people 
of Saskatchewan who are watching tonight to judge whether or 
not they think that the minister’s opinion about this Act is 
correct or not. And I would ask you, of course, for your opinion 
so that they can see what you think about it. 
 
It says in the Act and I want to quote just the first two parts of it 
because that’s what’s here and that’s what concerns Perry 
Anton and his situation. 
 

Where in the opinion of the minister all other remedies 
have been exhausted or an emergency exists, the minister 
may spend moneys from the fund for the following 
purposes: 
 
(a) conducting or completing the abandonment and surface 
restoration of a well structure, test hole, oil, shale, core, 
hole or related facility that has been left incomplete by the 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

insolvency or disappearance of the owner or operator. 
 
Now that’s the first part that can be covered. 
 
Under the (b) section — the next one, I quote: 
 

containment, clean-up and surface restoration of a problem 
that in the opinion of the minister is a major environmental 
problem that arises from oil or gas exploration, 
development, production or transportation operations 
within the scope of the Act. 
 

Now the minister of course goes on to state that the situation at 
the Anton ranch clearly does not fall into either of these 
categories. I leave it to the people of Saskatchewan to judge 
you, Minister, on that statement, and I refer them back to the (b) 
clause and to the outset. The outset says “where in the opinion 
of the minister”. How much more clear can an Act be than to 
give jurisdiction to the minister by saying that “where in the 
opinion of the minister”. Clearly in your jurisdiction, in your 
hands, you have the dictatorial powers under this Act to make a 
decision. 
 
Under the (b) clause, “containment, clean-up and surface 
restoration of a problem that in the opinion of the minister” — 
not in my opinion, not in his opinion, not in anybody else’s 
opinion — the minister’s opinion. He has dictatorial powers 
here to do what has to be done to make things right. “. . . in the 
opinion of the minister is a major environmental problem that 
arises from oil or gas exploration and development.” 
 
Now, Minister, I take you back to Perry Anton’s situation. A 
gas company digs a pit on the land. The pit is filled with sludge 
that is trucked in from all of the other wells in the area. These 
are the effluents that contain all of the drilling chemicals and all 
of the salt water sludges. All of the things that are the worst 
possible things that you could ever possibly spread around are 
collected, and as they should be. 
 
But they’re deposited in a pit on Perry Anton’s ranch. And 
they’re deposited in a pit that is uphill from his dugout, so if 
there is a spill out of that with any run-off water it goes 
downhill into his dugouts. There’s also a strong possibility that 
operators made mistakes and dumped loads of effluent into the 
dugouts themselves by mistake, thinking that they were the pits 
that were meant for disposal. 
 
Now, Minister, if in your opinion you came to the conclusion 
that the gas company was responsible for the pollution 
problems that Mr. Anton has encountered, then clearly it is 
within your power to use this fund. Clearly then, if the judge in 
question that may be looking into this matter, clearly if he does 
— and I say this is hypothetical because we don’t know what 
he’s going to find out yet; maybe he won’t find out that there’s 
anything wrong. But if he finds in his deliberations that this 
problem was the responsibility of gas company pollutants, if 
they find that Perry Anton’s cattle most likely died from these 
pollutants — and I’m convinced they did — but if he finds that 
and he says that this company should be paying and that this 
fund should be used to pay for it, then you as minister, having 
the authority to use that fund, will you make a commitment to 
use the fund if the judge recommends that? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me begin 
by saying that this has been an issue that’s been before my 
department and before the department of Environment, before 
SERM, for quite some time. 
 
I want to say that we certainly do sympathize with Mr. Anton’s 
situation and we have been working . . . and I want to say I 
think that we as a department, both SERM and Energy and 
Mines, have gone the extra mile to attempt to find a final result 
for Mr. Anton. Last year the two departments spent $80,000 
testing and could come to no conclusion through those tests that 
there was a liability. 
 
Subsequent to that — and certainly the member from 
Souris-Cannington has been bringing this issue to our attention 
and to the attention of the media — and subsequent to that 
testing last summer, we determined, working with Mr. Anton, 
to attempt to put in place a process . . . which process could be 
independent, which process could give a final determination as 
to whether or not there was liability on the part of the oil and 
gas sector. 
 
So what we offered, and what we offer today, is that we would 
appoint an independent retired judge, Justice Halvorson, to 
work with Mr. Anton, to work with the industry, to determine 
the facts and to make a suggestion — a recommendation — 
with respect to whether or not industry is responsible for 
contamination that ultimately caused the death of Mr. Anton’s 
cattle. 
 
Now that’s the first process. The first process I think is 
important in that we need to define whether or not the oil 
company is at fault. And I say to the member opposite, and I 
say to members of this legislature, that if the industry is at fault 
in this instance, they will pay. And let there be no mistake about 
that. And that’s what we have to determine and that’s why we 
suggested that Mr. Halvorson have a look at this entire issue 
because, if it is caused by industry, there will be restitution. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. I’m glad to hear you so 
forthrightly put that position on the record. I will hope that you 
will be as forthright in following up with the obvious question 
that needs to be answered and that being: whether or not the 
government will protect Mr. Anton from the possibility of an 
award being made that has to be taken later on to the courts for 
collection? 
 
Because in fact the reason this problem hasn’t been solved to 
date is because Perry Anton doesn’t have the money to be able 
to take it to court. He’s a rancher with no money. He can’t 
afford to hire any more lawyers, and he can’t afford to fight this 
case through the courts. 
 
So if Mr. Halvorson is the judge appointed, and if he comes up 
with a decision that an oil company or a gas company in this 
case should be responsible to make a payment, and that 
company refuses to make that payment, what is left for Mr. 
Anton? The court process — right back to where he started 
from. 
 
(2200) 
 
He would have to then take that company to court and say: I’ve 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

been awarded by Mr. Halvorson, and he said that I should get it 
and let the courts decide. Again the deepest pockets are going to 
rule the court system and they surely aren’t Perry Anton’s 
because he doesn’t have any pockets left — he’s lost them all. 
His ranch is polluted. His cattle are dead. He hasn’t got any 
money. That’s why we asked you for this process to start with. 
 
So the simple question then was: you have at your disposal this 
fund, and possibly we could see the judge making a 
determination that a payment should be made. And someone 
could refuse to make that payment. But you as minister then, 
could trigger that account because it is an insurance fund to 
clean up these kind of messes. And if the judge were to 
recommend that this fund be used for that, what I’m saying to 
you is, on his recommendation would you then free up this 
fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, the 
member is talking about a hypothetical scenario. And I think 
what is appropriate is that we wait for the conclusion of Mr. 
Halvorson’s investigation, and based on that conclusion 
determine what the next step of that process is. 
 
If Mr. Halvorson finds that industry is at fault, is liable, this 
department can and will instruct industry to compensate or to 
do the clean-up. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this process 
costs Mr. Anton nothing. 
 
So what we’re attempting to do is we’re attempting to await Mr. 
Halvorson’s conclusion. And as I’ve indicated, there is no doubt 
in my mind that the industry, if found liable as a result of the 
conclusion of Judge Halvorson, will in fact make things right. 
But I think what we need to do is go through the first process 
and come to a conclusion with respect to liability or a lack of 
liability on behalf, on behalf of the industry. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Before I allow the hon. member 
for Cypress Hills to continue with his questioning, I just wish to 
draw his attention, and member's attention . . . this subject was 
dealt with in Department of Environment earlier this day. As 
the Minister for Energy and Mines has said, both departments 
have been involved with it. There were some commitments 
made however by the Minister of Energy earlier today, and I 
simply remind the hon. member for Cypress Hills that a 
commitment from one cabinet minister is a commitment of the 
government, and I simply urge that you not be repetitious. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would 
suggest, Mr. Chair, that the minister has just conceded that 
$8,000 has already been spent out of his department on this 
process. We are here tonight to talk about the estimates on his 
department. Now if he is encountering costs that are not listed 
in the Estimates and goes over budget, then it is of necessity for 
us to learn how much those monies are going to be. Then of 
course the process that he is presently involved in with Mr. 
Anton could cost monies that haven’t been budgeted for. 
 
We therefore have to explore this area to find out how much 
money it is going to cost; whether this money is going to be 
taken out of the department — as a result that comes out of 
general fund, and as a result that is the taxpayer’s money — or 
if the minister is going to make that differentiation and take 
these monies out of the fund that he has set up under the other 

Act. And the other Act of course provides for the insurance 
fund that is paid into by the oil and gas industry. And of course 
every well that is drilled, each well of that company is charged 
a fee — that fee goes into that insurance fund. 
 
We need to find out from the minister which pot the money’s 
coming out of. The one that the insurance company fund . . . 
that the oil and gas companies are paying into that is designed 
to clean up these messes, or is it going to come out directly out 
of the department’s pocket, which is the taxpayers’ pocket. And 
it shouldn’t be the taxpayers’ pocket. 
 
Now the 8,000 already has come out because of the goodwill of 
this government to try to straighten out this problem. We 
appreciate that. But we do have to pursue this line of 
questioning in order to get the minister to commit to this fund 
because the commitment that the other minister made, if you 
will recall earlier this evening, was that he supported what we 
were saying. He agreed with it, but it wasn’t his department so 
he doesn’t have the authority. 
 
Only this minister has the authority to tap this particular fund, 
which is not the taxpayers’ fund but the insurance fund that has 
been paid into by the oil and gas companies. So if you see the 
difference, Mr. Chairman, then you will . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I thank the hon. member for Cypress 
Hills. I was not taking your preamble as a challenge of the 
Chair’s ruling, and I’m still not taking that. I appreciate, and 
have been paying very close attention. Of course I will now 
expect the hon. member for Cypress Hills to put those questions 
to the Minister of Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have to 
admit that in my consultation with other members, I’ve gotten a 
little off track here. 
 
Minister, you of course are going to commit to, as has been 
pointed out, your government to the decisions of whatever 
minister makes that commitment. And so we take it that you are 
committed to providing this fund in the event that it is required. 
 
We have a few more questions that we’d like to ask you, 
Minister, with regards to the department that you are in charge 
of. We have talked many times about the Act that you presently 
are bringing in, which of course affects your department and 
expenditures that you will be making throughout this year 
because obviously the changing of that Act will change the way 
expenditures are made. 
 
And I guess my simple question is here, have you allowed in 
your deliberations of the budget for the costs that the new Act 
will incur for your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told by my 
department that there are essentially no additional costs. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Minister, some time back, I guess on 
January 17 it looks like here, the Nature Saskatchewan people 
presented you with a prospectus. And I would like to get your 
opinion on some of the questions that they have asked because 
of course the way that you address these questions will 
determine how your monies will be spent. 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

It says very quickly here, just to bring you up to tune with this 
organization, it says that Nature Saskatchewan believes that 
rather than developing new reserves of natural gas and oil, the 
government and industry should emphasize conservation of 
energy — renovation of buildings, for example, to make them 
more energy efficient — and development of alternative sources 
of energy such as solar power, wind power, and hydrogen fuel 
cells. We strongly advocate the initiatives such as natural 
energy and transportation policies that curb the demand for 
fossil fuels. 
 
Minister, what are your responses to this organization and that 
general statement that they made? How do you plan to fulfil 
their objectives, if you agree with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say that 
energy conservation has to be and certainly is important and it’s 
on the minds of the officials within our department as we work 
with our federal government in terms of greenhouse gas 
emissions. I think it’s very clear that energy conservation is one 
of the very important things that we need to be looking at. 
 
With respect to hydrogen fuel cells, I think there’s some very 
exciting technology that’s . . . The Ballard fuel cell is an 
example that’s being worked on. A lot of money is being 
invested in an alternate source of energy. And I think that that 
certainly is one of the areas that we need to be proactive on in 
terms of alternate ways of doing things. 
 
The city of Regina just recently got an award for energy 
conservation initiatives. I know that there are initiatives as well 
in North Battleford and in my home community of Prince 
Albert. 
 
Building efficiency is something that we all need to be, and are 
more, aware of and I think that that is one of the very important 
things that we need to be doing in terms of energy conservation. 
 
But I want to say, in terms of shutting off — and I don’t think 
that’s what this group meant — the use of fossil fuels, that there 
can and will be a transition. If there are cleaner sources of 
energy, natural gas is certainly one area. It’s a very clean fuel 
and I think it’s an area that we’re doing in the Saskatchewan 
Research Council some very good works and very positive 
work on in terms of natural gas vehicles. 
 
So I think that there are a number of things that can be done, 
should be done, and my department will work with respect to 
energy conservation on a provincial level, on a local level, and 
on a national level. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
we’re glad that you’re working on these issues. More 
specifically they say that the increase in the greenhouse gases in 
the atmosphere is a major threat to our health, in the health of 
the biosphere and its ecosystems. Increased production and use 
of natural gas and oil exacerbates the problem since methane 
and carbon dioxide are emitted by test burn-offs, flares, gas 
leaks, and pumps, and the exhaust from the internal combustion 
engine is in vehicles and heavy equipment. 
 
Now, Minister, how of course that relates to your particular 
department is so very, very important because of course it is 

your job probably to defend the oil and gas industry as Minister 
of Energy and Mines and probably to promote the use of more 
energy. However, this group is pointing out to us what has been 
obvious in our society for a long time, that we need to strike a 
balance. And so my question to you is: where are you striking a 
balance to achieve these goals in terms of controlling these 
burn-off flares that they talk about, the gas leaks, and pumps 
that give off the exhausts and all of those things that we’ve just 
mentioned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t know if I would use the member’s description 
of the department as one of a defender and a promoter of the oil 
and gas sector. We certainly have developed a positive working 
relationship with them. We’re a regulatory and a licensing 
body, and we want to facilitate job opportunities, which come 
as a result of oil and gas activity. 
 
I want to say as well, the leaders, frankly, in the voluntary 
challenge in CO2 reductions, has been the oil and gas sector. 
They have probably been more proactive and produced more in 
terms of reductions, tangible reductions, than any other sector. 
 
I want to say in terms of flaring, the technology that they have 
been developed has been reducing the amount of emissions 
through flaring. 
 
And I want to just remind the member and perhaps pass on to 
him in case he missed it, Saskatchewan is one of the few 
provinces in this country who have joined in a pilot program to 
reduce gas emissions, that being emission trading. It was 
negotiated by Energy and Mines and SERM at a national level 
with our counterparts. The other provinces that signed on to this 
in Canada, aside from Saskatchewan, are British Columbia, 
Alberta, Quebec, and Nova Scotia. 
 
And so I think we’ve been doing some very positive and 
proactive work in that regard. We’ve much more to do and 
we’ll continue working with other jurisdictions and other 
departments in the future. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well of course the 
Nature Saskatchewan people have presented you with this very 
interesting brief, and I found it extremely interesting to read 
because, of course, it deals with the impact on terrestrial 
ecosystems and it has conclusions of several other areas that are 
not dealt with in their first, initial approaches to you. They also 
talk about the impact on our aquatic ecosystems, things that we 
in Saskatchewan don’t think of that much because we don’t 
have a whole lot of water and as a rule we don’t think. But we 
do have a lot up North and we do have to be concerned with it. 
We talked about energy conservation with these people. And, of 
course, the brief is fairly lengthy. But I’ve presented you with a 
few of the first opinions on it. 
 
And what I want to do is to table this document and ask you if 
you would give us a commitment to answering for the public 
the issues that these people have raised through this document, 
because I think it’s necessary that we make public what your 
answers were to these folks in their private meetings because 
it’s important to everyone. 
 
(2215) 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll undertake to 
give the member answers in writing as soon as I receive the 
documents. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And as soon as 
we have a page we’ll certainly see to it that you get that. 
 
Minister, you will recall earlier in the winter that I provided you 
with what I had referred to several times as the Louisiana report 
which was done by the people for the Wall Street Journal— 
their correspondents. Now I’m not going to go through the 
whole document because of course it is 32 pages long. But very 
briefly what this is, is a study that was done in Louisiana 
because their oil basin and their gas basin is very similar 
according to experts to the one in Saskatchewan and Alberta. 
 
And the Louisiana Basin, of course, because it was done so 
many years before ours, has encountered several problems. And 
the problems that they’ve encountered are mostly health 
problems related to people. And we are just starting now to 
encounter those kind of health problems and the unusual 
circumstances that go along with it. For example, we do know 
of a case where two reasonably young people died within a very 
short period of one another — one from a pancreatic disorder, 
the other from a heart disorder. These don’t sound like unusual 
circumstances. But when it happens, right in the middle of a gas 
field where there has been a major pollution problem, and you 
then read this report and find that there are several documented 
cases of similar types of unusual happenings where in Louisiana 
. . . and in this report it tells about literally scores of individual 
health problems like that that are very unusual. And it also tells 
us that studies that have been done there show that nine and a 
half times as many cancers are showing up in that field as show 
up any place else in the United States. I mean this is astounding 
material for people who have to live with the circumstances of 
these pollutions. 
 
Minister, I will, because of your good nature here tonight, ask 
you if you will receive a copy of this and can make a 
commitment as to a written document from yourself and your 
department as to how you are going to ensure the people of 
Saskatchewan that we don’t continue to have the same 
problems that Louisiana has. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, this ain’t Louisiana. 
Their industry started much before ours, and has been 
developed, and they’ve been operating under much different 
regulatory regimes than what we have in place here with respect 
to environment and pollution. 
 
I will commit to the member opposite that we will review the 
document and respond to him in writing. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
we can be here as long as you like, because this is Louisiana. 
What it says in this report, and what it says by all kinds of 
environmental studies, is that the oil and gas basin in Louisiana 
is exactly the same as the one in Alberta and Saskatchewan. We 
live under the same conditions. We have the same basic oil and 
gas reservoirs and we have exactly the same kinds of problems 
starting to develop now that they have already lived through. 
 
Now it’s true that they had their oilfields and their gas fields a 

long time ago. But remember this: technology may have 
improved somewhat but people are still dying from the same 
diseases and the same cause and effect results here, starting to 
be compiled now, as what happened there before, and we 
haven’t learned our lesson except to stand up and say this ain’t 
Louisiana. Give me a break, Minister. 
 
We’ve got exactly the same kind of conditions here. What 
we’re saying to you is don’t call this the same place as 
Louisiana, but look at their problems and use them to determine 
how we’re going to stop the thing from happening here that 
happened to them. 
 
Do you want to have the people in south-east Saskatchewan in 
the oilfield there, where you’re going to do all of your new 
piping and all of your new flooding programs, do you want 
those people to end up with the Minister of Health having to 
take care of them all because they’ve all got cancer? Is that 
really what you’re after here? You know, I beg you to 
reconsider that comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated to the 
member opposite, we will receive the report. I want to assure 
the member that we will make every measure, make every 
effort to study it in detail. I also want to assure the member 
opposite that the safest environmental practices will be in place. 
We are as concerned about the people of this province and their 
health, whether it’s in the oil patch or any other area, as the 
member opposite. And certainly it would be irresponsible for us 
to have anything other than very stringent environmental 
regulations in the legislation. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, under 
your jurisdiction and under your department, certain entities use 
the right of expropriation. Would you care to make a comment? 
And I think this is an opportunity for you to make a public 
statement as to your feelings about expropriation. 
 
And I know you’ve indicated in some conversations and in 
some letters that you have an opinion and that you would love 
to have the opportunity to express to Saskatchewan people what 
that opinion is. And so tonight I’m asking you, to give you that 
opportunity, what rights of expropriation do you feel that the 
people that are represented under your department and the 
department’s authority and the Acts that you control in your 
ministry, what should that extend to and how should it be 
applied? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to 
say that if, in the interest, in the public interest, expropriation 
becomes necessary, then different government departments will 
require the tools to deal with that. I’m told by my officials that 
there are over 30 different areas where expropriation tools are 
available, whether it be in SaskTel, SaskPower, Energy and 
Mines, you know, the pipeline operations. It’s very broad, very 
comprehensive. We believe that negotiations and discussions 
can, and will for the most part, create solutions rather than a 
confrontational approach, which I believe expropriation to be. 
And certainly we want to minimize that necessity and that 
requirement. 
 
The member opposite — and we’ll be dealing with a piece of 
legislation later this evening as I understand it — has some 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

concerns with respect to the process. And I’ve indicated to the 
member that The Expropriation Act is not under my purview. 
It’s not under the purview of Energy and Mines, but it’s under 
the purview of the Minister of Justice. We both agree that this 
can and probably should take some review in that the 
expropriation laws in this province have not been actively 
considered, overall, on the broader base. And we would be 
more than willing to work together to look at this legislation 
over the course of the next upcoming months. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Most of your answer I 
was able to get and appreciate. I have a question now of course 
that relates to this that was given to me by one of my 
constituents. 
 
As you are aware, your department will be involved heavily in 
the proposed gas plant expansions at Burstall. Now even though 
all three new plants and both of the old plants that are being 
rebuilt will be on the Alberta side, a lot of the spin-off effects 
will end up, a lot of the effects will end up being part of 
Saskatchewan’s problem. For example, we already know that 
there are several carloads of pipe — I forget exactly the number 
— it amounts to many railcar loads of pipe that have been 
brought into the area. This is large-diameter pipe, the diameter 
being such that only three pipes can be put on a semi-trailer 
truck to be hauled at one time, so that gives you a bit of an idea 
of the size of them. 
 
That pipeline is going to run from Alberta through 
Saskatchewan to the United States. Now you said you believe in 
expropriation for the public good. I’ll have you know that I do 
too. Where I quarrel with you is on the issue of interpretation of 
what public good is. I would ask you very simply on behalf of 
those farmers that are going to be faced with expropriation: 
what is the public good for the people of Saskatchewan from a 
pipeline that runs from Alberta to the United States? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, first of all the 
member is looking at an NEB (National Energy Board) 
regulated pipeline and it’s not under the purview of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Okay, Minister, then let’s be more specific 
and we’ll take another pipeline, the course that’s going to 
deliver some of the natural gas out of The Great Sand Hills into 
plants of that type. That is a collection-type system that will be 
in Saskatchewan, that will be under your jurisdiction. Now 
where is the public good in bringing gas from the field to the 
plant . . . when of course you can make the argument that the 
public good is for gas to be taken to farms and to villages 
because they need to heat their homes. But the collection 
system, how does that apply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I don’t think you can 
differentiate between the collection and the distribution system. 
It’s a resource that goes to market that creates royalties and 
taxation, that helps to fund government programs; those sales 
do. So I think that’s in the public good in terms of heating 
people’s homes and their businesses. I don’t think there’s a 
need to elaborate. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, I think then we should take 
this a step further. Now you’ve established that in some cases 

we’ve got some public good and I think that’s important that we 
note that. 
 
Do you not then think that it is also in the public good for those 
farmers and ranchers that are affected by those lines that you 
expropriate the land in order to install, do you not think it would 
be also in the public good for those people to have a vehicle, a 
legal arbitration board or some process like the Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board where they would have the opportunity to go 
to discuss their problems and to view their concerns and have 
someone other than an expensive court process that would be 
readily available to them so that they can address their 
concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think 
it’s fair to say that if you look at the amount of activity that 
takes place in this province and the number of expropriations, 
you’ll find that 99 per cent of these things are settled by 
agreement. The farmers, the landowners, are looking for 
compensation. The pipeliners and the pipeline people want to 
resolve in areas where there is a dispute. 
 
And I think expropriation is a last resort, and the member will 
agree to that. And the fact that the vast majority of these 
arrangements are settled through negotiation without an 
expropriation process speaks something to the nature of the 
relationship between landowners and industry. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, what it speaks of is a process 
where 91 per cent of the people realize they don’t have any 
other option. Because you expropriate and there’s no vehicle for 
people to be able to challenge the system, unless of course they 
happen to be millionaires in which case they’re not likely to be 
farmers anyway. They can’t afford the legal process to 
challenge it, so 90 per cent of them simply take what they’re 
given. 
 
I have, Minister, here one file from one individual farmer who 
happens to be 83 years old, and he gave me this file to 
challenge the expropriation processes of this province. A man 
83 years old goes to that much trouble, not for himself, but 
because he said the system is wrong and the next generation has 
to live with it unless old fellows like him take it on. 
 
Minister, when people like that come to my office, then I know 
that we are right to stand here and talk to you about the process 
that doesn’t allow individuals the opportunity to be able to have 
a day in court; to have an opportunity to express their problems. 
 
Now that relates not only to their own personal problems, it also 
relates then to not having anybody that can listen to the people 
on the land who can tell them what the environmental problems 
will be on that particular piece of property. So many farmers 
and ranchers in this province have got things on their property 
that they know about that can greatly assist, and we don’t have 
a vehicle for them to be able to approach. 
 
What we have is a board that works with the expropriation 
procedures, and that board simply rubber-stamps the request for 
expropriation. They do not in any way allow the individual to 
voice their opinions as an automatic part of the process. Now 
there are some vehicles in there that can be used, but they’re 
never used. 



1780 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

So, Minister, I would ask that you take a look at this, along with 
the Minister of Justice. And that you take a look at . . . and I do 
have a couple of other pipelines, in fact, that I thought of, that 
are not controlled by the federal regulations, but are controlled 
by your own, that do not deliver for the public good. 
 
For example, the ones that run to a refinery to bring in the oil 
out of the oilfields could just as easily be transported by rail. 
And, in fact, I have suggested to the people on the Notukeu line 
that if in fact they were able to convince the oil companies there 
to load the crude oil on those . . . into those tank cars and ship it 
into the refinery in Regina, they’d have ample use for the rail 
line to be able to afford to keep it open. And probably the cost 
of digging pipelines and operating them and keeping them up 
and paying for the environmental damage would probably, in 
the end, be cost effective. 
 
(2230) 
 
So we don’t agree with all of your interpretation of what’s for 
the public good, but we would ask you to make a commitment 
to investigate the whole area of expropriation with the Minister 
of Justice and with the other ministers involved, so that we can 
resolve this type of problem as they did in Alberta in 1977, 
which is 21 years ago. And it seems to me that if it’s working 
reasonably good over there for 21 years, then it must have 
something to it. Otherwise, by now they would have changed it. 
So it’s worth looking at. So I’ll give you an opportunity to 
respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated when 
my remarks began on this line of questioning, that I had talked 
to the Minister of Justice, and I intended to pursue that 
conversation with him to see if there were areas where we could 
improve the process to create harmony and assist in creating 
harmony between industry and landowners, and I will do that. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister, that will not go 
unnoticed in the country. I will assure you that I will bring your 
words to the people of the rural areas of Saskatchewan that are 
concerned. If people in the cities are concerned, they need only 
to ask, and we certainly will pass it on. I would only say now to 
the chairman that if he can find a page, I will send this material 
over to you as I promised I would. 
 
Subvote (EM01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (EM02), (EM03), (EM04), (EM05), (EM06) agreed 
to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (EM03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Whitmore): — I would ask the 

minister if he wishes to thank his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I really would like 
to thank my officials for their help during these estimates, and 
for the work that they and their employees do during the year. 
It’s a small department — Energy and Mines is — relative to 
other departments. The employees work very hard serving the 
people of Saskatchewan, and I want to thank them as well. 
 
I’d also like to close by thanking members opposite for their 
thoughtful questions. I appreciate the time they put into 
formulating their line of thought. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would also 
like to thank the minister and his officials for coming in these 
evening, and thank you for answering our questions. And we 
look forward to working with you, and solving the province’s 
problems in the oil and gas industry over the next year. Thank 
you. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
immediately to my left is our president, John Law; directly 
behind me is Garth Rusconi, vice-president of accommodation 
services; seated beside Garth is Debbie Koshman, 
vice-president, finance and corporate services. Over to her left 
and my left as well is Barb Loveridge, acting director of 
financial planning, finance and corporate services; and seated in 
the back, I think, is Al Nordin, commercial services director. 
 
Subvote (SP01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to you and to your officials. A few questions, Mr. 
Minister, that I’d just like to add to the debate that’s taken place 
already on SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation). Number one, Mr. Minister, as I understand it, 
SPMC manages all government properties in the province. And 
with that in mind, Mr. Minister, when we’re talking about 
management, does that mean you hold title to all government 
properties and the properties that you manage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We do hold title to the majority but 
there’s a number that are leased and certainly there are still 
some that are under the title of the different departments as 
well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, when it comes 
to the hospitals in the city of Regina — the General, the Pasqua, 
the Plains — are those properties in the title of SPMC now? If 
they are, which ones are? If some aren’t, which ones aren’t? 
And when did you take title of any of those three if you have 
title to those properties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We can get you more specific detail, but 
the only one that we will hold title to will be the Plains facility 
beginning November 1 of this year. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, you’re saying 
that right now you’re not sure of the Pasqua and the General but 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

the Plains you don’t currently hold title to; you will take title on 
November 1. Is that what I heard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — That is correct. But also I want to clarify 
that we do not hold title to — clearly we don’t hold title to the 
Pasqua or the General either. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me who currently 
holds the title to the three facilities we have just talked about — 
the Pasqua, General, and the Plains? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We could confirm this for you, but it’s 
our belief that they are under the title of the Crown province but 
under the management of the Regina District Health Board. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I’d appreciate more detailed 
information in regards to those three facilities as to who 
currently holds title. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other question . . . one of the questions that’s 
come up as well in regards in property, and certainly in regards 
to the whole health question, is the parking at the General. Is 
Property Management going to be responsible for additional 
parking or is that falling under the Department of Health? And I 
guess in asking that question, I should ask as well, is Property 
Management putting the funding in or is that all coming out of 
the Department of Health as far as the construction project at 
the General and the Pasqua? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The parking would be ours, along with 
the district health board. And to the second part of your 
question, the funding would be essentially the Department of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, when you say Department of 
Health, are we talking about funding that will go into the 
expanded parkade as well? I believe you said parking will be 
under . . . you will hold title, but does that mean that the 
department puts the funding in for that or will you then be 
responsible to put the parkade in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think to be clear, specifically we don’t 
really have a role at this juncture yet, that really is under the 
Regina District Health Board. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, those are basically 
the questions that I intended to ask tonight. A couple of them 
we’ve been into before. But I’m looking forward to receiving 
further information in regards to the questions as far as the 
specific information regarding title, who currently holds title. 
 
I thank you and your staff for taking the time to respond to 
those questions and look forward to your extended responses. 
Thank you. 
 
Subvote (SP01) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (SP02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
Subvote (SP01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I want to 
take the opportunity to thank my officials who assisted us this 
evening and who have been very helpful to myself as a new 
minister throughout the year. I certainly appreciate all the work 
that they do for myself as minister and certainly I believe for 
the Saskatchewan people. 
 
I want to thank the opposition for their questions as well. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(2245) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Education Amendment Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’d invite the 
Minister of Highways to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to 
introduce my officials that are with me tonight. To my right is 
Craig Dotson, the deputy minister of Education; to my left is 
Michael Littlewood, the executive director of third party 
funding and legislative services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Madam Minister, I know that you’ll be relying on your officials 
tonight, I’m sure, to assist in answering some of the questions. 
And there are a couple of amendments that are proposed by the 
minister to the current Bill, and I’ve indicated that the official 
opposition will also be proposing an amendment that we’ll be 
dealing with under clause 101 at the appropriate time when we 
get there. 
 
But before we do that, for some uncertainties from people who 
have contacted me they want some clarification and I do as 
well, Madam Minister. Could you indicate, in clause 5, you’re 
suggesting the changes to the program being delivered currently 
in our K to 12 system to be expanded to include 
pre-kindergarten or students not eligible to attend. Who initiated 
this type of request to the Department of Education, and what 
will this amendment hope to address? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, it was initiated really through 
the Department of Education, just in the work with the 
Department of Justice. And the fact that through the action plan 
for children, through the community school programs that 
boards of education were becoming more and more involved in 
pre-kindergarten programs as well as the department. And it 
was felt that in consultation that this should be officially 
recognized in the Act. 
 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

Mr. Krawetz: —The Minister of Education has made reference 
to this clause before in some of her media statements indicating 
that this will not be a compulsory situation for boards of 
education to be in. Is that clear? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, the answer to that question 
would be yes. It is set out that it will give powers to the board 
but not duties to the board. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
Madam Minister, clause no. 10 is the proposed restructuring of 
urban school divisions who currently do not have the 
subdivision or a ward system. I note there that it indicates in 
clause 10 that it refers to “in a vote.” I’m wondering if you 
could clarify who must initiate that vote. Is it the municipal 
council? Is it the urban municipal council? Is it the school 
board? Is it a school committee that could initiate the vote? 
Who will conduct the vote? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, the vote as recognized in the 
Act does not designate how that does come about, and that will 
be part of the regulations. And the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association) had also agreed with that and that they 
will be consulted as the regulations will be developed later. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I’m assuming by the 
comments in Hansard of June 1 from the minister that she’s 
suggesting that where there was a vote already conducted in one 
of our major cities that that vote was on a municipal ballot and 
it was asking the question as to whether or not the city wished 
to divide or subdivide into subdivisions and/or wards. 
 
Could you indicate whether or not you believe that that will be 
the part of the regulations . . . that it will indeed allow the 
community represented by its municipal council to actually 
have a vote that will determine whether or not a school division 
will be obligated to divide into subdivisions? Is that the 
understanding? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, it’s as I stated before — that 
those decisions haven’t been made; we need to develop the 
regulations and that will determine the type of process that 
would take place. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Madam Minister, you haven’t clarified 
it at all for me. My question is: will a municipal council be 
eligible or able to conduct the vote that will determine whether 
or not a school division must follow what has been placed in the 
way of the amendment to The Education Act? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, it’s my understanding then 
the piece of legislation here does not address that but that will 
be addressed in regulations. It may be appropriate that a 
municipal council administers the vote, but who and how it will 
be initiated will be decided in the regulations. 
 
(2300) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, if I might, to your officials, 
indicate that individuals in communities which are currently 
represented by boards of education without the ward system are 
asking . . . well, how would they go about asking for the board 
of education to indeed subdivide into subdivisions and have it 

done in that fashion? Will they have to approach the current 
school board to say we ask you to conduct that referendum, or 
will they be approaching the municipal council, or will they be 
approaching the provincial government to say we would ask 
that the provincial government ask the city — and I’ll use the 
example of the city of Regina, for instance — will it be the 
provincial government who will ask the city of Regina to 
conduct the vote? Will it be the board of education, the public 
board of education or for that matter the Catholic board of 
education? Who will people be able to turn to, to say we’d like 
to see whether or not a majority of people want to have the 
subdivision or the ward system in a particular city that doesn’t 
have it right now? Who do they turn to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, it’s as I’ve previously 
answered. All of those matters will be decided in the regulations 
— the who and the how it will be initiated, will be decided, 
when we do the regulations. That will be done with 
consultation. And I think a lot of the issues and concerns that 
you’re raising will be addressed then, with that. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Madam Minister, who will make the 
determination of what’s in the regulations then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, it will be the decision of the 
government. But that will be done in consultation with all the 
education partners — with SSTA, with STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation), with LEADS (League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), with SASBO 
(Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials). It 
will be with all the education partners. 
 
And there has been agreement on this piece of legislation to 
work in that direction. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess 
we’ll have to await and see what the regulations actually hold 
for people in the province. 
 
Madam Minister, your other piece of legislation that apparently 
has received consensus and support from the francophone 
community. And there has been a lot of work that has been 
done to achieve the changes recommended in the Act. Many, 
many clauses address the situation where there will be an ability 
to form one conseil scolaire, and be able to address the needs of 
the francophone community. 
 
I was looking for a time line, Madam Minister, as to when this 
could be in place in terms of the election. That’s the question 
that I have for you — is how soon do you expect this to be put 
in place? And the second part to that is how will each of the 
areas, the current nine areas, how will they select their 
representative to the board? Will this be by an election 
procedure in the near future? Or will this be by appointment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, the conseil scolaire will be 
created this fall with plans to be in operation then for January 1, 
1999. The representatives from the nine areas will do it through 
an election process of one member being elected to the conseil. 
And it will be done and conducted in the ordinary way that 
school boards are elected. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

understand that the people that we’ve spoken to have concurred 
with the proposed amendments, and that it seems that this is one 
piece of legislation that is being looked forward to. 
 
Madam Minister, one piece of legislation that is not being 
looked forward to by all people in education are the 
amendments to clause 100, around the grievance procedure, and 
tremendous, tremendous backlash. I’m sure that your officials 
and the minister has apprised you of the fact that numerous 
letters have come from boards of education, from individual 
trustees who express grave concern right across this province, 
that indeed the proposed changes that you have regarding the 
procedures for the settlement of grievances will again eliminate 
the local employer — in this case, the board of education. 
 
And I’m wondering, Madam Minister, how in the explanations 
put forward by the boards of education as individual boards, by 
the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, where they cite 
. . . where they have indicated that a similar type of employment 
program or contracts do exist right now with a health 
organization, the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations, SAHO, who has a provincial contract that is 
administered at the local level. In other words, the employers of 
health people at the level are the district health boards, and they 
administer a provincial contract. 
 
The same situation is occurring in the area of education. We 
have a provincial contract for the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, all the teachers that teach in the province of 
Saskatchewan, yet the employer is the board of education, the 
conseil scolaire, that is at the local level. The proposal that you 
have put forward and that has been, you know as I said, you 
know, many, many letters have indicated that that 
representation of the local employer is being eliminated — 
opposite to what exists in the Health department. 
 
I was wondering if your officials would provide you with the 
information as to how you see the education system being 
different than the employers of health care workers at the 
different district levels. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, in response to that, I guess 
first thing I would want to clarify is that this piece of legislation 
is not eliminating or changing what has already been the 
practice. It’s actually clarifying and continuing what’s been in 
law in this province for over 20 years. The collective bargaining 
regime used for the teachers in this province; this regime was 
established 20 years ago. We’ve now seen a different regime 
being established for health care workers, through SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), which is 
again a different regime than what is under The Trade Union 
Act. So we have different types of bargaining units within the 
province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I know that the Minister of 
Education has made reference to the fact that this was the 
procedure in the past, and that it’s here for clarification. I do 
recall from cases in the ’70s and ’80s where we were dealing 
with grievances, that indeed the board of education was 
involved in the grievance procedure in terms of how that 
grievance was settled . . . of a provincial contract. 
 
What is suggested here that that it is being removed from the 

board of education, and indeed the provincial bargaining 
committee — which has five government-appointed 
representatives and only four school trustee representatives — 
will be the group that will determine how the grievance will be 
settled; whether or not it will go to arbitration; who will be 
selecting legal counsel, and the like. 
 
I see that quite different from what was occurring in the past. 
We have a situation where the minister has indicated, well this 
is clarification of what the word “party” meant or “party to an 
agreement” or “party to a grievance,” that indeed it was a 
provincial responsibility. I think that we have an extreme point 
— clashing of points of view here — whereby we have boards 
of education that are saying no, we are the employers, we are 
trying to ensure that a provincial contract is applied at the local 
level. Should not they be consulted to ensure that the board’s 
opinion is represented adequately at that grievance procedure? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, in answer to that, again I just 
want to clarify that nothing is being eliminated with this piece 
of legislation. The process that has worked very well in the past 
will still be able to continue to work in the future. And so it can 
still happen. And the reason why there’s been so few number of 
grievances that ever come to the provincial level is that these 
grievances have been still settled at the local board levels or at 
the district levels. So these things can still happen. This isn’t 
preventing any of the ways in which it happened before from 
still happening with this piece of legislation. It actually 
happened under this piece of legislation before and this is just 
clarifying it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Madam Minister, I think you can see 
why boards of education are a little fearful of this, as to whether 
or not they indeed will have any say how grievances are settled. 
 
We saw the reaction of your government and the Minister of 
Education last December, when indeed she indicated that there 
was difficulty negotiating a provincial agreement, so something 
that had been in place called the protocol agreement was 
suddenly done away with and indeed it reverted back to what 
was in place in the past. But that meant that government had a 
majority on a committee and could do as it felt by majority rule. 
 
The same type of fear is here from boards of education again in 
dealing with the grievances where they will now be relying on 
the committee, which has a majority of government appointed 
members, to settle grievances of a contract dispute at the local 
level. So we again have eliminated the board of education. 
 
And I understand your comments and I understand the 
minister’s point of view in terms of the plan that she has put in 
place in terms of moving in that direction. But I do want to 
indicate to you that boards of education have indicated to me 
that that is something that they do not support; that they do not 
feel it’s in the best interests of the employer — the board of 
education. 
 
And as I indicated in my opening comments, there is a proposal 
for an amendment to clause 101 and again that will not change 
the context of the Bill that’s already there. It ensures that if the 
minister’s plan is that it be moved to the committee, the 
provincial bargaining committee to resolve the grievances. The 
school boards have indicated that that’s fine as well. However, 



1784 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

the clause that they are asking for, Madam Minister, is that the 
provincial bargaining team have some responsibility of being 
able to respond in a manner that is not arbitrary, that is not 
discriminatory, or that is not in bad faith. And that’s the type of 
proposal that I will be putting forth when we arrive at that 
clause. 
 
Madam Minister, if I might revert back to a comment that I 
made initially about the ward system, and I just want to indicate 
to you, and I’m not sure whether you have any further points of 
clarification because you kept referring back to regulations and 
indicating that the regulations are going to establish the book. 
 
If I can indicate to you what the Minister of Education indicated 
on June 1. She has indicated by saying this, in the future, if a 
public vote is held within an urban school division and the 
majority of those who vote support the establishment of a ward 
system, the board of education will be legally obliged to apply 
to the minister to establish wards. 
 
Now, what that is saying to me and I think to anyone who reads 
this is that a public vote doesn’t necessarily have to be 
originated by the board of education. A public vote can be 
anything that is defined, I guess, by the provincial government. 
And when you say regulations are going to clarify that, people 
are asking for clarification of what you’ve proposed in this Act 
right now to say who will conduct that public vote. Will it be 
only the board of education? Will it be only the municipal 
council? Will it be only the provincial government? Or are you 
going to ensure that all of these particular situations can address 
the need for a public vote? 
 
(2315) 
 
The question is who can begin the public vote. And as I’ve 
indicated to you, the Minister of Education said very clearly 
that a public vote, once it’s held and the outcome of that — the 
majority outcome of that — that says that the people in a 
particular urban municipality demand the ward system. The 
board of education, by what I see here, is legally obligated to do 
that, okay. So, obviously, this vote is not the board of 
education’s vote because you wouldn’t need to force them if 
they conducted it anyway. So, could you clarify that, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Chair, as I said previously, of course 
a public vote is a vote of the public on that issue. Now, how that 
could be administered — it might be through local 
governments. But, as I said earlier, who will initiate it, how that 
will come about will be brought in through regulations. But 
that’s going to be done in consultation with the education 
partners because those concerns have been raised and certainly 
we'll be working with STF and SSTA and LEADS and all of the 
other education partners there to determine the who and the 
how that will be done in regulation. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 36 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, I have a House amendment to 
clause 36 of the printed Bill. The House amendment is intended 

simply to eliminate some redundant language in this clause. 
There is no substantive change to the provisions. Do I need to 
hand this . . . Clause 86 . . . 
 
I move that clause 36 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend clause 86(aa) of The Education Act, 1995, as being 
enacted by Clause 36 of the printed Bill, by striking out 
“except where it is required in the circumstances to operate 
in another language”. 

 
I so move. 
 
Clause 36 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 37 to 42 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 43 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, I’d like to move an amendment to 
clause 43 of the printed Bill. I so move that we: 
 

Amend subclause 103(4)(a)(i) of The Education Act, 1995, 
as being enacted by Clause 43 of the printed Bill by 
striking out “francophone education area” and substituting 
“attendance area”. 
 

I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 43 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 44 to 100 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 101 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move clause 101 of 
the printed Bill: 
 

Amend clause 101 of the printed Bill by adding 
immediately after the words “settlement of the grievance 
within 15 days” where they occur in clause (b) as being 
enacted therein the following words: 
 

“; and 
every board of education or conseil scolaire has the right 
to be fairly represented in grievance or rights arbitration 
proceedings under the provincial bargaining agreement 
by the bargaining committee appointed pursuant to 
subsection 234(2) in a manner that is not arbitrary, 
discriminatory or in bad faith.” 

 
I so move. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Clause 101 agreed to on division. 
 
Clauses 102 to 135 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedules A, B, C inclusive agreed to. 
 



June 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(2330) 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur les services de l’état civil 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chairman, my official with me tonight 
is Mr. Rod Wiley, who’s the executive director of finance and 
management services in the Department of Health. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister and his 
official, welcome. Just a few quick questions. As I understand 
it, if as the legislation is laid out before us . . . what the intent is 
is to try and simplify some of the processes in regards to vital 
statistics. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can give us 
just a quick rundown of what the simplification of this will 
mean. Will it mean positions disappearing from the department 
as a result of the changes and money saved by the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. There are about 
four or five things that will sort of enhance the way in which we 
provide information and record and manage information and 
these are what the Bill would intend to do. It would improve 
customer services, update obsolete technology, streamline 
inefficiencies in the process, protect some of the fragility of 
existing documentation, and the overall modernization of the 
program that has been unchanged for several decades. So these 
are five of the issues that we’d be looking at doing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, so what you’re saying, 
while it’s supposedly simplifying some of the processes, it 
doesn’t necessarily mean that there will be a monetary saving to 
the department. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Over a period of time, Mr. Member, and, 
Mr. Chair, there would be a saving to vital statistics. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, will people have to 
deal with — will the department notice a significant change 
with the elimination of division registrars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, what they’ll see is a reduced 
number of registrars across the province and an enhanced flow 
of information with a quicker turn around time.  
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, how many actual 
positions then disappear and what with these positions 
disappearing, if we’re talking about simplifying as well as 
speeding it up, how are you looking or hoping to achieve that 
and where do people go to get the information in regards to the 
forms to fill out in order to make sure that the correct 
information is made available to vital statistics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well on the birth side, the parents would 
still have the option of filling out the form, or the responsibility 
of filling out the form over an extended period. They would still 
have up to 30 days to do that process. On the death side, this 
could be done immediately through the director. 
 
I think the other question that you’d asked that I want to go to 

very quickly here is the number of folks currently involved in 
the process. I think there are about 800 now today that are 
involved in the registration process. Yes, 800 division registrars 
in Saskatchewan today . . . that number we think would be 
reduced somewhere to 25 to 50 personnel, depending on what 
model we follow. We might use the district model so you could 
have one person within a district. If you needed to add 
additional folks to the system you could do that. 
 
Then of course there’s the transaction fee today to provide that 
information. I think it’s around 25 cents per transaction. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So, Mr. Minister, if I heard you correctly, you’re 
dropping from 800 to between 25 and 50? Is that what you’re 
telling me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s correct, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, many of the forms 
currently needed for burial permits, marriage certificates, birth 
certificates, or death certificates are being deregulated. Mr. 
Minister, how will the system work, and how will the 
department be sure to get all the necessary information you’re 
currently getting with this deregulation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well the deregulation of the forms will 
allow vital statistics to respond in a more timely manner, we 
think, to the needs of their clients as required for data collection 
and surface changes. Even though forms will be deregulated, 
there will still be, in our opinion, a cross-check on the system to 
maintain the integrity and the reliance of the documentation and 
the documents. And their information are being used by other 
federal-provincial governments. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, as I 
indicated earlier, if indeed this means a simplification of the 
process and yet all the vital information is available, we 
certainly can agree with it. 
 
When you’re talking about the job cuts, I guess . . . or the 
number of positions that are eliminated, the positions that are 
being eliminated, Mr. Minister, how are you going to deal with 
those? Are those individuals then actually moving or losing job 
opportunities or what process is going to be used in the 
elimination of those positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, there really isn’t a reduction of 
staff in the system. What it is is just a reduction of 
responsibilities that some of these people would carry. For 
example, today this work is being done by clerks or 
secretary-treasurers in municipalities. What this simply means 
is that it would be reduced functions for these folks to do. And 
as I say, there’s a transaction fee on these transactions and those 
are remaining the same. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, thank you to you and 
your official, and we look forward to seeing how the process 
will work. And hopefully it’s going to achieve the intent that 
you have indicated in bringing forward this piece of legislation. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 



1786 Saskatchewan Hansard June 8, 1998 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would draw 
your attention to the clock. 
 
The Chair: — It now being past the hour of adjournment, the 
committee will rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
(2345) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57  The Education Amendment Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I move that the amendments be now 
read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I move that Bill No. 57 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Leave is not granted. 
 

Bill No. 36 - The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur les services de l’état civil 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:49 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1707 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1708 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1708 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1708 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1708 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1708 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1708 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1708 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1709 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1709 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1709 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1709 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1709 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1709 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1709 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1729 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Volunteers for Can-Am Police-Fire Games 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1709 
 Drug Awareness in the North 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1710 
 1998 Torch Run 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1710 
 Tragedy in Kindersley 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1710 
 Rotary Park Peace Plaza 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1710 
 Support for Prevention of Family Violence 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1711 
 Crop Damage in Saskatchewan 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1711 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Crop Damage in Saskatchewan 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1711 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1711 
 International Trade War in Grain 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1712 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1712 
 National Highways Program 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1712 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1712 
 Employment Insurance Fund Surplus 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1713 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1713 
 Survey of Hospital Waiting Lists 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1713 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
 Financial Statements from Health Districts 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1714 
 Judicial Review of Pollution Claim 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1715 



  

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 226  The Referendum and Plebiscite Amendment Act, 1998 (Constitutional Amendment Referendums) 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1716 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Funding for National Highways Program 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1716 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training — Vote 37 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1716 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1716 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1726 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1726 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1730 
 General Revenue Fund — Finance — Vote 18 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1732 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1732 
  Hillson ............................................................................................................................................................................1735, 1740 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
 General Revenue Fund — Budgetary Expense — Finance — Vote 18 .................................................................................1741 
 General Revenue Fund — Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments — Votes 175, 176, 177.....................1741 
 General Revenue Fund — Finance — Servicing the Public Debt — Government Share — Vote 12 .................................1741 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities — Saskatchewan Telecommunications — Vote 153 ...........1741 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities — SaskEnergy Incorporated — Vote 150 ...........................1741 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment and Resource Management — Vote 26 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1741 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1741 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1751 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1752 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1753 
  Goohsen .........................................................................................................................................................................1754, 1760 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1756 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1758 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1759 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1763 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
 General Revenue Fund — Budgetary Expense — Environment and Resource Management — Vote 26 .........................1763 
 General Revenue Fund — Energy and Mines — Vote 23 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1764 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1764 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1773 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
 General Revenue Fund — Budgetary Expense — Energy and Mines — Vote 23 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1780 
 General Revenue Fund — Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation — Vote 53 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1780 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1780 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
 General Revenue Fund — Budgetary Expense — Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation — Vote 53 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1781 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 57 — The Education Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1781 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1781 
 Bill No. 36 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur les services de l’état civil 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1785 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1785 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 57  The Education Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1786 
 Bill No. 36 - The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1998/ Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur les services de l’état civil 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1786 


