





























































Hansard: May 14, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1141 
 May 14, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present petitions today on behalf of people of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the people of Redvers, Carnduff, 
Alameda, Alida, Carievale, and Bienfait. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by individuals 
from the communities of Radville, Lake Alma, and Ceylon. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Stoughton and 
Creelman. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition signed from people from mainly the Gainsborough 
area. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise on behalf of citizens 
concerned about the impending closure of the Plains Health 
Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Kisbey, Stoughton, Creelman, and Weyburn, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wawota. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased as well this afternoon 
to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents 
dealing with the issue of the moratorium on the closure of the 
Plains hospital. The petitioners come from the Wawota area of 
Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 
behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petition is signed, Mr. Speaker, by the good people from 
Ituna and Jedburgh and Goodeve. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I rise 
with petitions. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 

 
Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre by 
enacting legislation to prevent its closure, and by providing 
adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that 
essential services provided at the Plains may be continued. 
 

Your petitioners this afternoon come from the communities of 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

Ponteix and Hafford. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in bringing forth petitions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 
Ponteix. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Carlyle and Redvers. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains health care 
centre by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed the petition are 
from Ituna, Hubbard, and all throughout the land, and I so 
present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to present 
a petition through this following prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has signatures on it from the city of 
Moose Jaw. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m most pleased 
today, Mr. Speaker, to present petitions on behalf of the people 
from Cabri, Saskatchewan as well as from Medicine Hat, 
Alberta. The prayer for relief, of course, is continuing to ask for 
the double-laning of the No. 1 Highway, and I’m happy to 
present these requests on behalf of the people today. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise once again on behalf of citizens who are seeking 
justice for men and women who have lost spouses in 
work-related accidents: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows, widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Those who have signed these petitions today, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Saskatoon, Dalmeny, and Delisle. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; saving the Plains Health Centre; putting a 
moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 
having the Workers’ Compensation Board reinstate 
pensions for disenfranchised widows. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The young and restless, when they’re looking for excitement, 
are attracted to the legislature. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
pleased to introduce through you to the Assembly, my son, 
Alan MacKinnon, who’s just finished first year university and 
has come to the legislature looking for some excitement. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
going to reserve comment. It seemed like a very, very good 
opening, but I’m not going to pick up on it. 
 
I’m so delighted that a school in my constituency has finally 
come to visit us at the legislature. We have a group of 40 
students — they are in grade 6 at Greystone Heights School — 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Accompanying them today are 
Mr. Mantyka, Ms. Sikorski, and chaperon Jodi Brown. 
 
And I’d like everyone to please give them a very warm 
welcome. I had some wonderful meetings with many students at 
Greystone Heights School and they’ll have some great 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

questions for me I’m sure this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, seated in the west gallery, 21 grade 6 students from 
the wonderful town of Watson in our province. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Bernice Gerspacher, 
and chaperons Chris Hancock, Nora Mills, and Jan LeGars. 
 
I’m going to be meeting with them about 2:30 I think, for drinks 
and pictures and to discuss . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hamburgers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Not hamburgers. No. And no Dairy 
Queen. To discuss what happens in the legislature. 
 
I want to have all members give them a nice warm welcome to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Assembly, an important Canadian who’s in the Speaker’s 
gallery, and I would just ask him to stand when he’s introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, John Kim Bell is the founder and president of the 
National Aboriginal Achievement Foundation of Canada and is 
one of Canada’s most prominent first nations ambassadors of 
aboriginal empowerment. And, John, if you would just stand up 
while we’re doing the introduction. 
 
It’s John’s vision and his reality to have aboriginal people in 
Canada celebrated for their achievements and enable them, 
through education, to reach important goals. And, John, I just 
want to say thank you very much for that work. 
 
Now the reason that this is an important announcement or 
introduction, Mr. Speaker, is because in 1999 Regina has been 
chosen to be the host of the National Aboriginal Achievement 
Awards on March 12. And I want to say a big thank you to you 
and your organization for choosing our capital city. 
 
With John also we have his director of development, Devorah 
Miller. And Devorah, if you would stand up and be recognized 
as well. And also Ron Clark, the CEO (chief executive officer) 
of SaskEnergy and TransGas. Ron, thank you very much for 
your cooperation as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all of the members of the legislature, 
a couple of very important guests that have come to be with us 
in Saskatchewan today and tomorrow. And I’m talking about 
the men sitting in your gallery in the front row, His Excellency 
John Alexander Thomoglou, who’s the ambassador of Greece 
to Canada, and the consul general of Greece in Vancouver, Mr. 
Nicholas Plexidas. Welcome to Saskatchewan. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join my 
colleague from across the way in welcoming Mr. John Kim Bell 
and his entourage. I think . . . you know I can recall that the 
work that he’s doing has had a tremendous impact and effect on 
many aboriginal people’s lives including myself. And I can 
recall the early years, seeing a poster of him in Ile-a-la-Crosse, 
and certainly has inspired myself and many other aboriginal 
people across the country. 
 
So on behalf of the Liberal caucus I welcome him, and we do 
hope you have a pleasant visit. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to 
recognize John Kim Bell. And since introductions have been 
made, you know, by others I would like to, with due respect to 
all languages, and Iroquoian languages and Mohawk people, I 
would like to say in Cree . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
. . . You’re very welcome. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
You are doing outstanding achievement you know for the 
people and for all Canadians. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join with my colleague from Watrous and welcome the group 
here from Watson today. Watson is my home town even though 
it’s not in my constituency, so welcome, everyone. And 
remember that he usually buys everybody hamburgers. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Health Care Crisis in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The other day we 
received a letter from a Regina woman extremely upset about 
this government’s ill-conceived decision to close the Plains 
hospital, its absolute decimation of the health care system, and 
its total disregard for democracy and the wishes of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now the members opposite are asking 
themselves what’s unique about that? We’ve received 
thousands of such letters ourselves. We haven’t read them, 
mind you, but we know they’re rolling in. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what is unique about this letter is that the 
envelope was decorated with a Tommy Douglas 45-cent stamp. 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

Isn’t it ironic, Mr. Speaker, that the very man this government 
constantly uses to minimize public criticism of their health 
reforms was the very man who delivered this letter to the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP (New Democratic Party) say to the 
people of Saskatchewan: trust us with our health system; after 
all, wasn’t Tommy one of ours? Well, Mr. Speaker, you can rest 
assured that if Tommy were in this government today, and if the 
Premier had the fortitude to allow a free vote on this issue, 
Tommy would be voting with his constituents to save the 
Plains. 
 
But does it make you wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP have 
finally realized that their tired old excuses aren’t working any 
more. One would have thought that this new stamp to 
commemorate Tommy Douglas would have been cause for 
much NDP celebration and hoopla. Could it be, Mr. Speaker, 
that the members opposite know exactly what Tommy Douglas 
would have said about their careless disregard for the system he 
spent his life creating and that they are secretly more than a 
little ashamed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

House of Prairie Memories 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to bring a 
piece of Saskatchewan history to the attention of the House. 
Located in the town of Belle Plaine is the House of Prairie 
Memories. I just want to read a few excerpts from their 
brochure. 
 

The House of Prairie Memories was an Aladdin built 
prefab home ordered from the Eaton’s catalogue plan book 
in 1918 by the Palmquist family. Mr. Palmquist paid 
$10,000 for the package. The materials were delivered to 
Belle Plaine by rail and transported to the farm site 
one-half mile north of Belle Plaine. The farm was sold to 
Jim and Bertie Brentnall in 1972. The house was rented out 
for many years but sat empty for 10 years before being 
moved into Belle Plaine on July 4, 1996, where it was 
renovated to retain the original features. 

 
That little farm house is now the House of Prairie Memories 
and features antiques, collectibles, and gifts from yesteryear. 
Small group tours are available, as is afternoon tea and a gift 
registry for all occasions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan prairies have many stories to 
tell and some of them can be seen and heard and shared with 
gifts from the Prairie House of Memories. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Party Politics 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has warned members 
of this Assembly on many occasions not to play politics with 
health care. But yesterday we saw politics at its absolute lowest 
and worst from the Minister of Finance. 
 
The minister suggested that Darlene Sterling and the Liberal 

opposition are waiting for someone to die to further our cause to 
save the Plains hospital — nothing short of a malicious attack. 
 
And what about the Tories? Well this group heckled and 
ridiculed our efforts at the beginning of this session to heighten 
debate on the pending closure of the Plains. They have been 
riding our coat-tails and those of Ms. Sterling, and when things 
get heated they yell across the floor that they don’t share the 
podium with Darlene, they’re not associated with her. The 
Tories didn’t even give her the benefit of the doubt before 
hanging her out to dry. 
 
So this is how it goes, Mr. Speaker. A member of the public has 
legitimate concerns about an issue; she attempts to fight for 
what is right and is subjected to this kind of treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will not be party to actions which are not 
acceptable by any measure of decency. A message must be sent 
that enough is enough. We cannot in good conscience sit in this 
Assembly today and leave it to you, Mr. Speaker, to carry on 
the business of the House without the Liberal opposition. 
 

Accreditation to BTC Indian Health Services 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Battlefords Tribal 
Council Indian Health Services has recently been awarded 
national accreditation standing with the Canadian Council of 
Health Service Accreditation. The Canadian Council of Health 
Service Accreditation is a non-government agency that helps 
health care organizations across Canada examine and improve 
the quality of the care and services they provide to their clients. 
 
The achievement of BTC Health Services is a result of hard 
work on the part of the staff, the board, and the management. 
BTC Indian Health Services has been working towards the 
planning and delivery of reserve health care since the early 
1980s. BTC Indian Health Services now include a community 
health program, home care, a school-based dental program, a 
health promotion and planning program, and a community 
addictions prevention program. 
 
BTC Indian Health Services has also instituted a plan to 
continuously improve their health care services and delivery. 
 
I would like to congratulate board members, Wayne 
Standinghorn, Chief Thomas Mooswa, Chief Charles Stone, 
Chief Larry Wuttunee, Chief Ted Antoine, Chief Maryanne 
Stoney, Chief Rod King, and Janice Kennedy on this major 
achievement along the road to self-government. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rosetown Student Wins National Literary Contest 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take 
this opportunity to congratulate a very special girl with a 
remarkable gift. Today Carlyn McCulloch, a grade 5 student at 
Walter Aseltine School in Rosetown, is being honoured for her 
achievement as first place winner in the Royal Canadian Legion 
national literary contest in the junior poem category, having 
won in every other category on the way, for her poem “Thank 
You”. 
 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

While I regret I’m unable to attend her ceremony, I’d like not 
only to congratulate but thank Carlyn for sharing her special 
talent with so many people. The success of Saskatchewan is 
built upon the unselfish sharing of the gifts of our people, and 
young people like Carlyn are an inspiration and a role model for 
all of us, young and old. 
 
I want to share her poem, which was written for Remembrance 
Day, with you: 
 

I’m a little girl, I’m only ten, 
So I really can’t remember when, 
Our soldiers were off to fight the war, 
And our world was changed forever more; 
So I look at my poppy with petals so red, 
And I try to think of the injured and the dead. 
Whether his name was Tom, Jim or Frank. 
All of these soldiers I’d like to thank; 
You gave me a land that’s peaceful and free, 
To live in and play in, to swim in and ski, 
We can share our ideas. We don’t have to agree, 
I don’t have to worry. I’m allowed to be me; 
I have never met you. I never will, 
But the gift that you gave me, is with me still, 
So thank you, thank you for your gift of love, 
May we meet someday in the land above. 
 

I know we’ll be hearing more from this talented young lady and 
I wish her every success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Band Festival and ParkArt in Moose Jaw 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
you well know, this weekend Moose Jaw will play host to two 
very special events: the 49th annual Kinsmen International 
Band and Choral Festival, and ParkArt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, concert bands, ensembles, soloists, choirs, and 
more jazz than ever will be in Moose Jaw to celebrate the 
festival events this weekend, including an all-day concert in the 
Crescent Park Amphitheatre on Saturday. Bands from 
Manitoba, Alberta, Montana, North Dakota, and world-class 
pianist Shelly Berg from Los Angeles will entertain the 
thousands of visitors who will be in Moose Jaw this weekend. 
 
ParkArt is also happening this weekend, bringing crafters and 
artists from across western Canada to the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
So I just want to say to my colleagues in the House today, if 
you’re available this weekend, I invite you to come to Moose 
Jaw. 
 
You can tour the tunnels, you can view the murals, you can 
relax in the spa, you can tour the WDM (Western Development 
Museum), you can tour the Speaker’s backyard, and you can 
take in some very fine art and some very fine music. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Indian Head Goes Hollywood 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Minds 
Eye, a Regina film company, has just finished filming Bad 
Prospect, a $3 million made-for-TV movie, shot in 12 locations 
in Regina, Indian Head, and the Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
For the film, the town of Indian Head was transformed into the 
fictional setting of Elm Creek. Many of the town’s Grand 
Avenue businesses were given a facelift for the movie. The 
Royal Bank received a sign change and the Elks Hall became 
the Elm Creek police station. 
 
In the Qu’Appelle Valley a 19th century stone farmhouse 
served as the backdrop for a murder, while the hills above were 
transformed into a realistic go-cart race track. Producer Rob 
King was thrilled with the level of local support and 
cooperation for the filming of the movie. 
 
Bad Prospect may well demonstrate how good the prospects are 
for the Saskatchewan film industry, as the partners in financing 
include some major U.S. (United States) and Canadian 
companies. Financing partners for the film include Hallmark 
Entertainment, Showtime, A-Channel, Canadian film or video 
tax credit program, SaskFILM, Saskatchewan employment tax 
credit, Minds Eye Pictures, and Evergreen Releasing. 
 
I know we all hope that Saskatchewan’s film industry continues 
to grow and develop, both to highlight the natural beauty of our 
province and to contribute to our economy. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Metis Hunting Rights 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Environment and Resource 
Management. Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal 
has delivered a rather weak-kneed decision on Metis hunting 
rights. They have decided not to decide anything right now. 
They have ordered a new trial. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, it’s still unclear whether Metis can hunt 
without a licence or not. The original law, Mr. Minister, is still 
on the books, but some Metis leaders are suggesting they will 
ignore that law and continue to hunt without licences. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is your department going to do, and are you 
going to uphold the existing law requiring Metis hunters to buy 
a hunting licence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
As the hon. member indicated, the Court of Appeal did rule 
today, and the ruling was that there would be a new trial with 
reference to the Grumbo case. 
 
The court ruled that the decision by Mr. Justice MacLeod 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

recognizing Metis rights has been overturned . . . (inaudible) . . . 
the province is no longer obligated to recognize these rights. So 
today’s court decision means that all applicable hunting and 
fishing laws will apply to Metis and non-Metis residents . . . or 
non-Metis in Saskatchewan, and enforcement of these laws will 
take effect immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Computer System Project 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskPower. Mr. 
Minister, what is the SaskPower project code-named the Delta 
Project, and how much is it going to cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what I will do for the 
member is I will get him a detailed report on the project. It 
deals with the operation of . . . within the Power Corporation. 
I’ll get him the detailed report and bring it back to the 
Assembly. So I’ll take notice. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we 
have been informed that the executive of SaskPower, the same 
business geniuses that brought us Guyana and Channel Lake, 
SaskPower’s executive is recommending the purchase of a new 
SAP computer system at a cost to taxpayers of nearly $100 
million. Apparently this is what is known as the Delta Project. 
 
Has this proposal gone to SaskPower’s board of directors? Is 
SaskPower planning to spend almost $100 million on a new 
computer system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, one will have to 
remember that this is the same member that indicated that 
DEML (Direct Energy Marketing Limited) was in a potential 
issue of fraud, a few days ago. And then of course when the 
members from DEML came before the committee, came before 
the committee, he asked no questions, made no accusations, and 
this is what he does. 
 
What he does is he comes to the Assembly, waves papers 
around — which he’s doing now from his seat — makes 
accusations and then gets all excited, gets a headline in the 
newspaper, and then nothing, then nothing. And I can 
understand why the people of your constituency . . . maybe it 
wasn’t you leaving the Liberal Party, maybe it was them 
pushing you a little bit out. 
 
But I say to you, sir, wait for the answer. I’ll bring you a full 
report. Don’t get all excited, because probably the facts as you 
are stating them today aren’t accurate, just as in the past they 
haven’t been accurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, since it’s obvious you’re 
unaware of the answer or refuse to give it, I sent over to you the 
information on the Delta Project so you can make yourself 
informed about what’s going on in your own department. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have a potential massive computer contract 
worth up to $100 million. This raises a lot of questions. Did you 

read the contract? Are you going to read all drafts of the 
contract? Do you even understand the contract? Or perhaps 
you’re going to let Lawrence Portigal read it for you. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are we spending $100 million on a new 
computer system, and are Saskatchewan residents going to end 
up paying through the nose for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s easy for the 
member here to again malign Mr. Portigal in the confines of the 
Assembly. I didn’t see any of that bravado when Mr. Portigal 
was before the committee. This is an interesting guy. Big, 
strong guy, comes here in the confines of the Assembly with 
projections and again starts to malign people. When he gets to 
the committee he’s a pussy-cat, calm, quiet, no accusations, and 
away he goes. 
 
But I say to you, sir, if what you’re saying is that the men and 
women who run the Power Corporation are not competent, if 
that’s what you’re saying, that’s your opinion. But I can tell you 
that the management and the board of directors of SaskPower 
are doing an excellent job of providing power to the 
communities of Saskatchewan at a reasonable price. That’s the 
mandate of SaskPower. 
 
We’ve dealt with Channel Lake and are dealing within the 
committee . . . and are dealing with it in the committee, but for 
you to try to accuse the corporation of not acting in good faith, I 
think is immature and speaks a lot about what you and your 
party are all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, I suspect that you wouldn’t 
understand . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now I know the hon. member is 
a seasoned veteran of the Assembly and he’ll want to — order, 
order — and he’ll want to acknowledge the Chair before he puts 
his question. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
sure that the minister would not understand the difference 
between being a cold pussy-cat or simply being a courteous, 
nice individual. I happen to choose to be the latter, except when 
issues of you not answering any kind of questions and instead 
of answering questions about a department that you are 
supposedly responsible for, you launch on some kind of a 
personal attack. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I don’t mind that, but the people out there 
watching this know you for what you’re answering to, and that 
is complete incompetence in SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you going to allow SaskPower to spend a 
hundred million dollars on a computer system? What do you 
need it for? And are the taxpayers, the customers, going to get 
stuck with the bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, obviously the SaskPower Corporation, which is worth 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

several billion dollars, is carrying on the management and 
operation of the Power Corporation. That may surprise you but 
that’s how it works. 
 
They’re out there making arrangements, buying power from 
Husky and TransAlta to the tune of 200 megawatts of power, to 
provide power to farms. And yes, it’s costing tens of millions of 
dollars to buy the coal that runs the Power Corporation. They 
are spending tens of millions of dollars, you’re absolutely right. 
Because that’s how power corporations are managed and 
operated. 
 
And for you to try to make it sound like there’s something 
wrong with the management and board of directors to manage 
the Power Corporation, you just don’t make sense. Obviously 
that’s what’s going on. 
 
There’s no devious plot when tens of millions of dollars are 
being spent to buy gas and coal to manage the Power 
Corporation. They have to buy the coal because the Tory 
government under Devine sold the coalmines. How else can we 
run the Power Corporation? So I say to you, obviously 
decisions are being made. And the Power Corporation is well 
run. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I understand why they yell from their seats, 
because they don’t like the answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
afternoon are for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Channel Lake investigation has finally 
generated something I think we can all agree on. SaskPower 
officials have alleged that pages in the final Channel Lake sale 
agreement were removed and replaced with other pages, and 
after the agreement was signed by SaskPower, but before it was 
signed by DEML officials. 
 
Yesterday Lawrence Portigal said that he was the one that 
switched the pages. He says he told Jack Messer about it but 
Jack Messer says that that isn’t true. Ken Christensen says it’s 
news to him. Larry Kram pleaded ignorance on the issue as 
well. 
 
Mr. Minister, your own SaskPower officials allege a potentially 
fraudulent act in the sale of Channel Lake Petroleum. The 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) is saying that they 
would definitely launch an investigation if the inquiry turns up 
evidence of wrongdoing. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you immediately turn over the evidence that 
you have before you now to the RCMP for investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, quite contrary to what 
the member from Kindersley says about what the RCMP is 
saying, the RCMP is saying, and in the newspaper is quoted as 

saying, that the committee work is going very well. That’s what 
they say. 
 
And they said you should quit making accusations. This is what 
the committee is telling you and the advisers to the committee. 
Mr. Priel said don’t jump to conclusions as to the results of the 
hearing before you hear all the evidence. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite, just continue on. Allow 
your members to do their work in the committee. 
Recommendations will come forward. But obviously to come to 
conclusions today, you’ve got off the point that even the 
member from Melfort was saying yesterday in scrums, that you 
have to wait until the hearing’s over. Even he has got to that 
point. So you should have a chat with him. He will urge you to 
also be patient and wait until the work of the committee is 
completed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
people from the RCMP said if there’s evidence of wrongdoing 
they’d be prepared to investigate. They’ve also said that if 
SaskPower or officials from government come forward, they’d 
be prepared to investigate. 
 
What we are saying to you today, sir, is the SaskPower board of 
directors has a fiduciary responsibility to protect the interests of 
the shareholders of SaskPower. Those are the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If the board has evidence of fraud in the Channel Lake sale, 
then it is their legal responsibility to go to the RCMP and to 
initiate legal action to recover the assets. In other words, Mr. 
Minister, the SaskPower board should be turning over the 
Channel Lake file to the RCMP and they should be taking legal 
action to void the Channel Lake contract. 
 
SaskPower has the right to recover the ownership of Channel 
Lake in the event the sale was tainted by a fraudulent act. Mr. 
Minister, you have and your officials have had discussions 
either for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Now the hon. 
member has been extremely lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask 
him to go directly to his question and put it now. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, you, along with the SaskPower 
board, should be acting in this regard. Will you recommend 
legal action to recover the Channel Lake account? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to 
two months ago when I released in the Assembly the document 
reported on by Deloitte Touche, the Gerrand report which has 
been tabled in the committee, the CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation) report which has now been worked on, the 
thousand documents that were delivered to the committee. 
 
When asked by Mr. Truscott of the taxpayers’ association 
whether or not the police should be involved, the RCMP 
indicated that . . . what did they say? They said that the 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

committee is working well. And I think that’s a compliment to 
all of the committee members and to the legislature, that the 
RCMP, the most credible police force in the world, is saying 
this committee has credibility. Has credibility. That’s the 
RCMP. That’s an important comment. And what he is saying is, 
complete the work before you come to the conclusion — 
indirectly that’s what the RCMP is telling you, sir. 
 
And I would urge you to take the advice of Mr. Priel, the 
RCMP, and everyone, including many people now in the public 
— even some members of the press who say yes, legislators do 
have the credibility to carry out the work of the legislature — 
complete the work; do the report. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, what you are saying 
to the people of Saskatchewan is that you and your government 
refuse to come clean on this issue unless you are hauled before 
the legislative inquiry and forced to give testimony under oath. 
Do you hold this legislature in such contempt that you refuse to 
answer legitimate questions? — questions that are being asked 
in the living rooms and coffee shops all across this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have strong evidence to suggest fraud in the 
Channel Lake affair. Have you or your officials discussed legal 
action to recover the Channel Lake assets? Has the SaskPower 
board considered legal action to recover the Channel Lake 
assets? And will you immediately take action to protect the 
interests of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and turn over the 
evidence, that is very clear now, to the RCMP for investigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again I find it 
interesting indeed that in the Assembly the member from 
Melfort last week made accusations of fraud against . . . 
potential fraud against individuals and companies. Today 
you’re doing it again, from the member from Kindersley. But 
it’s interesting that not once in the committee where the work is 
being done, has the issue of fraud been raised when the 
individuals appear before the committee. What is this? Some 
sort of a game that you play with individuals and companies for 
your political benefit? 
 
Now I have here the appointment of . . . the Canadian 
taxpayers’ appointment of Richard Truscott as the provincial 
director of Saskatchewan for the taxpayers association, and he 
is the other one calling for the investigation. Now who is he? It 
says here, until the last federal election he was executive 
assistant to Mr. Elwin Hermanson — Elwin Hermanson. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the Chair is having 
some difficulty being able to hear because of shouting coming 
from both sides of the House. And I’ll give the minister a few 
more seconds to wrap up his comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to say that there’s two 
groups calling for an immediate investigation, and it’s not the 
RCMP. They’re saying, wait until the committee does its work; 
he says it’s a credible group doing the work. Mr. Priel says, 
continue to do the work and don’t jump to conclusions. Who’s 
calling for an immediate inquiry? The Tories and the taxpayers’ 

association under the guidance of Richard Truscott, former EA 
(executive assistant) to Mr. Elwin Hermanson. Now you talk 
about creditability — you talk about creditability. You come . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University Tuition Fees 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! Order. Order, order. 
Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, order. All hon. members 
will want to come to order, I’m sure . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I think so. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
sure that everyone here is interested in post-secondary 
education as well today. And my questions are for the minister 
in charge. 
 
The Government of Ontario has granted Ontario universities the 
opportunity to deregulate tuition fees. And my question to the 
hon. minister this afternoon is, is your government considering 
a similar move? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No we’re not 
contemplating any such measures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I’m sure that many, many students in the 
province of Saskatchewan will be pleased to hear that, Mr. 
Speaker. I have another question. And that is that I’m 
wondering, Madam Minister, is there an intention on the part of 
your government then to freeze tuition fees as the Government 
of British Columbia has done? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would share 
with the member that I’ve said to the students and to the 
universities that we respect their autonomy, and we certainly 
wouldn’t want to put in motion a chain of events that would 
cause them to cut programs because we had frozen their tuition. 
 
So instead what we try to do is work together to limit any 
increases. And certainly we feel in this recent budget we gave 
them enough money to allow them to do that. One university 
was planning a 7 per cent increase and instead they only had a 2 
per cent increase, so they were able to reduce that by 5 per cent. 
And we think this shows their good intent to keep it within 
affordability for the students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
I’m wondering if you would tell people today what your plan is 
to protect space for Saskatchewan students at our universities 
given the potential for influx of students from those provinces 
who in all likelihood will have a significant increase in tuition 
fees. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well that’s a complex question, Mr. 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

Speaker, because so many things affect space requirements. For 
example, we now have a number of regional colleges that are 
delivering first and second year university and it certainly takes 
some of the pressure off the universities. 
 
As well we’re seeing more workplace-based training, more 
Internet training, more SCN (Saskatchewan Communications 
Network) distance ed training; so those factors affect it. And as 
well, as we move towards a more harmonized system with the 
federal government of student loans, I think we may find that 
that will affect student mobility patterns across Canada too. 
 
So I think although we’d want to keep our eye on that, it’s too 
early to worry about it at this point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pay Equity 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, my question now is to the 
Premier. One of the many disappointments experienced since 
this government came to power is its inaction on the issue of 
pay equity. And a report commissioned by the federal, 
provincial, territorial ministers responsible for the Status of 
Women shows that Saskatchewan is the only — and I underline 
only — jurisdiction in the country, Mr. Speaker, where the 
wage gap is worsening. 
 
At the 1997 Saskatchewan Federation of Labour annual 
meeting, Mr. Premier, you promised that there would be pay 
equity legislation before, and I quote, “you retired.” So my 
obvious questions are, Mr. Premier: how do you explain the 
widening gap, and will you be retiring soon so that women can 
have a greater sense of promise that some fairness will indeed 
be forthcoming? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about 
the wage gap we have to look at a lot of circumstances in that, 
and we certainly are tackling that. We are working towards a 
pay equity framework agreement that is working within our 
departments of government, within our Crown corporations, 
and by the end of 1998 we will see a significant number of pay 
equity settlements, which will certainly be a very positive 
approach to this. 
 
But the other pieces to a wage gap in which we are making 
positive steps towards, is based in education and training. Those 
are a major part in which has contributed to some of the wage 
gap here, and some of the things that we’ve just done recently 
in our budget is very, very positive in that, and for 
post-secondary and for training. We also have to look at other 
issues with pension plans and other aspects which we are 
certainly lobbying the federal government for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Women’s Emergency Shelter 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, a few weeks ago I 
asked you about the future of the Prince Albert Emergency 
Shelter for Women. The centre was on the verge of closing due 
to lack of support from your government. However, you assured 

this House that the funding situation was being addressed and 
the centre would remain open. We’ve been informed that the 
funding crisis has not been addressed and the board has pulled 
out of running the centre as of May 1. 
 
Mr. Minister, why hasn’t this issue been resolved and what are 
you doing to ensure the future of the Prince Albert Emergency 
Shelter for Women? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to have 
the opportunity to answer this question, and as the minister 
stated earlier in the House in answer to a similar question, the 
home, the facility will remain open, the facility will be funded, 
and negotiations are going on at the current time with an interim 
board in place to see that that happens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Commercial and Freedom of Information 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for SaskPower. Mr. Minister, why do you refuse to 
put SaskPower Commercial under the freedom of information 
Act? That means we’re not allowed to make freedom of 
information requests about SaskPower Commercial’s 
hare-brained schemes in Guyana. 
 
Yesterday your colleague, the Minister of Justice, said that in 
his opinion SaskPower Commercial is a subsidiary of 
SaskPower and therefore should be included under the freedom 
of information laws. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you going to listen to the Minister of Justice 
and will you lift the cone of silence and include SaskPower 
Commercial under the freedom of information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This question was asked yesterday when 
we were in committee looking at some of the issues around . . . 
the estimates around the freedom of information Act, and there 
was an acknowledgement dealing with some of the SaskPower 
Commercial things, that these should be considered, and we 
agreed that we would consider those and I would raise those. 
And we will do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we’re 
just asking for a simple change. It can be done through an order 
in council within a matter of days, and the Minister of Justice 
said it could be done. 
 
Will you immediately bring in an order in council including 
SaskPower within the freedom of information legislation? And 
while you’re at it, would you include SaskTel International so 
we can find out what’s going on in places like New Zealand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m having a bit of difficulty with this 
whole matter because there hasn’t been a question. It may be 
that we each could assist the opposition today. They didn’t 
expect the fact that their colleagues next to them would be 
leaving, so obviously they’ve run out of questions . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . They went out on strike; well that’s 
true. But practically, what I may suggest is that some of our 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

colleagues over here would be happy to help draft some 
questions for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Investment in Youth Crime Prevention Programs 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce 
that the Government of Saskatchewan will invest $250,000 in 
crime prevention programs for children and youth in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This funding will go to community-based 
organizations in Prince Albert, Regina, and Saskatoon. Keeping 
communities safe is a top priority of this government. Last 
month I announced programs funded by Saskatchewan Justice 
that focus on curtailing the criminal activities of serious, repeat, 
and violent young offenders. However we know that reducing 
criminal activity also depends on providing youth with 
opportunities to lead positive and productive lives. 
 
The funding I am announcing today is for programs that will 
enhance existing services for youth in our communities so that 
they will have positive choices rather than turning to lives 
marked by conflict with the law. These programs are targeted to 
children and youth between the ages of 7 and 18, with an 
emphasis on meeting the needs of aboriginal youth in our 
communities. 
 
In consultations around the province, aboriginal people have 
told us about the need for cultural sensitivity and that there 
should be more aboriginal people involved in responding to the 
needs of aboriginal people. And we were told that without 
greater aboriginal involvement, it was difficult to see that the 
Justice system and its programs were constructive instruments 
for building stronger and safer aboriginal communities. 
 
Earlier this year, community groups in Prince Albert, Regina, 
and Saskatoon were approached to identify the needs in their 
communities and asked to suggest the best way to utilize this 
important funding. 
 
As is so typical of the cooperative spirit of our Saskatchewan 
communities, we were given a wealth of ideas on how to 
prevent crime among our youth. These ideas included 
street-proofing kids, parent patrols, keeping young people in 
school, and teaching youth about their cultural and spiritual 
traditions. These programs are focused on keeping youth out of 
the criminal justice system. I want to state very clearly that our 
government is proud of Saskatchewan’s young people. There 
are 94,000 youth in this province and the vast majority of them 
are well on their way to becoming good, solid citizens. 
 
We know that less than half of one per cent of Saskatchewan 
youth are in custody in the young offender facilities. The people 
of Saskatchewan expect us to protect society from repeat and 
violent young offenders, but the people of Saskatchewan also 
expect us to maintain our common sense and compassion for 
children and youth who do thoughtless things, that are willing 

to learn from their mistakes. 
 
Therefore in order to prevent crime, it is important to look at 
why young people commit crimes. Poverty, hunger, 
unemployment, racism, family dysfunction, and addictions are 
all problems in our society that affect the options that young 
people have and the decisions that they make. 
 
Funding provided by Saskatchewan Justice also buttresses the 
work done in the Saskatchewan action plan for children, and 
this Saskatchewan action plan is a partnership of seven 
government departments, the secretariat, and hundreds of 
Saskatchewan communities, agencies, and organizations. 
 
Our government has committed 29 million in new funding to 
strengthen early childhood development, support at-risk 
children and youth, invest in communities, and address child 
and family poverty. 
 
Our $250,000 investment in crime prevention programs is part 
of this funding, which includes 80,000 for the Prince Albert 
Race Relations and Social Issues Committee. I was pleased to 
join that committee this morning. And they are going to use the 
funds to hire two full-time outreach workers in Prince Albert to 
teach life skills and conflict resolution. I thank the work of the 
Prince Albert community and I look forward to other 
announcements around the province as we work to keep our 
community safe. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take 
some time to respond to the statement. And I guess part of the 
concern is that we’re getting the whole proposal in dribs and 
drabs as it probably suits the, as it suits the media program that 
the government has for that. It’s a bit like cutting out one little 
picture out of another picture and sending it over and we’re 
supposed to get the whole scene. It would be nice to have had it 
all at the same time. 
 
However I think having made numerous statements on Young 
Offenders Act and justice in Saskatchewan, there is one key 
word in the second line that I think is very important. And I 
think it’s an exciting line — how it will turn out I’m not sure — 
this is prevention programs. And I think if we can work on 
prevention programs, Mr. Speaker, and keep the people from 
becoming solid, hardened criminals, it’ll do a lot for the 
concerns that all of us across Saskatchewan have. So that is 
definitely a plus that we’re going to do some work with 
prevention. 
 
I have some of the same concerns I had on the previous 
announcement. Again, it only deals with Prince Albert, Regina, 
and Saskatoon. It does nothing for Unity, it does nothing for 
Lloydminster, it does nothing for my town of Rosthern. It does 
nothing for any of those other areas — just these three 
particular places. And so that is not much security and comfort 
that anyone in Saskatchewan can find from that particular 
report. 
 
The ages that are targeted by this venture are ages 7 . . . 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

between the ages of 7 and 18, and I think that’s good. I don’t 
think we can start too soon. I think the justice meetings that 
have been held across Saskatchewan, four of which that I’ve 
attended, in many cases said that many people in our schools 
can identify potential problems in grades 1, 2, and 3. So starting 
at age 7 is probably, Mr. Speaker, a good place to start; if in fact 
this keeps youth out of the justice system, that that’s good. 
 
There’s another line in here that I think needs a comment on. It 
says the people of Saskatchewan expect us to protect society 
from repeat and violent young offenders. Admittedly, this 
government has done that very poorly. 
 
That’s why, as I’ve said earlier, we’ve had break-in capitals in 
Canada, car thief capitals in Canada; we’ve had some of the 
most violent crimes that have taken place in Canada have taken 
place in this province. And that’s not as it should be, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s not what the people in this province expect. 
 
So this province has done a very poor job of protecting the 
public from offenders — repeat offenders, young offenders, 
violent offenders. 
 
I guess one question I have, and it relates to all the programs, 
and this one as well, and that is, how is this going to be 
evaluated? So at the end of the time, how do we look at this 
program and say this is money well spent. It could be good, and 
it could just be a buy-off. And we’ll have to wait and see what it 
is. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Saskatchewan Assistance 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m sure for all of us there are occasions that we know that we 
will remember of our years in public office and our time in this 
legislature. And I think as today I am privileged to provide the 
second reading remarks to The Saskatchewan Assistance 
Amendment Act, this will be a day that I will remember as an 
important day not only for myself but for the department which 
I am pleased to serve as minister and indeed for this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure today to 
be rising to move second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Assistance Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation which currently guides the delivery 
of social assistance in Saskatchewan today is legislation which 
is more than 30 years old, passed in 1966. And of course as we 
all know, much has changed since 1966, and the needs of those 
people who find themselves turning to the Department of Social 
Services for financial assistance have likewise changed 

dramatically since 1966. 
 
When the Act was developed, this Act, it was intended to meet 
the needs of individuals and families who were experiencing a 
financial emergency due to a short-term job loss, a disability, a 
family crisis, or a sudden illness. It was never expected to 
provide for long-term support for people who were able to 
work. The Act as we’ve known it was designed to provide 
short-term relief for short-term needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act as we know it effectively meets that 
circumstance and those needs. But things have changed 
dramatically in 30 years. Over these years, Mr. Speaker, both 
the economic and the social environment have undergone 
significant change. And this change has in many cases been 
very rapid. 
 
The result, Mr. Speaker, is that many people, particularly young 
people, have found themselves forced to turn to social 
assistance because they are unable to successfully compete for 
jobs in a market-place which demands that even many entry 
level, low income jobs require now a high school education. 
This comes as no surprise when we consider that 74 per cent of 
social assistance clients between the ages of 18 and 21 have not 
graduated from high school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is taking action to address this 
particular situation. The provincial training allowance is now a 
monthly payment for students enrolled in adult basic education 
or related courses. The allowance assists lower income 
individuals and families to access this much needed training and 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert we have the pilot project of what 
we describe as Youth Futures. Youth Futures links youth aged 
18 to 21 to education and skill training programs, and the 
workforce. Mr. Speaker, I can report that Youth Futures is 
receiving rave reviews from the young people who are 
participating. This pilot project in Prince Albert is developed 
and managed through a very successful . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Sorry . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
think that the member is giving me a standing ovation for these 
remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in reference to the Youth 
Futures program in Prince Albert, this program is so successful 
because it is a strong and successful match between the 
community and the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of those who today are receiving welfare, 
social assistance, expect to need that help only temporarily. 
Others however, Mr. Speaker, are finding it increasingly 
difficult to move back into the workforce. And for those whose 
families have become long-term recipients, the barriers that 
exist to break the grip of welfare dependence — what we 
sometimes call the welfare wall — is in some cases almost 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

insurmountable. The system today that we utilize presents 
numerous barriers from those who seek financial independence, 
who seek to become independent of welfare. 
 
The amendments, Mr. Speaker, that we are introducing today 
will remove many of those barriers and at least make the climb 
over the welfare wall a little bit easier. Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan the vast majority of people who today are 
receiving welfare benefits do not want to be on social assistance 
— they do not want to be there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the opportunity as minister to meet with 
literally hundreds of people who will be receiving social 
assistance benefits, and I report to the House the vast majority 
of those people do not want to be on welfare. They want, as best 
they can, the opportunity to participate in the community, to 
contribute to the community. They want to work, Mr. Speaker. 
They want to be independent. And parents in our province who 
have to rely on social assistance, particularly single moms, they 
want to be able to support their children to the very best of their 
ability. 
 
What I have concluded, Mr. Speaker, in speaking with families 
and parents and children who are today receiving welfare in our 
province can be summed up in this way. They say to us, we 
don’t want a hand-out, we just want a hand-up; not a hand-out 
— they want a hand-up. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we are creating by virtue of this 
legislation and amendments to the social assistance Act, some 
very, very important, innovative, creative, and in some ways 
unique, programs to turn this around. 
 
One of them, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement. The Saskatchewan employment supplement we 
believe is one way of providing that hand-up that I spoke of. 
Monthly payments under the program will supplement the 
income earned by lower income parents — either income 
earned from wages or from self-employment — as well as the 
income that may accrue to that household through child or 
spousal maintenance payments. 
 
The supplement will assist parents with child-related costs of 
going to work. And as they gain experience in job skills, many 
will finally enjoy the satisfaction that comes from making the 
leap from dependence on social assistance to independence for 
themselves and their families. 
 
For low income working families, the supplement will mean 
they are, and will always remain, better off working than on 
social assistance. The employment supplement will guarantee 
that families in our province will be better off working than 
they would be on welfare. 
 
The social assistance clients today who apply for assistance 
have every dollar that they might receive through maintenance 
payments considered as income. Mr. Speaker, we’ve changed 
the rules so that custodial parents are no longer penalized for 
pursuing child support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through these programs we’re working to improve 
the quality of life for low income families with children. To 
ensure that these resources go towards meeting basic needs, and 

to reduce further hardship on low income families, we are 
introducing an amendment that will prevent the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement from being subject to garnishment or 
some other legal process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clients will receive notice of how their monthly 
benefit was calculated. If in the circumstance it is, why their 
application for the employment supplement was turned down, 
or that they have incurred an overpayment. There are a number 
of ways in which clients can and will be provided with this 
information, and how clients are notified will vary depending 
on the nature of the information. 
 
In order to ensure the flexibility required to meet the needs of 
our clients, Mr. Speaker, we will repeal section 29.4 of The 
Saskatchewan Assistance Act which deals with notices of 
decisions. We will add a clause in section 14 which will permit 
the program regulations to specify how notices of decisions will 
be communicated to those receiving benefits under the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government believes, as I’m sure the vast 
majority of Saskatchewan people do and the vast majority of 
Canadians, we believe that in a country as rich as ours no child 
should be forced to grow up in poverty. It is based on this 
fundamental belief, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has taken a 
strong leadership role in the development of a National Child 
Benefit for Canadian children. It was in fact, Mr. Speaker, our 
Premier, the Premier of Saskatchewan, who first proposed this 
initiative as far back as 1995. 
 
The Saskatchewan Child Benefit, again a creation of this 
legislation, will assist lower income families with the cost of 
raising their children. The monthly benefit will be paid to 
eligible families on behalf of each child under 18 years of age. 
It will assist lower income working families, parents in receipt 
of social assistance, and those who are attending school. 
 
To be clear, Mr. Speaker, the Child Benefit and the employment 
supplement programs will be available not just to families . . . 
(inaudible) . . . they are receiving social assistance, but to 
thousands of families who are of a low income who may not be 
receiving social assistance but who may be of . . . we may 
describe as the working poor. And so there will be literally 
thousands of families who benefit from these programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the amount of money that a 
family will receive is based on the number of children in the 
family and that family’s income as reported to Revenue Canada 
for the previous tax year. The eligible families for the Child 
Benefit will be identified automatically by Revenue Canada and 
thus eliminate the need for the bureaucratic and formal 
application process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the often heard criticisms of government 
programs these days is the cost of administration, and we are 
constantly and at all levels looking for ways to reduce 
duplication of administration and costs. And so in a move 
which will greatly reduce the costs to Saskatchewan of 
implementing and delivering the Child Benefit, we will be 
amending the Act here today to allow the Minister of Social 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

Services to enter into an agreement with the Government of 
Canada which authorizes the federal government to integrate 
payments under the Saskatchewan Child Benefit program with 
the Canadian Child Tax Benefit. 
 
Because the Child Benefit will be administered by the federal 
government, all notices to clients and decisions regarding their 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit will be determined in accordance 
with the requirements of the federal government. We will be 
taking notices for the Saskatchewan employment supplement 
out of the Act and placing them in the regulation to provide the 
department more flexibility in making additions or changes or 
notices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these programs will take effect in July of this year, 
over the month of July, and at August 1. We’ve attempted as we 
can, to address as many of the situations of which we see may 
arise and answer as many of the questions as we can. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, it is possible that some completely 
unforeseen issue could present itself and need resolution, and 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will also amend the assistance Act to 
allow the Department of Social Services to make retroactive to 
July 1, 1998 any regulations developed to resolve situations 
which were not previously identified or anticipated in the 
program regulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in summary, we believe that the amendments to 
the Act, representing as they do the initiation of new, creative, 
and unique programing in Saskatchewan to provide 
independence for Saskatchewan families, we believe these will 
clear the path for many Saskatchewan families to enter the 
workforce, to become independent where they may today be 
dependent. 
 
And we believe they will open as well the window of 
opportunity for literally thousands of Saskatchewan children 
and their parents by providing them with a clear and reasonable 
choice between work and welfare so that you will always be 
better off working in our province than being on welfare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes, again I say, the 
Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan children deserve 
more than just a hand out, they do deserve a hand-up. This 
legislation will do that. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1988. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s quite 
obvious that government members needed something to lift 
their spirits a little bit in view of the number of situations 
they’ve had to deal with over the past number of days and 
weeks. Certainly when you look at health care, when you look 
at SaskPower and the Channel Lake fiasco, Mr. Minister, or Mr. 
Speaker, I can appreciate the fact that government members feel 
quite strongly about a piece of legislation which in many cases 
and in many ways as well, Mr. Speaker, addresses a number of 
areas that I have had the privilege of talking about in this 
Assembly over the past number of years. 
 

(1445) 
 
As I was listening to the minister give the reasons for the 
changes to the Saskatchewan assistance amendment, that it will 
be brought forward in The Saskatchewan Assistance 
Amendment Act, I can appreciate what the minister is saying. 
 
And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, as well, there are many people 
across this province are looking at this piece of legislation, will 
look at the legislation, and will be asking themselves, what does 
it really mean to me at the end of the day. Does it, as the 
minister indicated . . . will it give me that opportunity to work, 
to find work or accept the work that’s available and still give 
me an affordable way of life, Mr. Speaker? And I think that’s 
what’s going to be very important. 
 
Certainly as the minister indicated, I believe there are many 
residents of this province who today are drawing upon social 
assistance, and in many cases through no fault of their own, 
situations where individuals would have an opportunity for, or 
job opportunity, would like to take the job, but under the current 
stipulations find themselves actually losing . . . or less money in 
their pocket, having less money in their pocket as a result of 
attempting to work because a job just doesn’t meet the 
requirements of providing for all the needs. And every dollar 
they make over a certain level is taken away from them by 
social assistance. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of changes that are 
being brought forward under this Act. A number of changes that 
will dramatically change the way, I believe, we’ve used social 
assistance and how welfare recipients are dealt with, how we 
say to individuals that we’re going to give you every 
opportunity to find gameable employment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s certainly appropriate, as we look at this piece of 
legislation, that we indeed address and assess what the minister 
has indicated, the reasons behind the legislation that’s in front 
of us, and why we should look at it very carefully and make 
sure that indeed the amendments that are being brought forward 
at the end of the day will achieve the goals that I believe the 
government is setting out in this piece of legislation. 
 
As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, certainly I believe that there 
are some very positive moves that are being sought with this 
piece of legislation. And I can only commend the minister and 
the government for finally recognizing that there were needs, 
there was a need for change. That there was a need to help 
people feel more positive about themselves. And to give people 
the opportunity to indeed become part of the workforce rather 
than always receiving via the taxpayer. And I think that’s . . . 
there isn’t a person in our community or in our society who 
doesn’t feel that they want to be a contributor rather than 
always a taker from society and from the taxpayer. 
 
So in light of that, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that our 
caucus certainly is pleased to see the number of the 
amendments coming forward. However, this is a large piece of 
legislation. There are a number of issues to be addressed in this 
piece of legislation and I don’t think it would be proper for us 
just to move this through real quickly and we’re just off the 
order paper that quickly. 
 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

I believe we need to look at it very carefully because it will 
have some very serious implications once it is totally 
introduced. With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I now move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise and move second reading of a Bill to amend The Income 
Tax Act. This Bill continues our government’s commitment to 
lowering taxes as affordable and it introduces two new planks 
in the government’s job creation strategy. 
 
This Bill also implements a major component of our 
government’s efforts to help low income, working families to 
achieve financial independence as the Minister of Social 
Services was just outlining. The Bill also contains several 
technical amendments to The Income Tax Act which are 
necessary to ensure effective administration of our income taxes 
by the federal government. 
 
When we took office in 1991, the province of Saskatchewan 
was facing an annual budget deficit of $960 million and 
outstanding debt of over $14 billion. In addressing this difficult 
fiscal situation, our government made a commitment to the 
people of Saskatchewan to lower taxes on an affordable and 
sustainable basis. 
 
Since balancing the budget in 1994, we have been able to 
reduce taxes every year. In 1995 and 1996 we implemented a 
reduction in personal income taxes that saves Saskatchewan 
taxpayers $55 million a year. In 1997 we reduced the rate of the 
provincial sales tax, that is the education and health tax, from 9 
per cent to 7 per cent, saving all Saskatchewan residents over 
$180 million a year. 
 
Saskatchewan families now pay less in sales taxes than families 
in any other province with a sales tax. These tax cuts are 
responsible and sustainable. The budget remains balanced and 
our government is committed to ensuring that these tax cuts are 
here to stay and that they will be followed by further tax 
reductions. 
 
As I announced in March in the 1998 budget, we are continuing 
to lower taxes for Saskatchewan families. This Bill implements 
a reduction in the Saskatchewan basic personal income tax rate 
from 50 per cent to 48 per cent of basic federal tax commencing 
July 1 of this year. 
 
This reduction comes on top of the personal income tax 
measures announced in the recent federal budget. The most 
significant of those measures is the $500 increase in the basic 
personal credits for low income taxpayers, which will reduce 
both federal and Saskatchewan income taxes. Together, these 
income tax reductions will save Saskatchewan taxpayers over 
$57 million per year in provincial income taxes. 
 
Since 1992 our government has followed a strategy of using 
targeted tax incentives for key sectors of the Saskatchewan 
economy to stimulate growth and job creation. For example, we 
strengthened our small businesses by reducing their income 

taxes by 20 per cent. We fostered the growth of our 
manufacturing and processing sector with a variety of tax 
incentives. We encouraged agricultural diversification with a 
sales tax rebate for investment in livestock and horticultural 
facilities. We attracted call centres by removing the sales tax on 
1-800 numbers, and we improved the tax treatment of 
Saskatchewan-based truckers. 
 
The primary focus of our targeted tax incentives has been to 
improve the competitiveness of key sectors of the provincial 
economy. This strategy is working to attract investment and 
jobs to Saskatchewan. And yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the 
investment dealers of Canada released a report that said 
Saskatchewan leads the country in investment growth at more 
than double the national average. 
 
This Bill introduces legislation that will expand the targeted tax 
incentive strategy to knowledge-based industries and to the film 
and video industry. 
 
Firstly, with respect to the knowledge-based industries, to 
attract research and development activity to Saskatchewan and 
help companies right across the industrial spectrum to invest in 
the future, this Bill implements a new income tax credit for 
R&D (research and development) activities. 
 
The 15 per cent tax credit will be available to all corporations 
making R&D expenditures in Saskatchewan and will reduce 
Saskatchewan corporate income taxes payable. This tax credit 
will benefit many Saskatchewan industries, including 
engineering, biotechnology, and information technology. It will 
also benefit Saskatchewan’s universities where much of this 
research will take place. 
 
To create an opportunity for Saskatchewan’s film and video 
industry to grow and compete with other parts of the world, this 
Bill also implements a new film and video employment tax 
credit. This refundable tax credit, equal to 35 per cent of the 
eligible Saskatchewan labour costs of the Saskatchewan film 
production, provides the impetus for the film and video industry 
to expand and offer new employment opportunities to 
Saskatchewan people, especially young people involved in this 
industry. 
 
My colleague, the Minister of Municipal Government, will have 
more to say about this tax credit when she introduces the 
enabling legislation. 
 
The fourth budget measure to be implemented through The 
Income Tax Act is the Saskatchewan Child Benefit. As has just 
been described to the legislature by the Minister of Social 
Services in his introduction to the proposed amendments of The 
Saskatchewan Assistance Act, the Saskatchewan Child Benefit 
is part of a comprehensive strategy to help families get off and 
stay off welfare. 
 
The Saskatchewan Child Benefit will provide a monthly, 
non-taxable allowance to assist lower income families with the 
costs of raising children. The benefit will be integrated into a 
single payment with the federal tax benefit to improve 
coordination and efficiency in the delivery of federal and 
provincial child benefits. 
 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

Finally, this Bill also implements several technical amendments 
which will assist Revenue Canada in its administration of the 
Saskatchewan income tax system. 
 
I will be pleased to answer questions concerning the 
amendments when discussing this Bill at Committee of the 
Whole. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 
An Act to amend The Income Tax Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
certainly wish to say a few brief remarks about this Bill, which I 
regard as a technical Bill following the budget and I don’t think 
it would be appropriate to re-engage in a week of budget debate, 
Mr. Speaker. And so I think that it’s appropriate that I just make 
some very brief comments before we allow this to go to 
committee, at which time I think it is very appropriate that more 
of the technical questions that we will have, to ask at that time. 
 
I think while the government takes a great deal of time patting 
itself on the back about how fast we’re moving forward with tax 
relief, the plain and simple truth is that Saskatchewan is the 
highest taxed jurisdiction in Canada. Our tax freedom day is 
later than any other jurisdiction in Canada, with the exception 
of Newfoundland who has the dubious distinction of beating us 
by a day or two. 
 
And while we certainly do agree that tax relief is certainly 
needed and definitely important, we believe that this personal 
tax reduction is really not all that significant to the average 
resident of Saskatchewan. It amounts, if you calculate it out, to 
approximately the price of a half a cup of coffee a day, no 
cream, no sugar, and that’s kind of fortunate because it matches 
the other half a cup of coffee we got from the federal 
government sometime before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that one of the things that we continue to 
ignore is what I’ve called in the budget debate, the demographic 
deficit, in that we are increasingly following behind particularly 
the province to the west of us, in terms of our competitiveness. 
And it makes it difficult for us to continue to attract young, 
professional workers and people that will come to this province 
to broaden the taxpayers of the province instead of continuing 
to rely on the same few to be continued to be burdened with the 
full impact of tax measures in this province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I certainly do not want to reiterate the 
whole budget debate. There are questions we will want to 
address in committee and we will certainly prepare to do that. 
And at this time then we have no objection to the Bill moving to 
committee. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
just like to take a few moments in the second reading debate to 
congratulate the Minister of Finance, and indeed the entire 
cabinet, on behalf of my constituents and on behalf of the 
people of Prince Albert, and this will probably apply, Mr. 
Speaker, to all of the constituents of every MLA (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) in Saskatchewan. 
 

And that is to congratulate them on this — on the fact that over 
the last two, three years, this government has reduced income 
tax twice, and the fact that this government has reduced the 
sales tax and the fact that this government has created more 
employment by reducing corporate taxes in targeted places. 
And, Mr. Speaker, as a general result, we are all better off — 
certainly much better off than we were five, six years ago in this 
province. And what’s perhaps even more important is the 
direction is continuing and we are moving in the right direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just take issue with the one comment 
that was mentioned by the speaker previous, and that is with the 
remarks with respect to tax freedom day. I think that if the 
member was to check specifically, he would find that 
Saskatchewan is not at the bottom of the barrel on that but falls 
somewhere well in the middle. 
 
However, there are many ways, there are many ways of 
calculating taxes and tax benefits, Mr. Speaker. And I think if 
you look and take in total . . . if you include items such as cars, 
how much it costs to operate a vehicle here in Saskatchewan 
and to license a vehicle; if you include the health premiums that 
we pay none of, that those people espouse, and if you include 
housing, if you take the overall package of the cost of living in 
Saskatchewan, you will find that what we get is far, far better 
than what people get in other provinces. 
 
But my main purpose, Mr. Speaker, for rising for this moment 
or two was simply to say congratulations to the Minister of 
Finance and cabinet, and thank you from the people of 
Saskatchewan for moving our taxes in the proper and the right 
direction. And good luck in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 40 — The 
SaskTel Pension Implementation Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bill before us 
disestablishes the legislative SaskTel superannuation plan and 
enables the establishment of a strictly internal SaskTel pension 
plan. We understand that this arrangement has proceeded from 
the negotiations following the 1996 SaskTel strike. 
 
Our caucus recognizes that the conditions of the Bill arose out 
of a legitimate collective bargaining agreement. Although we 
do not want to unduly delay this Bill, we have some concerns 
that we will want to have addressed before it’s passed. 
 
As with any agreement negotiated with one set of Crown 
employees, there is always the concern that this will set a 
precedent for future negotiations with the employees of other 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

Crowns. It is not clear from the Bill or its executive summary 
how this new pension will compare with the pensions of other 
Crowns. If it is significantly higher than the others, we can 
naturally expect that the other Crown employees will begin 
clamouring for a similar one. This will of course drive up the 
costs of the Crowns, which will ultimately be borne by the 
taxpayers and ratepayers. 
 
Indeed, even leaving other Crowns aside, we have to question 
how this will affect the competitiveness of SaskTel. Already the 
public phone company’s value is slipping as greater levels of 
competition enter the market-place. In order to ensure the health 
of this public asset, we as its managers and shareholders need to 
ensure that it doesn’t incur any undue costs. 
 
We also need to examine how this Bill will affect current claims 
on existing pension plans. There have been a number of claims 
against the current plan from groups such as remarried widows. 
It would clearly be unfair if the transfer of this new plan was 
used as a way of dismissing such disputes. 
 
We also need to be concerned about the loss of public oversight 
that is involved in this Bill. No longer will we in this Assembly 
be able to review negotiated arrangements. We have seen 
throughout the Channel Lake affair what happens when Crown 
assets are managed without proper oversight. This concern 
needs to be considered before we extend further management 
freedoms to the Crowns. 
 
Our caucus is also unclear about how this new plan will affect 
the pensions of existing beneficiaries. Will those already 
receiving pensions have their plans unilaterally changed? This 
again would be unfair and the Bill is not completely clear on 
how this would be handled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time we have no problem with seeing this 
Bill pass second reading. However we will want to see these 
and other concerns addressed in committee before we are 
willing to pass this Bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 35 — The 
On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 37 — The 
Noxious Weeds Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 
interesting piece of legislation that comes before the legislature; 
it deals with the commercial production of industrial hemp. 

Hemp in many people’s mind is synonymous with marijuana, 
but of course members of the legislature, members of the 
legislature would know that when it comes to this piece of 
legislation, that that is not accurate. 
 
Although they come from the same species of plant — cannabis 
— hemp and pot have very different characteristics and uses. 
 
The marijuana that is used for a narcotic refers to a mixture of 
leaves and flowers that have a high content of THC 
(tetrahydrocannabinol) of 3 to 5 per cent. Industrial hemp refers 
to the fibre-producing strains of cannabis. It has very low THC 
levels and cannot be used as a narcotic. 
 
The dried stalk of the plant is what is used for manufacturing 
products such as paper, rope, etc. Hemp contains a high content 
of proteins — it can be used in soups, cereals, cakes, etc. 
 
Again, hemp seed oil can be used in paints, varnishes, cooking, 
and has some cosmetic and medical uses, I understand. 
 
The federal government has implemented regulations that will 
enable commercial production of industrial hemp under licence. 
Because interest in hemp has been shown here, it has been 
removed from the noxious weeds list and will make it legal for 
growth here in the province. 
 
Other parts of the Bill removing the list of noxious weeds from 
the Act and put in regulations to make it easier to amend in the 
future, provides municipalities with the authority to appoint 
inspectors to inspect properties for noxious weeds and require 
the destruction of these weeds. 
 
This piece of legislation in its entirety . . . this Act, I should say, 
The Noxious Weeds Act, is an important component of good 
husbandry in the agriculture communities and makes up an 
important part of regulations dealing with noxious weeds, 
which are . . . can have significant negative economic impact on 
one’s farming operation. So it’s a very important Act for 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s important that we 
recognize that. 
 
This Bill . . . We don’t want to . . . This Bill dealing with the 
industrial production of hemp, I think is important and can be a 
further economic benefit to the province of Saskatchewan. 
Farmers all over this province are looking for ways to diversify 
their farming operations and perhaps this will present 
opportunities for agriculture producers all across this province. 
 
We do not want to raise the alarm bell that somehow or another 
this is going to promote the illegal growing of marijuana plants. 
That is not what this piece of legislation is about. We don’t 
want to create any kind of hysteria in that area. 
 
This is an important product and an important potential, as I 
said, diversification opportunity for Saskatchewan producers. 
 
We have perhaps a few questions that we’ll be asking but we 
feel that it’s appropriate that this Bill now move to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 4  The Saskatchewan Evidence 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before we begin, I’ll invite the minister 
to introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I am pleased to have with me today, 
Andrea Seale from the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Welcome, Mr. Minister, and to 
your official as well. I have just a few questions on this first 
one, The Evidence Act, and dealing with particularly the part 
about individuals that can appear on video tape, closed circuit 
television, or have another person with them in a witness box. 
That’s a rather new idea to Saskatchewan. I think it’s probably 
a valid idea but it is new. 
 
And I guess the one question on that, how much discretion will 
a judge have in determining which people and in what cases 
that will apply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It will be in the absolute discretion of the 
judge. The judge will maintain control of the court and decide 
who would use this new method. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And one other question, because 
like I said, this is new to Saskatchewan and is probably both 
interesting and positive. And the question that I have, on 
creating this Act, Bill No. 4, what did the government do in 
terms of consultation with the public or the legal community 
before creating this piece of legislation? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We had extensive consultation around 
this, as this legislation comes out of the work of the steering 
committee on the abuse of adults in vulnerable circumstances. 
 
And the following groups were included in this committee: the 
Disabled Women’s Network of Saskatchewan or DAWN; the 
Saskatchewan Association for Community Living; the 
Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan; the Saskatchewan 
Deaf and Hard of Hearing Services; the Saskatoon Crisis 
Intervention Service; the Saskatoon Committee on the Abuse of 
Older Persons; the Provincial Partnership Committee on Family 
Violence; the inner-hospital domestic violence committee; the 
Aboriginal Women’s Council of Saskatchewan; Saskatchewan 
Seniors Mechanism; Regina Police Service; Sherwood Credit 
Union; Department of Justice; Department of Social Services; 
Department of Health; Department of Labour; Department of 
Municipal Government; and as well then, further consultations 
with the legal profession as well. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And as I said, this 
is a rather unique Act and quite different, to us, happening in 
Saskatchewan. So I’m glad to see that list that you just gave to 
us was quite lengthy. And I think those take care of the 
questions that we had on Bill 4. 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Electronic Filing of Information Act 
 

The Deputy Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I invite the 
minister to introduce his new officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today 
Mr. Phil Flory, who is the director of corporations with the 
Department of Justice; and Darcy McGovern from the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you and welcome again, Mr. Minister, 
and to your new officials. I think in the fact that we’re running 
to the end of this century and just about ready to start a new 
one, doing some electronic filing is something that we would 
expect government to do and so I have a few questions on this. 
 
Which departments from government are probably going to be 
the first ones to get on-line with this project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think I can say clearly that the 
Department of Justice is ready to proceed with this. And we’re 
working on a project with a one-stop registration relating to the 
corporations branch, which also ties into the Department of 
Finance. And we’re working together also with the Department 
of Economic Development. And so those are the initial ones. 
But I think we know that as we show how this works, other 
departments will be ready to come and participate as well. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I think especially as we get into 
some of the areas of land titles and registrations, that will speed 
that up and be welcomed by everybody in Saskatchewan. 
 
Obviously there’s an expenditure involved in setting up 
electronic filing of information. Are the monies coming out of 
existing budgets? Is there a separate budget that’s around to go 
ahead and take care of this new system in all departments? Or 
how is that going to be financed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As we proceed with our initial plans that 
I’ve told you about with the Department of Justice, we have that 
funding in place already. 
 
But practically, there will not be a separate line of funding. It 
will be used in each department as they move forward as part of 
the work that they do in that particular area. But we anticipate, 
in the same way that you do, that as we do more of this it will 
just mean that the budget requests are less. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Another question on this. Are 
there certain types of information that are readily able to be 
filed electronically and are there some which are not able to be 
filed electronically, either for practical means or legal means, 
and . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think practically, it’s a question of 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

what kind of data can go in, and practically most anything can. 
The only area where we are having to look at separately really 
is the issue of signatures, and we are working and looking at 
what’s being used in other jurisdictions around that. But 
otherwise, virtually any kind of data can be used in electronic 
filing format, as we know from the use of fax and other Internet 
applications. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I think that answer was exactly 
where I was hoping that that particular question would go. 
 
And I’d like to thank your guests for coming out and giving us 
the information on these numbers of questions and that 
concludes the information we’re looking for on Bill No. 22. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Correctional Services 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’d like the 
minister to introduce his new officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today, 
Madeleine Robertson from the Department of Justice; Don 
Head, who is the new executive director of correctional services 
for the province of Saskatchewan; and Jan Turner, who is the 
director of community services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and welcome to 
your new officials. I don’t know if the fact that we keep getting 
more officials means that we’re going to get better answers or 
just the questions get tougher. 
 
In Bill No. 2, I don’t see the word, sentencing circles in there, 
and yet I believe through quite a large part of it, that’s exactly 
what we’re dealing with. And I’m wondering why the specific 
reference isn’t used in the legislation because it’s what we all 
understand. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No, we’re not talking about sentencing 
circles in this legislation. We’re talking about some of the 
alternative measures in the community justice committees, 
which are in place, before the matters actually go to the court. 
And it’s not sentencing circles, which happen after a judge is 
trying to decide a sentence. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — You mention that . . . the other things that are 
taking place. I’m wondering if you could just elaborate fairly 
briefly on what those sorts of things are that you say are in 
operation out there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What we’re doing in Saskatchewan . . . 
and I know that you’ve been part of some of the discussion and 
debate around what options are available within the community. 
And community justice committees are similar to the youth 
justice committees that are used under the Young Offenders 

Act. We haven’t formally established the community justice 
committees which would be seen throughout Saskatchewan 
until we pass this legislation, because we don’t want to get into 
any difficulties. 
 
But effectively what they will be is allow, for example, the 
police to refer matters to them or prosecutors and have them 
dealt with at the front end of the whole criminal justice system 
as opposed to after charges have been laid and the trial held and 
then a judge trying to make a decision. 
 
So they’re going to some of the things that I know you heard 
the Member of Parliament from the Camrose area in Alberta 
talk about. It’s those kinds of initiatives, and I guess we’re 
wanting to make sure that we have the legislative framework all 
in place before we do that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And as you mentioned, I was in 
attendance at a number of those meetings and I think some of 
the ideas that are out there are very positive. And if we can use 
those in our Saskatchewan system to help youth particularly, I 
think that’s going to be a good move. 
 
There’s an interesting little phrase or a line in this Bill that says 
that no action will be taken against a minister, or can be taken 
against a minister, a minister’s delegate, or community justice 
committee for, and here I quote, “neglect or default.” And I’m 
wondering if maybe this shouldn’t be exact and maybe the only 
cases where action should be allowed, when there’s a blatant 
neglect of duties. 
 
I think we know on the one side we don’t want community 
people who are volunteering feeling that they’re going to get 
hung out for an error they make. But when the word neglect and 
default is there, it seems a little larger than just, you know, 
being a bit of a novice at what they’re trying to work with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the simple answer is that if 
people are acting in good faith and reasonably, they don’t have 
to worry about liability at all and this further protects them. But 
if they’re acting in a way where they’re neglecting their duty 
and where they’re just not doing the job . . . and that includes 
the minister as well. If in fact I was doing something where I 
was negligent, this wouldn’t exempt me either. 
 
So it’s basically setting out that people acting reasonably and in 
good faith are protected but there still is a . . . there are 
situations where people could be intentionally doing something 
wrong and they would be bound or be liable for whatever 
damage they caused. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I appreciate the direction of 
that answer because I think that’s a concern that we have, as I 
said, that the people who are volunteering aren’t going to be 
liable for not always being the most professional people in that 
area but that people that should know what they’re doing can’t 
be devoid of taking or holding any responsibility. 
 
As far as youth criminals, are the programs in place for them 
totally outside your mandate? Because I think that they work in 
Social Services. Are the programs totally outside the mandate 
of your department, or do you have some say in how Social 
Services handles them? Like when they go there, are they no 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

longer any of yours — like how does that work through? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that is the simple answer, that once 
the courts have dealt with them they go into the Social Services 
responsibility under the Young Offenders Act. Now we provide 
advice and consultation on issues that relate to sort of overall 
corrections policy. But practically, once they are into a young 
offender facility, that’s under the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I think you probably know 
my opinion on that because there’s a tendency that when we 
have people moving from one department to another, there’s 
always a possibility of people falling in the cracks. And the 
second things is, as I mentioned earlier on in other cases, that 
Social Services’ mandate is not a mandate for public security, 
whereas yours is. 
 
But having received that answer, I think that takes care of all 
the questions we have on Bill No. 2. Thank you. 
 
(1530) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions 

Act/Loi sur les conventions sur l’exécution de jugements 
 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 
official before I call clause 1. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m pleased to have with me again Darcy 
McGovern from the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and welcome again, Mr. 
Minister, and to your official. I believe we saw Bills similar to 
this last year in terms of enforcement of judgements between 
provinces, and I’m wondering, is this very similar to one that 
came through a year ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It deals with the whole issue of 
enforcement, which is similar, but the one last year dealt with 
enforcement between provinces. This one deals with 
conventions that the country of Canada would enter into with 
other countries, which then in turn allows us as a province to tie 
into the international convention arranged between Canada and 
another country. So it’s on a different level and it includes the 
whole world, depending on the numbers of conventions that are 
signed. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I don’t know if people in 
this province very often think that we’re dealing legally on an 
international basis. So this next question relates to that. How 
many international civil judgements would have to be retired in 
Saskatchewan in a given year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s a question that’s not possible to 

answer because under our present system, if you have a 
judgement in another country and you want to enforce it in 
Saskatchewan, the person in the other country has to hire a 
lawyer here and start all over again. 
 
And so we’ll be able to give you those numbers in a few years 
after this legislation is in place, for example with France, which 
is the first country that we think that we’ll be tied into. And 
then what we’ll then know is the numbers of foreign 
judgements that are actually registered pursuant to the 
convention and pursuant to this Act in Saskatchewan. 
 
But at this time they have to restart every time, which basically 
means double litigating. And if a person moves again, well then 
they litigate again in another place or another country. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, and you just led into my next question 
when you said if they move again, there’s new litigation begins. 
 
How many provinces in Canada are going to be onside with this 
type of a program, let’s say by the end of this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This legislation has been developed and 
passed by the Uniform Law Conference of Canada, which 
meets every summer, usually in August, and looks at the kinds 
of laws which should be similar or were the same in every 
province. 
 
So we know that this, within a few years, will be passed in 
every jurisdiction. But I can’t predict exactly how many will be 
done this year. But we anticipate, because it’s basically good 
news for Canadian citizens, that it will be passed everywhere 
within the next couple of years. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And I think to the extent that this means that 
you don’t have to go through a whole new legal procedure in 
every jurisdiction every time something happens is probably 
good. But it creates a rather interesting one probably here in 
Saskatchewan with the possibility that Guyana may decide to 
sue SaskPower. 
 
Would this make any judgement against SaskPower more 
readily enforceable here in Saskatchewan than it would have 
been before this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This particular legislation refers to 
bilateral conventions between countries. So right now we know 
that there is a convention between Canada and France. And so 
that’s sort of the first one that’s there. 
 
If there is negotiated at some point a bilateral convention 
between Guyana and Canada, then this legislation would be 
used in that situation. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. So I would imagine that if we 
were somewhat prudent, we’ll make sure we don’t negotiate 
that with Guyana for some time. 
 
And thank you again to your official, and that takes care of the 
questions that I have on Bill No. 31. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Saskatchewan Evidence 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Electronic Filing of Information Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Correctional Services 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions 

Act/Loi sur les conventions sur l’exécution de jugements 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 

The Deputy Chair: — Before we begin, I invite the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Chair, I’d like 
to introduce deputy minister Ray McKay to my left; and also 
Donna Dumont, business manager. 
 
Subvote (EC10) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and welcome, 
Mr. Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
As I understand, you came down today from the North to talk to 
us about it. I would imagine that coming to Regina probably 
isn’t . . . when you left the North, I would think that Regina 
doesn’t even look that good. You’re probably looking forward 

to going back north again. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me first of all, this department is 
really just one part, just given a small page in Economic 
Development, and I think that with the northern people having 
very many specific concerns that it seems like it should be 
sitting by itself somehow or given more recognition. Why is it 
just sitting here under Economic Development? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Chair, the number one issue in 
regards to our northern development has been economic 
development. And we thought that there would be a strategic 
focus when the Office of Northern Affairs was created, and as 
such that has been the major focus. 
 
And as well, we look at the Office of Northern Affairs to do 
major, coordinated work with other departments such as tying 
in Economic Development and Education; so there’s an 
important need for coordination with Education. There’s new 
developments, as we’ve done in facilities on Health; we then 
have coordinated work with Health and so on. 
 
So basically the reasons are, strategic economic development 
focus combined with coordination with other departments. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the biggest single jump in this 
budget when I look at the different programs in the different 
areas is in resource policy and program coordination. Are there 
any new programs or issues in this area that justifies that 
increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, we have been looking at the base 
reason on the economic development side. We have moved in 
from approximately 500 people, for example, working in the 
mining area in 1992 to 1,085 this past year. So we’ve seen 600 
people extra working in the field of mining just since 1992. 
 
And so that’s been a tremendous success story wherein the 
department, with its focused strategy on economic 
development, works with the mining companies and the 
communities to focus in on the economic side. And we have 
moved in there as well from around 20 to $30 million worth of 
contracts and salaries to approximately 150 in this past year. 
 
So we’re looking at that strategic type of success in regards to 
the North. So we base most of our activities that way, as well as 
on the training side. 
 
I must say that when I was growing up in the North, we used to 
have maybe a dozen people going to schools. Our coordinated 
partnerships with the Department of Education, both at the 
K-12 side and at the post-secondary side, we now have about 
1,600 people in the field of education. Just in teacher education 
alone we have graduated 200 people. So what we’re seeing is 
— with the strategic, coordinated focus — we are seeing 
success, successful partnerships with industry, successful 
partnerships with the community. 
 
And I might add that for those people who are concerned about 
the environmental side, we also have environmental quality 
committees in 29 communities. It’s really the first of its kind all 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

across Canada. We’re really innovators in this area. 
 
And in that sense we have three major environmental quality 
committees that we work with in regards to the North. And that 
is also another example of the partnership that we do have with 
the communities and also to the mining industry in this case. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, that was a long answer to a 
really short question and I’m not really sure if I got the answer 
that I wanted. 
 
I’m wondering — this extra $124,000 — is there something . . . 
You talked about the number, the job increases from 500 to 
1,085 I think the numbers were, and is there something that 
you’re doing that’s directly . . . that you believe is directly 
affecting the job numbers there through this program and with 
the extra money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, we’re basically maintaining 350 jobs 
right now through the . . . and this past year we’ve had 290 new 
ones. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So there’s people working in a department up 
there that . . . directly involving resources that’s going to 
encourage new jobs or encouraging further development of the 
resources up there and there’s actually that many people 
employed through your department then, is there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — On those 350 jobs that we maintain, plus 
the 290 new ones this past year, they range in many areas. 
Some of them are in the mining sector, some of them are in the 
forestry sector, some of them are in the community services 
sector; and also we support the traditional resource users in the 
areas of trapping, fishing, and outfitting. So I think that in that 
sense we are having a broad-based approach in regards to the 
budget of the North. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I notice in the budget that all 
funding has been dropped for Cumberland House. Why is that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — There was an historic agreement with 
Cumberland House and this past year was a final payment on 
the Cumberland House agreement that was 3.8 million. And so 
when you’re looking at it being dropped, it isn’t being dropped, 
it’s because the payment was completed — the agreement was 
actually fulfilled. And that was the reason why you see the idea 
of a . . . which is not really a drop on the Cumberland dollars, 
it’s just a completion of the agreement that was signed in 1988 
— the Cumberland agreement. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, under economic development 
division, could you tell me how many loans were given out last 
year and what the total value of those loans were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — On the loans, we had commercial loans, 
we had 42 commercial loans. And the value of those loans was 
2,251,700. We had, on the primary loans, we had 56 at 246,542 
for a total of, of course, on the commercial and primary being 
$2,498,242. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, were there any loans from past 
years that were written off this year? 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I can provide you with that detail in 
regards to the loan write-offs. I’ll just take notice of your 
question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us how many jobs 
that these loans created and how many of these jobs have been 
maintained as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — The question for the maintenance was 
350 and we had 290 new ones this past year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Were there any marketing and research grants 
given out last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — On the market and research side, we had 
33 and the amount was 232,504. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, did the labour standards that 
companies in, what I guess we’d call southern Saskatchewan, or 
the ones that are not in northern Saskatchewan anyway, are 
there the same labour standards or are there some that we don’t 
have to adhere to in the North? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — At this point, there is a difference and 
those labour standards are under review. As you know, in most 
of the major agreements — for example, on the mines — the 
standards are reflected through the union agreement and so on, 
but there is a difference in regards to the standards and that’s 
under review at the present time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Does the marketing research areas . . . pardon 
me, the business skills grants — how many of them were given 
out this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Just on the . . . In the similar fashion as 
the CREDO (community regional economic development 
organization), the REDAs (regional economic development 
authority) are now . . . (inaudible) . . . what we call CREDOs. 
And we had eight grants there for 273,570. But we also had, 
along with that, organizational skill development grants that 
were given out for a total of 10 — $18,423. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you tell me how much funding was given 
to the community-based regional economic development 
organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, that’s 273,570. 
 
Ms. Draude: — The wild rice crop renewal program was 
instituted in ’96-97 to assist with crop failures when there was 
unusually high water levels. Is that program still in operation, 
and if so, was there any expenditures under it last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, on the seeding, the crop renewal 
program is about 20; we’ll give you a more exact figure later 
on. There’s also help in regards to the machinery that is utilized 
in regards to the harvesting. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you tell me what expenditures were made 
under the commercial fishing freight subsidy and price support 
program this year, and how may fishermen received subsidies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — On the fishing aside, we had 49 of the 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

loans approved for 216,997. 
 
There is also a transportation subsidy, when we’re dealing with 
freshwater fish marketing, and that’s a . . . the total budget in 
there is 345,000. Part of it goes to administration in regards . . . 
in support of the fishers and the rest goes into the subsidy of the 
transportation because of the huge cost of going up into the 
north country and the flying in of fish assessment. 
 
Ms. Draude: — As a price support program, does this program 
conflict with any international trade agreements in any way? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — As far as we know it doesn’t. A similar 
agreement exists in Manitoba. There is approximately . . . in our 
case we help the fishers with about 345,000; in Manitoba it’s 
about 200,000. And as well we have a bit . . . maybe about 10 to 
20,000 in Alberta. And we, out of that 345, we have 25,000 
going to the commercial fishermen’s cooperative federation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, under the resource development 
division, this branch is charged with coordinating the mineral 
surface lease agreements in conjunction with the Environment 
and Resource Management. Can you tell me how well this 
works and if it’s not just adding another layer of bureaucracy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, in regards to the EQCs, 
(environment quality committee) we look upon it as a strong 
partnership with SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management). And we are agents, administrators for 
SERM in regards to the environmental quality committees. 
 
We administer the programs and the 29 communities that are 
involved then participate in their regional meetings. There’s 
three of them — three EQCs in the North — and in that sense 
therefore, over the years our partnership has created probably a 
new level of real involvement by people in the environmental 
issue — more so than any place else that I can see in Canada. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, what mineral leases did this 
branch negotiate over the past year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Basically, right now in terms of 
administration, there is five gold mines, one copper, zinc, and 
eight uranium mine surface leases. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the status 
of the uranium review panel is and has it delivered its report 
yet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — The panel has done its final report 
already. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, I move we report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’m going to invite the minister to 
introduce his officials. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me today John Whyte, the deputy minister of Justice; 
Doug Moen, who is the executive director of public law and 
community justice; Elizabeth Smith, who’s the director of 
administration services branch; Keith Laxdal, the associate 
deputy minister of finance and administration; Ron Hewitt, 
who’s the assistant deputy minister of registry services division; 
Richard Quinney, the executive director of public prosecutions 
division; John Baker, executive director of law enforcement 
services; and Don Head, who is the executive director of 
corrections. 
 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials. There are, as you know, many issues 
surrounding justice these days. Your department is, I’m sure, 
well-acquainted with all of them and we wanted to touch on 
some of them here this afternoon. 
 
My colleague has raised some of them in the legislature here in 
the last few days and the concerns that we are hearing from 
people all across Saskatchewan relate to what many describe as 
a revolving door justice system that we have here in 
Saskatchewan. The concerns of people here in this province are 
that justice is breaking down; that we don’t seem to have the 
levels of concern coming from you and your department that 
can handle these types of issues. 
 
And you just look at the kinds of actions that have taken place 
in recent days where you see families coming to the legislature 
and saying that the system in their view has let them down. 
We’ve seen circumstances where people with very, very serious 
charges that have been levelled against them have been 
basically released with, I understand, no bail on their own 
recognizance, that kind of thing. We feel that there is concern 
certainly in this area. 
 
The most recent incident that you’re aware of, I’m sure, is the 
circumstances where after this individual was released on bail 
— or without bail, pardon me — we have a situation where 
there is another alleged incident that happened just over this 
weekend here. And I think people in Saskatchewan are 
extremely concerned about that. This gentleman was accused, 
first and foremost, of murder and attempted murder. So we have 
an individual that has been charged with five potential murders, 
four of them in an attempted fashion, one of them in actual fact. 
And so now we have a circumstance that the justice system 
allows this individual to be released without any bail with the 
supposedly . . . some elders making sure that he's going to 
behave himself. 
 
Now what happens? From there we understand this individual 
goes out and has committed . . . at least has alleged to have 
committed a very, very serious offence, attacking someone with 
a baseball bat if — I believe that’s the circumstances — has 
been likely, and if he hasn’t been already likely will be charged 
with further offences. 
 
Mr. Minister, these are concerns that I think people all across 
Saskatchewan share. What in the world was the justice system 
thinking about when this individual was released? What kind of 
system do we have in Saskatchewan where these kinds of 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

incidents happen? I think, Mr. Minister, that the people of 
Saskatchewan would be very interested in your comments on 
these types of situations. I don’t think it’s good enough for the 
people of Saskatchewan to just say that we’re going to do our 
best and that we are working hard in these areas. 
 
There are circumstances and many, many different incidents 
that we can point to that demonstrate that the system is not 
working. And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, what are you 
doing and what are your department officials doing to correct 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. As the member knows, I can’t 
comment on specific cases. I’d also remind the member 
opposite that the judges of the court are independent, and they 
make their decisions based on all the evidence that’s placed 
before them as well as the law. And that there are various times 
when they will look at all of the factors and deal with the 
matter. 
 
But I think more directly, we in Saskatchewan have a justice 
system which deals with many, many difficult cases on a daily 
basis. And many of these matters are dealt with by the police, 
prosecutors, the courts, the adjunct services that we have, and 
victim services, and all of the other related services that will 
provide help when there is a major catastrophe or difficulty that 
involves a crime. 
 
And we are working together with all of these parts of the 
justice system to make sure that the capable people who work 
within the system can do the job to the best of their ability. And 
for example this year, I’ve already told this House about the 
extra money that we’ve been able to provide for policing, 
whether it’s in the serious crime initiative and the aboriginal 
resource officer area that we’ve been working in; whether it’s 
the extra money into the prosecutions that will enable us to 
develop the SHOCAP (serious and habitual youth offender 
comprehensive action program) or the serious habitual youth 
offender programs; or all of the other things that we are doing 
around family violence and crime prevention, which I’ve 
mentioned previously today — all of these things relate to how 
people interact with the justice system. 
 
And it’s not something where the system is monolithic; it 
involves many, many people, including those of us here in the 
legislature who work on creating whatever laws there are and 
whatever programs there are that we can to help these people. 
 
So I think that our goal is to have a fair, just system that treats 
people in a way that upholds our constitution and all the rights 
under the constitution, as well as meeting some of the 
individual needs when there are some great difficulties. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Johnson): — Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Ward: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to introduce to 

you and to the Assembly, a good friend of mine sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery here, an IBEW (International Brotherhood of 
Electrical Workers) worker in town for some union training. 
His wife is a part-time CA (chartered accountant) of mine, and 
I’d like to introduce Mr. Darcy Wright from Estevan to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
with your little speech you gave us a few minutes ago I think 
what the people in this province want to tell you is that we need 
some teeth in the law. We need to feel that the victims are the 
people that have rights as well and we have to . . . everyone 
knows that Saskatchewan has problems; so does every other 
province. I don’t think that we have anything that’s terribly 
different from the rest of Canada, and our system is failing our 
people. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people that we’ve been telling us . . . been 
working with us are saying that the RCMP are doing a terrific 
job, the police are doing a terrific job, and we’re getting the 
people to the system and that’s where the breakdown is. I think 
that the people of this province are asking that you look at the 
system and make the changes that they require so that they feel 
safe in their own homes. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the other issues that were brought forward 
last year was a case around Martensville, or somewhere in the 
area around Saskatoon, where a young person was murdered 
and we found out that that person who was later charged had 
actually had a warrant out for his arrest. And we found out at 
that time that warrants were actually sent out on a weekly basis. 
I understand that there has been some changes in that policy 
now. Can you tell me how often warrants are sent out and to 
where? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — All of the warrants are sent out by fax the 
same day. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So starting from last year, now every warrant 
that comes across the desk of the prosecutors are sent out 
immediately that same day by fax, out to the police in each area, 
is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There was a change in the Criminal Code 
that allowed us to do that. And since the change in the Criminal 
Code then we’ve done that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, there’s one area I’d like to 
discuss briefly. And that is something that I think is referred to 
here in Regina as the aboriginal co-op. Can you give us an idea 
of when it was established and how much money was spent in 
that aboriginal co-op? 
 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If the specific question is about our 
alternative measures program that is funded by the Department 
of Justice at the Aboriginal Human Services Co-op, then we 
spend through the Department of Justice, about $218,000 a 
year. But that co-op, such as it’s organized, provides many 
other services that are funded both federally, and other 
departments in the provincial government, and I think the city 
also puts some money in there. And then I think that there are 
some funds that they also get from foundations and other 
places. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, one of the issues that we’re 
hearing a lot about now are the number of gang-related offences 
that are happening in this province, not only just the native kids 
but also other gangs that have been coming into the province. 
Have you been specifically looking at policy that will relate . . . 
and deal with the gangs and actually send a message out that 
Saskatchewan isn’t going to be standing for that, for the gang 
offences that we’ve seen in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — On this particular issue, I announced on 
March 30 of this year that the government will be spending a 
million dollars over the next two years to assist police with 
serious crime. 
 
And we have serious crime units being established in Regina 
and Saskatoon city police services to address organized 
criminal activity with a particular focus on the drug trafficking, 
prostitution, and criminal gangs. This allows for extra police 
officers. We’ve also added extra money into the prosecutions, 
which is in addition to this money, which allows for a focused 
attention on serious crime. 
 
These units will use the latest methods and technology to gather 
criminal intelligence and share it with each other and with the 
RCMP, and through the RCMP internationally, and will be 
using the evidence gathered to prosecute organized criminal 
activity within this province; also cooperate in dealing with 
organized criminal activity across the country. 
 
I’d also add that the federal Minister of Justice and the federal 
Solicitor General are very much interested and involved in the 
whole question of dealing with serious crime. And we have 
been working together with some of their initiatives along with 
the initiatives of all the other provinces. 
 
So in that way it’s especially helpful for us on the prairie region 
where we cooperate with Alberta and Manitoba and the 
Northwest Territories because we’re now part of the north-west 
region of the RCMP. 
 
But practically, I think we can say we have a special interest 
and concern in this area and we’re actually putting extra money 
to deal with this. And we’d be happy to look at any other ideas 
and suggestions that you have, but we have some very good 
initiatives in this area that we’re working on. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the victims of crime, I know that 
they do work with people like the family that we had in here 
yesterday, and there was high praise for those people. I think 
they’re doing a very good job. 
 
I’m wondering if you can tell me how much money was spent 

in that department or program last year and how many people 
are actually working in that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I was able to find the information for you. 
The budget in this area, or the estimated expenditures in this 
area, for 1998-99 is $2.438 million. And the number of people 
that are working in that area, full-time equivalent, is 15. 
 
What I would also say is that this program provides funding to 
victims services programs throughout the whole province. And 
these programs cover approximately 800,000 out of the million 
people in Saskatchewan. And they’re provided . . . and if you 
wish I can go through and name all the communities where they 
are. But I can give you the details. 
 
But practically, we don’t have that many people actually hired 
in the Department of Justice to do the work because it’s work 
done throughout the province on contract or with other groups. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I am glad you clarified that because it would 
seem that $2 million for 15 people sounded like somebody was 
going to get a lot of money. But I guess that’s probably not the 
way it’s working. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that this fund is in part at least served by 
the surcharges on fines. And I know that there was actually an 
increase to those surcharges last year. Can you tell me how 
much money more was brought into that fund through the 
surcharges. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The increases that were announced will 
raise about another $400,000. Last year the revenue was about 
1.6 million; this year it will be about 2 million. And if you set 
that over against our estimated expenditures you’ll see that it’s 
about $438,000 less than what we’re actually going to spend. 
 
And so what we’re doing is we’re using some of the money that 
we accumulated earlier before we set up all the programs. And 
our plan is eventually, basically, just to have enough money to 
run the programs for one year in the fund that we carry over 
from year to year, which would be about 2.4 million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, some of the money that’s 
spent, is it actually used for compensating for damages for 
people? Or is it all involving individuals and going out and 
talking to them, contracts to actually deal with people . . . or to 
pay people that are out dealing with people who have been 
victimized by crime? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The money that’s spent is spent on quite a 
number of programs, but you asked specifically about the 
straight cash compensation to individuals, and the amount that 
we have budgeted there is about 300,000 out of that 2.4 million 
goes directly to individuals. 
 
We have made some choices within government that, providing 
the broader based services throughout the whole province, 
would have equal or higher priority than just giving cash to 
individuals. But we still retain that compensation part of the 
program. 
 
But practically the kinds of things that the whole program 
provides are — and I’ll just give you headings and if you have 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

questions you can ask about specific ones — crisis intervention 
services, sort of immediately; specialized victim services 
programs, and these include things like the children’s justice 
centre in Regina and the Saskatoon child centre which we 
supported as pilots before, and some of those are going on to 
different sources of funding. We also have interview rooms 
throughout the province where especially children can be 
interviewed in a room that’s not sort of the police officer’s 
regular interview room. 
 
We have sort of victim and witness support programs which 
include sort of being with the person through the whole process. 
We have as well some education and training programs, 
coordination. We continue to do research and evaluation around 
the programs to make sure we’re getting what we actually 
intended to get. I can give you some of this information. 
 
And also we’re working on various programs that relate to sort 
of prevention of victimization which is also prevention of 
crime. I mean if you prevent crimes you also prevent there 
being victims of those crimes. 
 
But I can give you some more detailed information on this if 
you wish. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I do appreciate that. 
Mr. Minister, when it comes to policing on reserves I know that 
. . . at least I believe that the RCMP is actually paid for 
federally. Is that correct? Or is there money that’s spent by your 
department to police reserves, and if so, can you tell us how 
much money is spent policing reserves and how many officers 
are actually assigned to do reserve work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We spend about $10 million a year in the 
province in policing under the tripartite policing agreements on 
reserves. And that cost is shared 48 per cent paid by the 
province, 52 per cent by the federal government. So our share 
would be about 4.8 million and there are 89 officers that are 
part of that program. 
 
But the way we have set it up in Saskatchewan is that because 
every one of these tripartite agreements involves the federal 
Solicitor General, or through . . . with the RCMP and then us in 
the province, and then the first nation, we also then have very 
good support from the RCMP throughout Saskatchewan. And 
so most of these policing arrangements are integrated very 
closely with the first nation police stations and police 
detachments that are around the reserve. So it basically is a 
network of policing right across the province that includes the 
first nations. 
 
(1630) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, how many times have sentencing 
circles been used this year by the Justice department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This is not easy to get an exact number 
but we’re fairly certain that for the year 1997, there were 31 
sentencing circles held in the province. In the previous year, 
there were 55. 
 
Now basically there’s a decline in the number of sentencing 
circles, and it relates to the answer that I gave you previously on 

some other things we were talking about earlier this afternoon, 
because we’re dealing with more community-based justice 
activities which allows for police and prosecutors to direct cases 
away from the criminal justice system. 
 
Sentencing circles are held after you’ve had a charge, you’ve 
had the trial, and then the judge is trying to figure out the 
sentence. We’re trying to move some of the alternative 
measures programs earlier on so that we won’t have to go 
through the whole trial and sentencing process. 
 
But that’s the number for last year. We don’t know for 1998 
yet. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Good 
afternoon, Mr. Minister. I also want to welcome your officials 
here. I just have a couple or three questions on, and it’s been a 
concern that’s been brought to me by a couple of my 
constituents, Mr. Minister, and it’s to do with the .04 reading 
with the Bill that we passed in the legislature here in the last 
couple of years. 
 
And the concern, I guess, is that . . . Maybe first of all I could 
get you to go through the steps of if you were stopped and blew 
over .04 once, but if you turned around and say within the next 
month you blew again over .04, what the steps are and what the 
penalties, how they increase for, say, up to three, four times. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d like to be able to do that from memory 
but I can’t. And practically, it’s in the SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) legislation. It’s actually not in Justice 
department. It’s managed through the Government Insurance 
and it relates to the regulation of vehicles. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What is in your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — You name it, it’s usually there. But this 
one, this one is practically . . . I mean I can try to answer some 
of your specific questions around how the courts might respond 
to it. But to actually deal with the administration of the 
program, well that’s all handled through SGI. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Now when 
those estimates come up I’ll ask those questions. I just 
wondered though one of the concerns, too, that came up — and 
I’m not sure if this maybe also falls under there — it’s to do 
with when someone blows on a roadside test. Is there any 
obligation on behalf of the officer involved to show the person 
that’s blowing what they blew? Because the feeling that we got 
out there that a number of people feel that if it’s only the RCMP 
officer that gets to look at what the reading is, should there be a 
bit of problem between the RCMP member and the person out 
there, it could add up to be quite a problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — My understanding is that the roadside test 
— if that’s what you’re talking about — is just pass or fail, and 
as far as we know there’s no reason why the person couldn’t 
look at it and see that they either passed or failed. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Yes, I understand that, Mr. Minister, but is 
there any obligation on behalf of the RCMP to show that if he 
doesn’t want to. Like if he decides that there’s no way he’s 
showing that person that, it just seems to me that if you’re 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

blowing and you’re blowing over .04 you should have the right 
to see at least what you blew. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well as my officials advised me, there 
appears to be no obligation to show that, but the fact of it is it 
doesn’t seem to be any reason why they wouldn’t show. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Good afternoon, Mr. Minister, and to your 
officials again. We talked earlier on in the day dealing with 
some of the issues around Justice and the Justice meetings that 
have taken place around the province. And one of the 
statements that I’ve made there or I’ve asked — and I couldn’t 
answer and no one else did — I think now I’m going to ask of 
the people that should probably know. 
 
That we just have to look briefly at the kind of province that we 
are, which is basically a province that’s made up of volunteers 
and people who help — neighbourliness. Those are all key 
characteristics of this province. We haven’t had multitudes of 
people coming in from elsewhere in the world bringing with 
them the good and the bad. We’re not an industrial, you know, 
province that has the blight of industries that industrial towns 
apparently have. 
 
And yet in spite of all of these good characteristics that we’re 
famous for and that we’re proud of and justifiably so, I guess 
the question I have is how in the world did we ever get to have 
one of our cities be the break-in capital of the world? And 
because that fits into justice, I think we need to know why that 
happened here. 
 
I would have expected that to have been Vancouver as a coastal 
city with the problems that has. We expected it to have been 
some place maybe in Ontario and some industrial cities that 
have really seen some decline in the industry and things really 
fallen apart there. 
 
How do we get this in a province that we’re all proud of for the 
reasons I just mentioned? How could that have happened here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I recognize that the hon. member has 
asked this question a number of ways and we ask the same 
question because it is a troubling situation. We know that, 
unfortunately, in Saskatchewan we have a high number of 
people who are in that at-risk situation. And these are people 
who are highly mobile. They don’t have ties to the 
communities. They lack education. They don’t necessarily have 
as much employment. Family stability is lacking. 
 
There are many health issues whether it’s addictions or 
sometimes fetal alcohol syndrome issues, and there are many 
complex issues that revolve around this. We have been working 
to develop a number of ways to respond to some of these things. 
As you know, I’ve been announcing various things regularly 
that will attempt to deal with some of those things including 
what was announced today about crime prevention for young 
people, which includes street workers, people who can work 
with some of these at-risk kids. 
 
We also are working very closely with other departments of 
government and municipalities, federal government, to look at 
issues like housing. We’re looking at issues like the community 
schools, or now some of the pre-kindergarten programs, 

because we know that if we can deal with many of these people 
when they’re at an early age, we can hopefully head them off 
from lives that are in conflict with the law. 
 
What we need to do as a province is to work together with all of 
the people that are concerned, which I think are all the people of 
the province, and attempt to deal with why some of these things 
happen. 
 
But at the same time we also have developed a series of very 
clear responses that hold those who commit these offences 
accountable. And that includes some of the issues around the 
serious habitual offender program which looks at those 50 kids 
in Saskatoon, 50 kids in Regina, and maybe a lesser number, 20 
or 30, in Prince Albert that actually cause an inordinate number 
of the car thefts and break-ins that you’re talking about. And as 
a result, we are providing some resources for the police and the 
prosecutors in that area. 
 
But there’s no question that we have to deal with the whole 
broad array of the causes of crime as well as respond to specific 
incidents that happen. And it’s a difficult question but we’re 
attempting to deal with that. 
 
I think another thing that I would say is that the Department of 
Justice is often the catch at the bottom that catches those people 
that maybe haven’t done so well in school, or that the health 
system ends up not dealing with in a whole way, or whether 
there’s housing problems, some of these other things. 
 
And so we in the Department of Justice have to work very 
closely with all of our colleagues in the provincial government, 
the federal government, and the municipalities and the 
community organizations. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. I guess that leads me back to some 
extent exactly where we started off at. You mentioned a term 
part way through your answer about the number of at-risk 
people in Saskatchewan. Because if we follow that logic 
through, it’s the at-risk people that end up being the ones who 
commit the crimes who get us to be the, you know, car thief 
capital of Canada or the break-in capital of Canada. 
 
Now we continually hear how job situation is so good in 
Saskatchewan and you, sir, sitting on that side of the House 
probably can hear it louder than we can all the good things that 
are happening in Saskatchewan; and there are good things 
happening here. 
 
You put those things together with what I mentioned at the start 
— the history and the reputation and the pride that we have and 
the kind of a helping province that we are. I guess I’m going to 
repeat a very similar question. Why in the face of all those 
things do we in Saskatchewan have that many avarice people? 
Why do we have a larger percentage that gives us those 
unwanted capital cities than Edmonton, Vancouver, Halifax? 
 
I guess that . . . if we don’t . . . if we can’t address that question 
and if we can’t answer that question, then as we go around 
spending money in the Department of Justice we, sir, I submit, 
are just spinning our wheels. Because we’re not quite sure why 
those things are happening. 
 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

Why do we have more avarice people. Our unemployment 
scene is supposed to be good. I think we need a fairly 
comprehensive answer to make sure that our money is spent 
comprehensively, carefully, and successfully. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I appreciate your questions. As you 
know, our goal as a government is to make sure that there are 
safe communities for everybody in the province, including 
those avarice people. Unfortunately those avarice people are 
often a greater proportion of victims because it often involves 
the people that are caught. 
 
We know from the demographics of Saskatchewan that, and 
also from the demographics of the people who are caught in the 
criminal justice system, that a much higher proportion of those 
people are aboriginal. We also know from the demographics of 
the total province that we have higher proportion of young 
people in Saskatchewan than some other provinces, and many 
of those people are aboriginal people. 
 
And part of our challenge as the people of Saskatchewan is how 
do we make sure all of these young, capable people can lead 
lives as contributing members of our society, participate in the 
economy, so that all of these other activities which are 
disruptive to society are not their activity. 
 
(1645) 
 
And we’re doing those things through many programs that 
relate to economic development that we have to do in 
conjunction with our first nation and Metis friends. We also are 
doing them with, as I said before, many of the kinds of 
initiatives that we are able to work with the communities 
throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
The research that we are doing and are continuing to do helps 
us focus what the programs that we’re creating do. And a good 
example of that is the program that was announced this morning 
in Prince Albert, where we went to the community there in 
Prince Albert, and I think there were about 35 different 
organizations that came together last fall and this January and 
said, we need some extra help in establishing our youth centre 
downtown because we think that that’s a good way to prevent 
crime among youth in our city, the city of Prince Albert. 
 
And so when we were able to provide some funding to that 
through some of our crime prevention initiatives, there was a 
consensus in the community that this is the way that it should 
be done. We’re continuing to do that right across the province. 
 
Often the work we’re doing with the 7- or 8- or 9- or 
10-year-olds we may not see how well that’s benefiting the 
whole community for another 10 years. But we do become 
involved continually in evaluation and try to spend our money 
in the most effective and efficient way we can. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think the part that you 
mentioned earlier this afternoon, and this part again where you 
mentioned you got involved with members of different groups, 
I think that is definitely the key one so that just one group 
doesn’t go off and say we want the money, or we have a 
program and no one else is involved in it. 
 

Speaking of the program that was announced today and I think 
the one you announced a number of weeks back, I’m wondering 
if you could break the money that has been allotted on that 
program in total — between Prince Albert, Regina, and 
Saskatoon — break that up into how much each one of those 
cities is getting from that program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the three programs you’re asking 
about, the one today was a crime prevention program where we 
had $250,000 and that was roughly split between the cities 
equally so each city got about 80,000 or a little more. 
 
On the serious crime initiatives for this year’s budget, the 
Regina Police Service gets 125,000, Saskatoon Police Service 
gets 125,000. On the SHOCAP, or the serious habitual offender 
program, Regina Police Service gets 80,000; Saskatoon Police 
Service gets 80,000; and the Prince Albert Police Service gets 
40,000. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, and I guess the question that I’ve 
asked to some extent in different ways on this situation — and 
you mentioned in your answer that the aboriginal community is 
part of that and they’ve been involved in the planning of some 
of the programs — what happens to all the rest of the 
communities in this province that have needs and may also have 
that component in their community, including my community 
of Rosthern which gets nothing. What do we go home and tell 
our people that Justice is doing for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This question about the rest of the 
province I think is an important question. And part of it was 
answered earlier when we were talking about the first nations 
policing throughout the province. All of the tripartite funding 
which was the $10 million, that goes for policing throughout the 
province because none of those funds go to any of the cities, 
and any of the initiatives that we have with the police are there. 
 
In addition to the 250,000 that the province is putting in on 
crime prevention, there’s also another $750,000 that’s coming 
from the federal government on crime prevention which has not 
been allocated and we’re actually receiving applications from 
communities throughout the whole province to deal with that 
money. We wanted to go ahead with the money that we already 
had and put that into Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Regina, but 
the other 750,000 is available for the whole province. 
 
We also have money that’s going into the aboriginal initiatives. 
And one of the areas that makes it I guess interesting, if I can 
put it that way, in dealing with the federal government around 
aboriginal issues is that the federal government has effectively 
not . . . or said that they don’t want to fund any initiatives 
within the cities. They’ll do it on the first nations but not in the 
cities. 
 
And we have been able to, through some shared funding 
arrangements, get aboriginal funding where the federal 
government will come in and help with some initiatives in the 
urban setting. And so often what happens is the federal 
government is providing other funds for aboriginals out on the 
first nations and then doing some sharing within the cities. 
 
The total policing of the whole province outside of the cities is 
done through the RCMP. And our contract and the amount we 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

pay to the RCMP is $64 million, and as you know none of that 
money goes to Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, 
Estevan. That’s money that is effectively a third of the budget 
of the Department of Justice, and it goes to places other than the 
city. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Two more questions. My next one has a short 
answer I believe. You mentioned there was some money around 
sort of looking for a home. Does that mean my community 
which I know is at present wondering what they can do with 
youth crime particularly in our community, if they come up 
with a plan can they contact someone? Who do they contact? 
And is there any money available for that if they need some? 
They haven’t even talked about that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is yes, and the person to 
contact is Jan Turner in the Department of Justice or you can 
direct it through my office and it will get there. But that’s in the 
community services program. Jan was here earlier when we 
were talking about The Correctional Services Act. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, and the last question from myself this 
afternoon. Earlier on in some of the discussion that took place, 
we talked about the kinds of sentences that are given and what 
happens when people end up in the courts. And I believe you 
made the statement that judges were independent and therefore 
it wasn’t something we could deal with. 
 
I’m wondering if you’ve given any thought to making judges a 
little different sort of a person, a person that feels a little more 
responsible to society instead of sort of being given a chair, a 
bar, a job, and said there you are, do what you choose. 
Hopefully it’ll be the best but no one can sort of say you are 
totally out of sync with the rest of society. What’s happening? It 
is not what society wants. Can we make them somewhat more 
responsible? Are you giving any thought to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This can have a very long answer or short 
answer and I know you want the short answer. But practically, 
when judges are out of line with society, their decisions are 
usually appealed and there are levels of appeal that can deal 
with some of these concerns. 
 
The other thing is that there are formats whereby we can share 
our concerns with the judiciary through various kinds of 
seminars and things that they have. In addition I think that the 
response of the public to various decisions doesn’t go unnoticed 
by the judiciary. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of 
committees. Before I . . . Well I should welcome the minister 
and his officials here first. Before I get into my questions I 
thought I would give the latest weather report. There’s been 
tornadoes reported down in the south-west in the Vanguard area 
and perhaps heading towards Gravelbourg. So for those people 
who happen to be listening from that area, just keep an eye out 
for them. And lots of rain. 
 
Mr. Minister, some of the questions I would like to ask deal 
with the firearms issue as I’m sure you expected when I stood 
up. I wonder if you could give us a progress report on the court 
case in Alberta — where it’s at at the present time, and where 
you expect it to be in the near future. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There has been no decision yet. We I 
think expected one in February, March. We’ve been expecting 
one any day actually. And practically until that decision has 
been made, we’re not quite sure what the next step is but we are 
watching carefully what’s happening nationally. 
 
And we’ve been following some of the concerns around the 
evidence that was presented to the court. And it’s our 
understanding that the issues that have been raised around the 
evidence from the Department of Justice and the RCMP have 
been raised by Alberta counsel to the court in Alberta so that 
they’re aware of the concerns that the public has. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could perhaps outline for us the arguments that 
Saskatchewan presented, without going through two weeks 
worth of transcripts or whatever it is, but give us sort of a 
thumbnail sketch of the arguments that Saskatchewan 
presented. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — A very short summary form is that the 
provision in this legislation, Bill C-68, are beyond the powers 
of the parliament under the Constitution Act, 1867. Because the 
provisions regulate the use of firearms without any requirement 
for criminal activity, we argue in Saskatchewan that they’re not 
truly criminal law. 
 
The provisions are an attempt by parliament to use the criminal 
law power to support an extensive regulatory scheme without 
any requirement on the federal government to show that the gun 
owner has committed a criminal act, or poses a threat to public 
safety. The province of Saskatchewan submits that a law of this 
type is a regulatory scheme that can only be enacted by the 
provincial government. It’s not supported under the criminal 
law of power that the federal government argues that it should 
be. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would it be 
safe to characterize the federal government’s initiative as trying 
to make firearm ownership a criminal activity unless you have a 
permit which abrogates that criminal activity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I like those short answers, thank you. 
The arguments that Saskatchewan put forward, were they 
similar to the arguments presented by Alberta and I believe it 
was the Yukon was also an intervenor on this, and perhaps the 
Northwest Territories, I’m not sure about that. Did those other 
jurisdictions provide any other arguments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We argued similar arguments to the 
province of Ontario, province of Manitoba, Northwest 
Territories, Yukon, and then Alberta as the main presenter. I 
would argue that our presentations were more effective than 
some of the other provinces. But other than that, well they were 
similar. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Since I don’t 
have the opportunity to rise in Estimates in any other provinces, 
I can’t ask their ministers to give a comparison. 
 
From Saskatchewan’s perspective, how many lawyers did we 



May 14, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

have working on this particular issue, and who were they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Our lead lawyer on the matter was 
Graeme Mitchell and he was assisted by Tom Irvine. And we 
also had further assistance with Darcy McGovern, who you see 
regularly here; Doug Moen, who is here; John Whyte. I’ve had 
my chance to throw in a few ideas and questions, as well as my 
ministerial assistant Heather Nord. So those were the main ones 
involved. 
 
We also had an advisory committee of various organizations 
throughout the province that provided assistance. And I would 
have to say that your party, and you particularly, were helpful 
as we went through the process of trying to figure out what our 
next strategy should be. And we’re obviously getting ready to 
move into the next one, but we want to see what the court says. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, as you say, 
perhaps getting ready to move into the next step. Are we at the 
situation I believe where the court is no longer sitting but we’re 
waiting for the judge’s decision? Is that accurate, the hearings 
are over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The reference was heard over five days 
last September — September 8 to September 12 — and all of 
the members of the Bench, from the reports we have from our 
council, had familiarized themselves with sort of vast amounts 
of materials that were filed. And it’s very clear the full court is 
taking this matter very seriously. 
 
We had anticipated the decision sooner than now because it’s 
been approximately eight months since the decision was argued, 
and we’re looking forward with anticipation. We don’t know 
whether it will be an unanimous decision, a split decision, and 
we don’t know which way that they’re going to go. There’s 
obviously a good chance that whoever is successful, or not 
successful, may take a good look at appealing to the Supreme 
Court of Canada as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 
expect that if the federal government lost at this particular 
junction, they would take it to the Supreme Court. 
 
I guess my question to you is, are you prepared to take it to the 
Supreme Court if the unfortunate was to happen and the 
provinces were to lose their court case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Our position is yes, but Alberta would be 
the one that’s the lead on this. But I think practically, they’re in 
the same position as we are. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. If, let’s 
say Alberta was not prepared to move forward, could some 
other party such as Saskatchewan, or Ontario, Manitoba, the 
Yukon, Northwest Territories — could they move it forward to 
the Supreme Court? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We’re not absolutely certain of the answer 
to that one, in that Alberta is the appellant in the matter and 
we’re all approved as interveners in the case. But we’ll 
obviously be checking that out and be ready for that possibility 
as well and I’ll share the information with you when I know for 
sure. 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you very much. What 
action is happening at the current stage through the RCMP and 
through federal initiatives to implement parts of the Act that are 
already in place. I know that the new regulations have just come 
forward within the last month, perhaps two weeks. I haven’t got 
a copy of them yet but I know that they are becoming available. 
So what is happening in that area as far as implementation of 
C-68? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The latest developments as of just a few 
weeks ago, are that on March 26 of 1998 the federal minister 
announced the final steps of regulations. He said they would 
come into effect on October 1. The Department of Justice, the 
federal Department of Justice, has selected the RCMP as the 
agency responsible for the administration of the gun control 
program in those provinces where the provincial people have 
withdrawn; so that includes understanding . . . or includes 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s a memorandum of understanding between the RCMP 
and the federal Department of Justice that sets out how they’re 
going to work together. We understand that it’s not totally 
resolved because the RCMP are having some questions about 
how the costs are to be dealt with. We are watching very 
carefully to make sure that none of our money that we pay for 
the RCMP in Saskatchewan goes towards this program, and 
they know that and are quite cooperative in explaining what’s 
happening. 
 
We’re expecting that the existing work that we’re doing under 
Bill C-17 will be transferred over to the federal government 
within the next while. I’m not sure of the exact date. It appears 
it will probably be in June sometime that that responsibility will 
be transferred over to the federal government. But at this point 
we’re still continuing the present system under Bill C-17. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You answered 
one of my questions there about the costs from the provincial 
side of things if the RCMP are going to administer it and carry 
it forward. 
 
What will happen to the Bill and to the regulations on October 2 
if the court case has still not been decided? Will that have an 
impact on it? Will it not allow the federal government and the 
RCMP to carry that forward? Or will they simply say it’s the 
law of the land and a court decision has not yet been made on 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well we’ve taken as a province a strong 
political position, which I know you support that — well we’re 
all together on this, I think is the best way to put it — but that 
this matter won’t proceed until the court case has been dealt 
with. So it’s extremely unlikely that the decision won’t be out 
before October 1. But as we get closer to that date, we may be 
seeking your wise counsel as to what our next step is as we look 
at the various points. 
 
But practically, we think there’d be a great deal of political 
difficulty for the federal government if they proceeded when the 
court case has not been decided. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know 
listening to various media reports that have already been talking 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1998 

about registration starting on October 1, the expectation is being 
built in the public that you’re going to have to start registering 
on October 1 because of what the reports that are coming down, 
because the regulations take effect at that particular point in 
time. 
 
And I think it’s going to be extremely important for people to 
recognize or to understand that the law is being challenged, that 
these regulations may very well be thrown out, and that you 
may not yet have to register on October 1. So I think it’s going 
to be very necessary for the government to make it clear in the 
people of Saskatchewan’s mind exactly what happens on 
October 2 if this court case has not yet been decided. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that’s practically the point I was 
making, which is that as we get closer to October 1 we’ll have 
to develop a strategy around that. 
 
But I think the other side of it is that there’s no requirement I 
think, to file immediately on October 1. There’s a time period. 
And probably the recommendation is that you wouldn’t go 
down there on October 2. 
 
But we need to wait and see whether the decision is released 
from the Alberta Court of Appeal. I anticipate that it will 
actually be coming fairly shortly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — For people who already have firearms, it 
may not be necessary for them to register on October 1 or 2. 
But let’s say somebody goes to buy a firearm on October 2. 
What position does that put them in? The law I believe says that 
you’re supposed to register at that point in time. That firearm is 
supposed to be registered. 
 
So do you register it; do you not register it? If you don’t register 
it, are you breaking the law? That leaves people in limbo. So I 
think there needs to be some clarifications here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Dealing with some hypotheticals, that it’s 
hard to answer from this position or I think as federal Justice 
lawyers. But you very clearly set out a number of the practical 
problems. 
 
In addition to the what we know, is the huge practical problem 
of running the kind of computer system that they’ve envisioned. 
And so you add that on to sort of just the day-to-day problems 
that will arise, and I think we’ll all be very surprised if this ever 
comes to fruition the way that Mr. Rock initially described it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. I believe Mr. Rock and Mr. 
Chrétien seem to be bound and determined to drive this through 
no matter what the cost is. Since you mentioned cost, how much 
has Saskatchewan spent in fighting this court case up till now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We have not spent any money outside of 
our own government lawyers. So practically, I guess it’s the 
time spent in Edmonton, you know, and I mean the cost of 
having our lawyers be in Edmonton, that would be extra costs. 
And then also I guess them working on this particular case. 
 
But we’ve got a good team of constitutional lawyers because, as 
you know, we’re very involved in many kinds of constitutional 
issues and they’ve done a good job for us in the court in 

Edmonton. They also did a very good job for us in the Supreme 
Court involving the Quebec reference case. Both of these cases 
we handled internally. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Part of the 
argument that you presented . . . I’m glad to see we’re dealing 
with the constitution and the fact that property is the jurisdiction 
of the province, and that that’s part of the arguments that are 
being put forward. Because that is . . . was the original 
arguments that I presented to this House back in — what was 
it? — ’94, I guess. We’ve been at this for so long one tends to 
forget just how long we’ve been doing it. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I’d like to thank you and your officials for 
coming in and I wish you success in this court case because 
that’s success for all of us. And I’ll be there to make sure that 
the fight is carried on if the Alberta court case proves not to be 
successful, that we do push it through to the Supreme Court. 
Thank you. 
 
Subvote (JU01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (JU02), (JU04), (JU03), (JU06), (JU05), (JU07), 
(JU08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvotes (JU03), (JU04), (JU05), (JU06), (JU07), (JU08), 
(JU09) agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:20 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1141 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1142 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1142 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1142 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1142 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1142 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1142 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1142 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1142 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1142 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1143 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................1163 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Health Care Crisis in Saskatchewan 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
 House of Prairie Memories 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1144 
 Party Politics 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1144 
 Accreditation to BTC Indian Health Services 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................1144 
 Rosetown Student Wins National Literary Contest 
  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1144 
 Band Festival and ParkArt in Moose Jaw 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1145 
 Indian Head Goes Hollywood 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1145 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Metis Hunting Rights 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1145 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1145 
 SaskPower Computer System Project 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1146 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1146 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1147 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1147 
 University Tuition Fees 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1148 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1148 
 Pay Equity 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1149 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1149 
 Funding for Women’s Emergency Shelter 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1149 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1149 



 

 SaskPower Commercial and Freedom of Information 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1149 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1149 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Investment in Youth Crime Prevention Programs 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1150 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1150 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 49 — The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1151 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1153 
 Bill No. 48 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1998 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1154 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1155 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1155 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 40 — The SaskTel Pension Implementation Act 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1155 
 Bill No. 35 — The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act ..............................................................................................1156 
 Bill No. 37 — The Noxious Weeds Amendment Act, 1998 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1156 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 4  The Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1157 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1157 
 Bill No. 22 — The Electronic Filing of Information Act 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1157 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1157 
 Bill No. 2 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1158 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1158 
 Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions Act/Loi sur les conventions sur l’exécution de jugements 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1159 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1159 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 4 — The Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1160 
 Bill No. 22 — The Electronic Filing of Information Act 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1160 
 Bill No. 2 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1160 
 Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions Act/Loi sur les conventions sur l’exécution de jugements 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1160 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Economic and Co-operative Development — Vote 45 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1160 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1160 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Justice — Vote 3 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1162 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1162 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1163 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1165 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1166 
  D'Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1168 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
 General Revenue Fund — Budgetary Expense 
 Justice — Vote 3 .........................................................................................................................................................................1170 
 


