





























































Hansard: March 23, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  
 March 23, 1998 
 

231 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find out 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from the communities of 
MacNutt, Yorkton, Wroxton, and Rhein. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions to 
present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find out 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Kamsack, Runnymede, 
Saltcoats, Yorkton, Churchbridge, Langenburg, and Rhein 
areas. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions to 
present to the Assembly, and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find out 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the Cudworth, 
Bruno, Humboldt areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Churchbridge, 
Langenburg, Runnymede, Rhein, Kamsack. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry into all the 
facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these come mainly from the community of Saltcoats. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who signed this petition are from Spruce Home, 
Wroxton, Langenburg . . . (inaudible) . . . and Runnymede. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I as well have a petition to present 
to the House this afternoon surrounding the whole issue of 
Channel Lake and Jack Messer. These people that signed this 
petition come from Langenburg and Saltcoats, and they are very 
interested in the issue. And I am pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present on 
behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from the good people of 
Neudorf, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition. 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to save the Plains hospital by enacting 
legislation to prevent its closure, and by providing 
adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that 
essential services provided at the Plains may be continued. 
 

Your petitioners come from Coronach and Big Beaver. 
 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1998 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too bring 
forward petitions in regarding . . . in regards to the Plains 
hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed this petition are all 
from the Coronach area of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains hospital. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Those who’ve signed the petitions that I have this afternoon are 
from communities of Springside, Ituna, Melville, and Killaly. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition today: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 
completely ban the practice of night hunting in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by some folks at 
Ituna, at Beaver Dale, Willowbrook, Crooked Lake, Melville, 
and Neudorf. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
additional petitions from citizens of Saskatchewan that are 
concerned that we have more effective ways to deter youth 
crime and to protect society. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 
Parliament of Canada and the legislature of Saskatchewan 
enact legislation and policies to deal with the problem of 
youth crime. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Wakaw, St. Benedict, 
and Cudworth. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
present a petition this morning with a little different flavour for 
the people of Maple Creek. I’ll read the prayer: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And of course the flavour here is strawberry jam; it was 
collected in a local restaurant. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 
received. 

 
Petitions with respect to funding the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; petitions to save the Plains Health 
Centre; and petitions regarding the ending of the practice 
of night hunting. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day number 16 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what are the names, positions, 
and home departments or agencies of all the current 
members of the disability income plan advisory council for 
the Government of Saskatchewan out-of-scope disability 
income plan? 
 

I also give notice that I shall on day number 16 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what criteria are used by each 
department or agency for the selection of the members of 
the disability income plan advisory council for the 
Government of Saskatchewan out-of-scope disability 
income plan; and what are the criteria used by the 
Department of Finance in deciding which government 
departments or agencies will supply members of the 
council? 
 

I also give notice that I shall on day number 16 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: by what specific authority do 
the statutes, regulations, orders in council, ministerial 
policy or guidelines does the disability income plan 
advisory council make its decisions? And who is ultimately 
responsible for such decisions? 
 

I also, additionally, give notice that I shall on day number 16 
ask the government the following question: 
 

Again to the Minister of Finance: what is the process 
followed by the disability income plan advisory council in 
making decisions regarding disability income claims, 
including the process by which a claimant is represented; 



March 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

who represents the claimant before the disability income 
plan advisory council; and the course of action that may be 
taken by the claimant if he or she feels that the 
representation and the resulting decisions are not fair and 
reasonable? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d like to give notice 
of motion for first reading of a Bill. I give notice that I shall on 
Wednesday next move first reading of a Bill, the Tory bell 
ringing expenses indemnification Act, short title, who’s Tory 
now, at $28,000 a day. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day number 16 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

In the 1997-98 provincial budget the Department of Social 
Services designated $250,000 for the outreach program to 
assist children at risk. Has the $250,000 in total been 
distributed? Please provide a breakdown of how this 
$250,000 has been distributed by (a) location — city or 
town; (b) organization; and (c) dollar amount to date. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would like to give 
notice that I shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a 
Bill, the protection of children involved in prostitution Act. 
 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, seated in your gallery are three people from the 
constituency of Canora-Pelly, and I’d like to introduce them to 
you and to all members of the House. 
 
Carol Sleeva and her two sons, Mathew and Travis, come from 
the community of Canora. Carol has been a very active person 
in Canora, having served 12 years on the Canora School Board, 
now of course known as the Crystal Lake School Board. 
 
Her sons, Matthew and Travis, are away from school today, and 
they’re not playing hookey, Mr. Speaker, because today is a 
professional development day for teachers in Crystal Lake 
School Division, and they’re here doing their own professional 
development, wanting to see for the first time the House and the 
Assembly here and see how things function. 
 
And so I’d ask all colleagues to welcome these three individuals 
to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saturday, March 21 was 
the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination. The day commemorates the 1960 Sharpville 
Massacre in which South African police opened fire on 
anti-apartheid demonstrators, killing 69 and wounding 178. 

Through you, Mr. Speaker, I state the obvious. We all live in 
the province of Saskatchewan, a province where tolerance is not 
only accepted but expected. The people of Saskatchewan come 
from western European, eastern European, Asian, African, and 
many other countries. Saskatchewan is also blessed with the 
rich aboriginal heritage. 
 
Tolerance is not so widespread elsewhere, nor is it something 
we can allow our children to forget. This is why the Canadian 
Human Rights Commission, in partnership with the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, has issued a poster 
designed to provide young people with information to help 
combat discrimination. The poster will be distributed to all 
grade 7 to 12 teachers. The poster gives information about the 
danger of hate groups and how to deal with discrimination and 
hate when they encounter it. 
 
The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission has adopted the 
theme of “March 21 every day” with the view to promoting the 
elimination of racial discrimination every day — not just in 
remembrance of the Sharpville Massacre on March 21. 
Although we can be proud of our collective multicultural 
heritage in Saskatchewan, we must continue to fight back 
against racial discrimination and teach our children to value this 
multi-ethnic province of ours. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Membership 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
some very exciting news. As you know, the Saskatchewan Party 
became an official registered party in this province just six 
months ago — December 17, 1997 to be exact. That very night 
we sold our first few party memberships at meetings in 
Rosetown and Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since then we have managed to sell a few more 
memberships. Last week was the cut-off date for membership 
sales for our leadership convention, and after some long hours 
by our party staff inputting those memberships over the 
weekend, I am pleased to announce that there are now 4,579 
card-carrying Saskatchewan Party members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are not long-time party members simply 
renewing their memberships. And no one is having their 
memberships renewed for them like some other parties are 
doing these days. These are 4,579 brand-new members of a 
brand-new party, joining together to provide one clear choice 
and a better future for our province. 
 
They will be voting to select the new Saskatchewan Party 
leader who will lead our party in the next election. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to thank every one of the 4,579 Saskatchewan men and 
women who have made this commitment to a better future for 
our province by joining the Saskatchewan Party. 
 

Expression of Sympathy 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, if I may with leave, I would like 
to, on behalf of the official opposition, extend our deepest 
sympathy to the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) Northcote 
on the recent passing of his mother. Our condolences are 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1998 

expressed on behalf of all the members of the official 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Creation 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last year Saskatchewan businesses and cooperatives created 
13,000 new jobs. That’s one of the best records in Canada on a 
per capita basis. Mr. Speaker, we will do more. 
 
In our budget we continue to make job creation our number one 
priority. We are doubling our investment in organizations like 
regional economic development authorities — local authorities 
that help promote job creation across the province. 
 
We are encouraging innovation and growth through targeted tax 
cuts for companies spending money on research and 
development. We are investing $14 million this year in 
agricultural research and development. We are helping create 
jobs in film production with a film employment tax credit. We 
are helping ensure the oil and gas industries continue to create 
jobs by adjusting royalties. 
 
Last year was a very good job for . . . very good year for job 
creation in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It showed what can 
happen when everyone works together. Our budget continues to 
help Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan businesses, and 
Saskatchewan cooperatives create jobs. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lack of Specialists in Swift Current 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Friday I told this House that specialists in Swift Current had 
reached the boiling point and would not be performing any 
on-call services. Today I would like to read from a letter I 
received from a senior specialist in that city who writes, and I 
quote: 
 

Some areas of special concerns need attention. I would 
advise against deliveries being done here unless the 
attending physician is of the opinion that transferring the 
patient will endanger the life of the baby or mother. 
Trauma cases and acute abdominal emergencies should be 
stabilized, and if assessed to be fit to be transferred out, 
should be referred to an appropriate centre. I would like to 
emphasize that no case should be admitted for observation 
if complications and life-threatening situations might arise. 
Such cases should be referred out if they present after 
hours or at weekends. 

 
Mr. Speaker, specialists in Swift Current serve a population of 
about 50,000 people. And those people are waiting for answers 
from this government — not excuses and not finger pointing. 
They want answers and a resolution to this serious problem 
immediately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to send copies across to the Premier, the 
Minister of Health, and the MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) for Swift Current, who remains silent on this issue in 
regards . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Hockey Game in Eston 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday in Eston, my home town 
as you know, we had an international hockey game of note. The 
Canadian national team squared off with the national team of 
Belarus, a former . . . or, pardon me, a republic of the former 
Soviet Union. There were 1,100 people, Mr. Speaker, at the 
game. Sponsors included Royal Bank, Imperial Oil, Nike, and 
many others. 
 
It was a spirited contest featuring a home town favourite hockey 
player, playing at an international level, a young man, Evan 
Marble, from Eston, Saskatchewan. Many people felt it was on 
a par with some of the Canada-Russia series of years ago. Then 
we only got to watch it on TV. This was live and it was very 
entertaining. 
 
In the end, Team Canada did us proud and proved to be too 
strong for the other side, winning by what eventually turned out 
to be a rather lopsided score of 8 to 2. Congratulations to the 
Canadian national team and thank you to the sponsors and 
organizers for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Partnership in Education Program 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 
to highlight a partnership in education program that is working 
very well. The Department of Highways and Transportation 
sponsor students from Campbell Collegiate with a partnership 
in education program. The department offers a work experience 
scholarship annually to a graduating student who will be 
studying civil environmental systems or transportation 
engineering at either of Saskatchewan’s universities. The 
scholarship provides summer employment and cooperative 
education placement to the student until graduation. Currently 
there are four students in the program, three women and one 
man. 
 
The department’s human resource staff provides consultation 
and counselling to grade 11 and 12 students on career choices, 
job and market research techniques, résumé writing, and 
interviewing techniques. The department provides work 
experience for grade 12 credit classes and experience for 
students with physical and/or mental challenges. 
 
Continuing with our commitment to education, our government 
has plans currently under way to expand the work experience 
scholarship program to include one student per year entering the 
faculty of computer science. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meeting to Discuss Death of Community Home Operator 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two weeks ago 
today, a strong and proud woman by the name of Valerie 



March 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

Montgomery-Bull travelled all the way from Battleford to 
request a meeting with the Minister of Social Services. Mr. 
Speaker, the minister did not meet with Val that day but she 
was encouraged by his statements to the media that he would be 
travelling to Battleford to talk with her and her family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been two weeks since this commitment, but 
Val has heard nothing. I think all members of the Assembly can 
appreciate that you must be careful not to jeopardize the 
imminent trial but, Mr. Minister, Val lost her mother and her 
children lost their grandmother. 
 
Mr. Minister, Helen Montgomery lost her life . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I want to remind the hon. 
member that remarks brought to the House should be directed 
through the Chair, and I’m sure that he’ll want to abide by that 
protocol. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Helen 
Montgomery lost her life while she was providing a service to a 
government department. For the life of me I don’t understand 
why no action was taken to express condolences to her family, 
but it really is never too late to do the right thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I would like to challenge the Minister of 
Social Services to make immediate arrangements to meet with 
Valerie and to give her some assurances that her mother’s death 
was not in vain. And I would close by saying that I’ll be 
following up with his office to ensure that this challenge is met. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Council for International 
Co-operation Session 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Council for International Co-operation is holding an 
informational session regarding how Saskatchewan’s 
international development funds are spent. Everyone is invited 
to join the council to view information displays and to meet 
with representatives of agencies that participate in 
Saskatchewan’s matching grants program. 
 
This year’s theme is: “Saskatchewan’s people-to-people 
linkages for global development.” Three Saskatchewan people 
with direct links to development projects will give brief 
comments on how Saskatchewan aid has had an impact on 
global development. 
 
Presentations will take place between 5:15 and 6:30 today. Jim 
Mercer will speak on his innovative project to improve survival 
rates of land-mine victims; Michele Beveridge will speak about 
the National Farmers Union communications link with Mexico; 
Jeanette Dean, chairperson of UNICEF (United Nations 
Children’s Fund) Saskatchewan, will give a slide presentation 
about Saskatchewan’s contribution to improving the lives of 
third-world children. 
 
Everyone is invited to Room 218 of the Legislative Building 
between the hours of 4 and 7 tonight to join in celebrating 
Saskatchewan’s success stories in global development. 

Congratulations and thanks to the many caring and sharing 
people involved with the Saskatchewan Council for 
International Co-operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
afternoon are for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). Well, Mr. Minister, 
it’s spring, the ice is melting, and the stink at the bottom of 
Channel Lake is starting to come to the surface; and also it 
looks like Jack Messer’s going to rat you out. I guess $300,000 
wasn’t quite enough to keep him quiet. Jack Messer says the 
SaskPower board and the ministers on the board were aware of 
what was going on and they could have stopped it at any time. 
But they didn’t. You didn’t. You have covered it up. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is now clear that the only way to get to the 
bottom of this whole dirty deal is to hold an independent public 
inquiry. It’s the only way to clear the air and to clear up the 
whole mess surrounding Channel Lake. Mr. Minister, will you 
commit and announce a public inquiry today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in the reverse order, 
no I’m not about to call a public inquiry today. But for your 
information that you passed on to the House — I’m not sure 
whether you got it from my report to the House on March 10 or 
not — but the fact of the matter is that we clearly set out the 
scenario that you refer to about how Channel Lake came to 
light, the review that was called for on December 9; and the 
result and the bottom line that I referred to a week ago or two 
weeks ago tomorrow on Tuesday when I said on page 10, “This 
government is extremely disappointed (about) events that I have 
described.” I said that. I said as well, “We deserve our share of 
criticism for letting it happen. We ordered a detailed review, we 
have made the review public,” i.e., the Deloitte Touche report.  
 
And we have said as well that we will have an inquiry in the 
Public Accounts Committee, that is if your members and your 
desk mate, your desk mate who is in control, who is in control 
of calling the meeting which will allow for the inquiry into this 
issue in Public Accounts . . . We intend that you should be at 
the meeting when it comes on March 31. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, everyone 
in this province wants to get the truth on this whole Channel 
Lake affair, and a public inquiry is the only way to do it. The 
Saskatchewan Party is calling for a public inquiry; 87 per cent 
of the callers to the Leader-Post phone poll are calling for a 
public inquiry; now even Jack Messer is calling for a public 
inquiry. The only people who don’t want a public inquiry are 
the NDP and the wholly owned subsidiary, the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you hiding? Who are you protecting? 
Why don’t you clear the air for all of Saskatchewan taxpayers 
and call a public inquiry? 
 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — To the member opposite, we have 
an inquiry planned, the work being done by members of this 
Assembly, if you can convince your desk mate that she should 
come and call the meeting to order so that we can ask the 
questions and get the answers. 
 
I say to the member opposite that all he would have to do to get 
this inquiry started — and he knows it full well — is pat your 
desk mate on the shoulder and get the meeting started. We are 
calling for the inquiry to start by Public Accounts on March 31, 
and we really hope that you have the courage to come there and 
ask the questions that you say you have to ask. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the only thing you 
want is a complete whitewash of this whole thing so it’ll go 
away and leave you alone. Jack Messer is strongly suggesting 
that the NDP (New Democratic Party) cabinet ministers know a 
lot more about Channel Lake than they’ve been letting on so 
far. 
 
We need the answers, Mr. Minister. Who knew, who knew all 
about all of this dirty affair and when did they know it? Who is 
involved in the cover-up, Mr. Minister? You must have found 
out about Channel Lake back in June right after you became the 
minister responsible and you didn’t take immediate action to get 
to the bottom of the deal. 
 
No, you didn’t do anything. You covered it up until December 9 
and then you launched, only then you launched an investigation 
— after the Provincial Auditor brought it to life. Mr. Minister, 
you sat on the file for six months — six months you sat on the 
file. You knew what was going on the whole time; you were the 
minister responsible . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member has been 
extremely lengthy in his preamble and I would ask him to put 
his — order — to put his question directly. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — You were the minister responsible. Will you take 
responsibility for this whole mess, and will you do the right and 
honourable thing and that’s tender your resignation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to that member 
opposite, I understand why he resigned as leader of that party. 
Because he wanted to tell the people of Saskatchewan that it 
really isn’t the Tory Party. And they would have an old 
Reformer — a defeated Reformer — or possibly an old Liberal 
run the Conservative Party to try to trick the public that you 
really aren’t Conservative. 
 
So I understand why you resigned, but I want to tell you this. 
The fact of the matter is that you should resign because you’re 
unwilling to carry on as the official opposition and call the 
committee that you chair. And if that’s the case, why don’t you 
turn over official opposition to the others in opposition — the 
real Liberals — and let them carry on with the committee work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’m not 
surprised you want someone else in opposition, given what has 
transpired in the last while in this legislature. 
 

Mr. Minister, this morning Jack Messer admitted — admitted 
— that SaskPower lost money on the Channel Lake deal. You 
lost money in spite of the fact that you said you made $2 
million. Mr. Messer says you lost money on the deal. 
 
Mr. Minister, you can’t even get . . . you can’t even tell the truth 
about the most basic facts in this whole situation. The only way 
to get the truth is under oath, in front of a judge, at a full public 
inquiry. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit that everyone, including Jack 
Messer . . . Will you admit what everyone knows, including 
Jack Messer, that you did lose millions of dollars in Channel 
Lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — To the member opposite, if he 
would read the Deloitte Touche report, he would read that there 
was an $8 million loss in arbitrage. There’s no doubt about that. 
But as the assistant provincial auditor said . . . but as the 
Provincial Auditor said through his office, there was $2 million 
made overall in the project. 
 
As it would relate to Mr. Messer’s call for a public inquiry, 
that’s a great deal different than what he was saying last 
Thursday when he said he’s confident the Public Accounts 
Committee will get to the bottom of what happened in Channel 
Lake. That’s what he said Thursday. 
 
I haven’t talked to him. I haven’t heard reports what he’s saying 
today, but one has to wonder why Mr. Messer is saying on 
Thursday he agreed with coming to Public Accounts and why 
today he’s saying something different. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — It is indeed a good question, and that is exactly 
what a public inquiry would find out. 
 
Mr. Minister, who knew about this and when did they know 
about this whole Channel Lake affair? How far up the NDP 
food chain does this thing really go? It is now clear that it just 
wasn’t the bottom feeders who knew about Channel Lake. We 
think that when the public inquiry starts tracing who knew 
what, it’s going to leave a pretty interesting trail from the 
former minister to the current minister right to the Premier of 
this province — right up to his desk. 
 
That’s what you’re afraid of, isn’t it, Mr. Minister? You don’t 
want to tell the truth. You can’t handle the truth. You paid Jack 
Messer $300,000 to keep a lid on the truth, and now he’s going 
to rat you out, and you know it. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you hiding and who are you protecting? 
Is it the former minister? Is it yourself? Or is it the Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, who asks the questions and then gets his colleagues to 
yell and holler so the answer can’t be given, I say to him 
clearly: the fact of the matter is there will be an inquiry in this 



March 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

Assembly whether you like it or not, whether you like it or not, 
and you can try to filibuster to avoid the tough questions in this 
committee. That’s what you’re doing. You’re trying to avoid 
the tough questions that will be asked of some interesting 
people that you may have some experience with. You have no 
questions to ask. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
I’m saying if you’re not willing to do the work, if you’re not 
willing to do the work of the inquiry that we have in Public 
Accounts, then turn the important work over to what is 
becoming the real opposition — the Liberal and the member 
from the Battlefords — who will come and ask the tough 
questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, last week the official opposition asked 
you to explain the NDP plan for dealing with widespread public 
concern over your government’s closure of the Plains hospital. 
As usual your non-answer demonstrated your arrogance and 
lack of concern for the . . . and the public’s concerns in the 
province. You said the NDP’s version of health reform should 
be a model for other provinces. Unbelievable. A model for 
other provinces; I believe that’s a joke, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, when you look at what’s taking place in this 
province; when you see how the public are reacting; when you 
see the number of petitions that have been brought forward to 
this legislature; when you get the letters that are coming; Mr. 
Premier, will you now do the right thing, and as we see in the 
communities of Kipling and Carlyle, will you ask, Mr. Premier, 
the Regina District Health Board to hold the meetings that they 
had called rather than cancelling them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer this 
question one more time for the members opposite because 
they’ve asked me this now three or four times on a weekly 
basis. And I want to say to the member opposite that the 
decisions around the closure of the Plains Health Centre has 
been made five years ago. That decision around the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre has been supported, Mr. Speaker, by a 
number of people. 
 
And just recently in the letter from the member from Earl Grey 
who sat on the board today, says this, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
the Plains Health Centre, and I think it should be reinstated. 
And she says this, she says: 
 

That I am confident that the process to complete the 
closure of the Plains hospital will ensure the best acute care 
services in this province. These services will not only 
benefit the people from the Regina district but will benefit 
people from all across southern Saskatchewan. No services 
will be lost and no beds will be further closed.  
 

The Plains Health Centre will continue to provide the top 
services that they’ve had in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Toth: — And a further question to the Minister of Health. 
Mr. Minister, the Regina District Health Board planned 
meetings for the communities of Kipling and Carlyle, and many 
people in those communities and the surrounding area were 
looking forward to sitting down with the Regina District Health 
Board to discuss health care and discuss the closure of the 
Plains health care centre. 
 
Mr. Premier, or Mr. Minister, isn’t it true that the reason the 
meetings were cancelled is because the Premier had ordered 
you to order the Regina District Health Board and your 
appointee, Garf Stevenson, the chairman, to discontinue the 
public meetings because of the criticism that you knew would 
be coming out of those meetings? Is that not true? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the 
member gets his information from, but I have no sense of what 
he’s just said to me today in response to the discussions that the 
district health board has had with . . . in terms of closing off any 
kinds of discussions. The Regina health care district has visited 
districts to the south now — we think it’s eight districts that 
they visited — and confirmed that there is going to be an even 
enhanced working relationship than the past. 
 
But I can’t believe for a minute, Mr. Speaker, that the member 
opposite doesn’t believe in the process. I mean now we have 
three elected, appointed health boards that have made this 
decision. Three elected and appointed health boards. 
 
They’ve had two studies on this particular issue, Mr. Speaker, 
and if the member opposite doesn’t support the democratic 
process of how people get on the board, the member should 
stand to his feet and say what he believes. 
 
Two-tiered health care system by the member opposite from 
Moosomin; to user fees by the member opposite from 
Moosomin, and the member doesn’t believe in the democratic 
process of people getting onto district health boards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
campaign to save the Plains hospital continues to mount 
because people are afraid. Patients are afraid, doctors are afraid, 
and now those who run ambulance services are telling us that 
they too are afraid of what will happen if this government is 
allowed to take the wrecking ball to the Plains hospital in 222 
days from now. 
 
Steven Wald, who operates an ambulance service in Assiniboia, 
writes that the Plains must be saved because of its easy access 
for rural ambulances, which is essential in an emergency. But 
above all, he is concerned about the chronic bed shortage which 
will only get worse if the Plains is allowed to close. 
 
Mr. Premier, why do you ignore the input of patients, doctors, 
nurses, and ambulance drivers? Before you personally turn off 
the lights, will you agree to have a public meeting to hear the 
views of the people most affected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to again 
reiterate to the member opposite around the decisions and how 
they’re made relating to the Plains Health Centre. 
 
I’ve already said that on . . . over the last five years the decision 
about the Plains Health Centre has been made by three different 
boards — boards that in fact have been appointed and have 
been elected. And they have had two studies, Mr. Member, and 
they in fact have made the decision that the Plains Health 
Centre will close. 
 
At the same time that they made the decision to close the Plains 
Health Centre, they are going to enrich the services that are 
going to be provided from those facilities. 
 
There will be no further bed reductions; they currently have 675 
beds in this district that serve not only Regina but the southern 
part of the province. No more reductions in beds is what 
they’ve said. They’re going to add an MRI (magnetic resonance 
imaging); they’re going to add a new CAT (computerized axial 
tomography)scanner; they’re going to add some additional 
services around cardio services. 
 
We’re going to have — in their opinion, Mr. Speaker — not 
only a better, two better health care facilities, but enriched 
health care services for people from Regina and all of southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 
the minister in Health and the Premier, I’d like to send across 
letters from the Wald Ambulance service so that they can find 
out firsthand what people in southern Saskatchewan think. 
 
Mr. Minister, in this letter Mr. Wald tells us that the chronic bed 
shortage is something he and the patients he transfers are forced 
to deal with on a constant basis. He writes of one recent 
incident in which he was transferring a patient in extremely 
critical condition to Regina. And as he entered the city, he 
radioed ahead to one hospital but was told there were no beds. 
Several minutes later he arrived at a second hospital and began 
to unload his patient but was then informed there was no bed 
available at that hospital either. 
 
As Mr. Wald tended to the unconscious patient in the hallway, a 
doctor phoned other hospitals, trying to free up a bed. Finally 
the patient was loaded up, headed to another hospital where a 
bed had finally been found. 
 
Mr. Minister, what’s the case? Are you so out of touch that you 
don’t understand there’s a major problem here? Or are you so 
arrogant that you just don’t care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that in this province we’ve assured people of 
Saskatchewan that they would have equitable and efficient 
health care services across the piece. And that statement’s been 
made by people who serve in capacity of district health board 
folks who are elected and appointed by all of us. That decision, 
Mr. Speaker, has been made. 
 
Now I want to say to the member opposite, when he talks about 

the accuracy of his numbers, two days ago, or last week, the 
member from Thunder Creek stood up in this House and said to 
the public that in fact there were a period of 10 days where 
there have been no beds available in the system in Regina — he 
said that. 
 
Today, the member from Wood River stands up and reinforces 
that same statement. Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely inaccurate. 
There are days in the system where it is tight — there’s no 
question there are days where it is tight. But there are no 
occasions in this province — no occasions — where emergency 
services to the people of Saskatchewan are not provided, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, what the 
Minister of Health is really saying to us is, he’s not saying our 
numbers are wrong, that he can’t believe us, he’s telling the 
people that are out there in the field dealing with this day after 
day that they are liars. That shouldn’t be allowed in here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now I think the hon. member 
will recognize that excessive language which questions the 
integrity of hon. members directly or by implication are not in 
order and I’ll simply ask him to be very cautious about that. Go 
directly to his . . . make his point, go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, Stephen Wald says the 
incident I just described is not isolated. He indicates that other 
ambulance services could tell you similar horror stories. He 
writes, “The situation is at a crisis level already, and the closure 
of the Plains hospital can only make things worse.” Mr. 
Minister, how many people have to die before you understand 
that there is a crisis on your hands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to ensure 
the member opposite and the people of Saskatchewan that 
nobody has died in this province who required emergency 
services. No people have died in this province, nor will they, 
Mr. Speaker, because we don’t have available emergency 
services. Not correct. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the member opposite 
about the process and the thinking of the members opposite, I 
have here an interview that was done by their leader in 1996, 
and what does he say about the process of people who run 
health boards in this province? I mean he says that the 
governance needs to be highly educated, highly knowledgeable 
in health care delivery. And that you need to get that through 
the democratic process. 
 
Then asked what his solution would be, he says that he would 
remove from the district health board, would remove from the 
district health board the democratic process and would appoint 
people to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite do not believe in the 
democratic process of how people serve on boards, don’t 
believe me. They do not believe in medicare system. They 
believe in the privatization and the two-tiered health care 
system. Given the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, they would 



March 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

abandon the process of medical services, medical health 
services in this province. They would . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Next question. 
 

Child Prostitution 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, the 
members of this Assembly should be interested in what Alberta 
has just passed as Bill No. 1 in their Assembly reflecting 
Premier Klein’s priority as the healing of victims of the child 
prostitution trade. The Alberta government has budgeted $5.2 
million over the next three years with a goal of abolishing the 
child prostitution trade by the year 2000. 
 
Mr. Premier, your NDP government had to be dragged, kicking 
and screaming, to even acknowledge the significance of the 
sexual exploitation of Saskatchewan children. 
 
Will you demonstrate that you are as concerned as Premier 
Klein and commit to equal funding by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, placing the health, well-being, and safety of our 
children as a top priority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for her 
question. As the member knows, we undertook last year a 
major, a major strategy to combat child prostitution and the 
abuse of children on our streets. That has involved — very 
successfully, Mr. Speaker — involvement with community 
organizations for public education. We have new street workers 
on the streets and again working with community-based 
organizations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to be able to stand in this 
House today and announce, as a result of the budget delivered 
here last week, we have not doubled, Mr. Speaker, the amount 
of money available for this, for this strategy — we have tripled 
it in this budget, Mr. Speaker, to $750,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
outrageous that this government claims to be committed to this 
issue, and yet they treat this specific issue so very trivially. And 
I refuse to allow them to continue to ignore the problem. The 
problem of sexual abuse of children by johns and pimps is as 
acute as it has always been, and it is not going away. It requires 
urgent and targeted action, Mr. Minister. 
 
A small but important step is the proposed establishment of a 
safe house in Saskatoon spearheaded by an organization known 
as Saskatchewan community . . . Saskatoon Communities for 
Children. This group was awaiting word from your department 
at budget time as to whether it would receive $250,000 required 
to operate that safe house. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you do the right thing and provide at least 
this lifeline to those children at risk? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have had the, 
have had the opportunity to meet on a number of occasions with 
the Saskatoon Communities for Children. We are working very, 
very closely with the Saskatoon Communities for Children in 

strategizing for mechanisms to deal with the abuse of children 
on the streets of Saskatoon, as we are working with the 
community organizations in Regina, as we are working closely 
with community organizations in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I repeat, this government takes this as a high 
priority. We have said very clearly, very clearly to those who 
would abuse children on our streets, that the full extent of the 
law will be brought to bear. We have in this most recent budget, 
I repeat, tripled from 250 to $750,000 — three quarters of a 
million dollars — in one budget year; not in three budget years, 
but in one budget year for battling this problem. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, in addition to all of the work that is 
happening across this province through the child action plan to 
assist families and children at risk. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the money 
targeted by this start, issued forward by this government in the 
budget, hardly reaches the Alberta priority in their funding — 
$1.7 million per year to fight child prostitution and to help heal 
those children. This doesn’t compare. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have put forward notice of a Bill, the 
protection of children involved in prostitution Act. I am asking 
whether or not the minister and his government will support this 
Bill to deal with this very grave issue in a very targeted and 
meaningful way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member will be able to 
do the arithmetic and know that this province is putting in more 
dollars per capita than is the province of Alberta. But, Mr. 
Speaker, but that is not what is key to the solution of this 
province. 
 
The key is working with community organizations. The key is 
working with people who are actually on the streets, not just in 
the legislature, but working with people who are actually on the 
streets. And that, Mr. Speaker, we are doing. 
 
We are doing it in Prince Albert, we’re doing it in Saskatoon, 
we’re doing it in Regina, we’re doing it across the province. 
And this, Mr. Speaker, will provide in the short, medium, and 
long term, a real solution. I’m looking forward to further 
discussions with the Saskatoon Communities for Children and 
their concept of the safe house. I’m looking forward to 
conversations with groups here in Regina, Prince Albert, and 
across the province. 
 
Again I reiterate, Mr. Speaker, this province takes this problem 
very seriously. We have dedicated very significant resources in 
this budget towards it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, to ask leave to make a comment 
with respect to condolences to the members of this House. 
 
Leave granted. 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1998 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Condolences 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to, on 
behalf of the Liberal caucus, afford our sincere condolences to 
the member from Prince Albert Northcote on his recent loss of a 
dear loved one. And from all of us, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
express that to the member and his family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 240 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Northern Village of Air Ronge) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill No. 240, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Northern Village of Air Ronge) that it be read and moved 
at the present time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:23 p.m. until 2:33 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
D’Autremont Bjornerud Toth 
Draude Heppner  
 

Nays — 20 
 
Shillington Mitchell Atkinson 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Calvert Teichrob Trew 
Renaud Lorje Cline 
Serby Hamilton Sonntag 
Wall Kasperski Murray 
Jess Hillson  
 

Bill No. 241 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Alameda) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill 
No. 241, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of 
Alameda) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:35 p.m. until 2:45 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Bjornerud Toth D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Heppner 
 

Nays — 19 
 
Shillington Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Calvert 
Teichrob Trew Renaud 
Lorje Nilson Cline 

Serby Hamilton Sonntag 
Wall Kasperski Murray 
Jess   
 

Bill No. 242 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Albertville) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill 
No. 242, The Channel Indemnification Act (Village of 
Albertville) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:46 p.m. until 2:56 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Bjornerud Toth D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Heppner 
 

Nays — 17 
 
Shillington Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Calvert 
Teichrob Renaud Lorje 
Nilson Cline Hamilton 
Sonntag Wall Kasperski 
Murray Jess  
 

Bill No. 243 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Resort Village of Alice Beach) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill 
No. 243, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Resort 
Village of Alice Beach) be now introduced and read for the first 
time. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:58 p.m. until 3:08 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Heppner 
 

Nays — 17 
 
Shillington Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Calvert 
Teichrob Renaud Lorje 
Nilson Cline Hamilton 
Sonntag Wall Kasperski 
Murray Jess  
 

Bill No. 244 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Alida) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 
my home town now. I move first . . . I move the Bill No. 244, 
The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Alida) be 



March 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:11 p.m. until 3.21 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Heppner 
 

Nays — 17 
 
Lingenfelter Shillington Mitchell 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Teichrob Renaud Lorje 
Nilson Cline Hamilton 
Sonntag Wall Kasperski 
Murray Jess  
 

Bill No. 245 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Allan) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill 
No. 245, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of 
Allan) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:23 p.m. until 3:33 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Draude Heppner  
 

Nays — 18 
 
Flavel MacKinnon Shillington 
Mitchell Johnson Whitmore 
Kowalsky Teichrob Renaud 
Lorje Nilson Cline 
Hamilton Sonntag Wall 
Kasperski Murray Jess 
 

Bill No. 246 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Alsask) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
Bill No. 246, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village 
of Alsask) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:35 p.m. until 3:45 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Boyd Heppner  
 
 
 

Nays — 19 
 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Mitchell 
Whitmore Kowalsky Teichrob 
Trew Renaud Lorje 
Nilson Cline Hamilton 
Sonntag Wall Kasperski 
Murray Jess Murrell 
Belanger   
 

Bill No. 247 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Alvena) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
Bill No. 247, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village 
of Alvena) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:47 p.m. until 3:57 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Boyd Heppner  
 

Nays — 21 
 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Shillington 
Mitchell Johnson Whitmore 
Kowalsky Teichrob Trew 
Renaud Lorje Nilson 
Cline Hamilton Sonntag 
Wall Kasperski Murray 
Jess Murrell Belanger 
 

Bill No. 248 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Aneroid) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
Bill No. 248, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village 
of Aneroid) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 4 p.m. until 4:10 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Boyd Heppner  
 

Nays — 20 
 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Shillington 
Mitchell Johnson Whitmore 
Kowalsky Teichrob Trew 
Renaud Lorje Nilson 
Cline Hamilton Sonntag 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Murray Belanger  
 
 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 1998 

Bill No. 249 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Annaheim) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
Bill No. 249, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village 
of Annaheim) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:12 p.m. until 4:22 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Boyd Heppner  
 

Nays — 19 
 
MacKinnon Shillington Mitchell 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Kowalsky Teichrob Trew 
Renaud Lorje Nilson 
Cline Hamilton Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Jess   
 

Bill No. 250 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Antler) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
Bill No. 250, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village 
of Antler) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:24 p.m. until 4:34 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Boyd Heppner  
 

Nays — 21 
 
MacKinnon Shillington Mitchell 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Kowalsky Calvert Teichrob 
Trew Renaud Lorje 
Nilson Cline Hamilton 
Stanger Wall Kasperski 
Ward Murray Jess 
 

Bill No. 251 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Resort Village of Aquadeo) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
Bill No. 251, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Resort 
Village of Aquadeo) be now introduced and read for the first 
time. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:36 p.m. until 4:46 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Boyd Heppner  
 

Nays — 19 
 
MacKinnon Shillington Mitchell 
Atkinson Tchorzewski Johnson 
Whitmore Kowalsky Teichrob 
Trew Renaud Lorje 
Nilson Cline Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Jess   
 

Bill No. 252 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Arborfield) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
a Bill, No. 252, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town 
of Arborfield) be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:48 p.m. until 4:58 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Boyd Heppner  
 

Nays — 20 
 
Flavel MacKinnon Shillington 
Mitchell Atkinson Johnson 
Whitmore Kowalsky Calvert 
Teichrob Trew Renaud 
Lorje Nilson Cline 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Murray Jess  
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................232 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................232 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................232 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................232 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................232 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 Clerk ..............................................................................................................................................................................................232 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................232 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................233 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................233 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................233 
 Saskatchewan Party Membership 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................233 
 Expression of Sympathy 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................233 
 Job Creation 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................234 
 Lack of Specialists in Swift Current 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................234 
 International Hockey Game in Eston 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................234 
 Partnership in Education Program 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................234 
 Meeting to Discuss Death of Community Home Operator 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................234 
 Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation Session 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................235 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................235 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................235 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................237 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................237 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................237 
 Child Prostitution 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................239 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................239 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Condolences 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................240 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 240 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Northern Village of Air Ronge) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................240 
 Bill No. 241 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Alameda) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................240 
 Bill No. 242 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Albertville) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................240 



 

 Bill No. 243 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Resort Village of Alice Beach) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................240 
 Bill No. 244 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Alida) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................240 
 Bill No. 245 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Allan) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................241 
 Bill No. 246 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Alsask) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................241 
 Bill No. 247 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Alvena) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................241 
 Bill No. 248 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Aneroid) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................241 
 Bill No. 249 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Annaheim) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................242 
 Bill No. 250 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Antler) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................242 
 Bill No. 251 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Resort Village of Aquadeo) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................242 
 Bill No. 252 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Arborfield) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded division) ...........................................................................................................................................242 
 


