





























































Hansard: May 07, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1007 
 May 7, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this come from the communities 
of Ceylon and Radville. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With a petition as well 
to present. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Ceylon, Radville, Trossachs. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today to do with Jack Messer’s $300,000 
severance. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are the community of 
Spy Hill and Tantallon and Rocanville. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition calling for the cancellation of Mr. Jack 
Messer’s severance. People that have signed this petition, Mr. 
Speaker, are all from the community of Hudson Bay. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition surrounding 
severance payments to Jack Messer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 

immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
Everyone that has signed this petition is from Carrot River. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have a 
petition to present to the Assembly this afternoon on the issue 
of the Plains Health Centre and the moratorium that many 
people would like to see placed on it. The petitioners on this 
petition come from the Carnduff area of Saskatchewan, and 
I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 
in this House to present a petition on behalf of people of 
Saskatchewan, the prayer reading as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has signatures on it from the 
communities of Weyburn and Yellow Grass. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Weyburn, Springside, and Yorkton. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join my colleague in 
presenting petitions on behalf of concerned citizens about our 
health care and the closure of the Plains Health Centre here in 
Regina. The people who have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, 
are from the communities of Ituna, Hubbard, and Balcarres. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise this afternoon to 
present petitions from citizens of the province concerned about 
crumbling health care under the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
and specifically about the impending closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. Your petitioners this afternoon come from the 
communities of Hubbard, Foam Lake, and Ituna. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today and bring forward petitions in the people’s 
efforts in stopping the closure of the Plains hospital: 
 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from Ponteix. I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
this afternoon on behalf of citizens who are seeking justice for 
men and women who have lost their spouses in work-related 
accidents: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) on October 27, 
1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This is signed by people from Regina and White City. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m most happy 
today to present petitions on behalf of people of Saskatchewan. 
Their prayer for relief reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These folks, Mr. Speaker, come from the community of White 
City basically, and Regina, and Grenfell, and I’m happy to 
present them on their behalf today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly with 
regard to the following matters: the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; acting to save the Plains Health 
Centre; putting a moratorium on the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre; and having Workers’ Compensation Board 
reinstate pensions for disenfranchised widows and 
widowers. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you, in your gallery, and to my 
colleagues in the legislature, 53, I think, grade 5 students from 
McLurg School in the constituency of Regina Sherwood. 
They’re accompanied this afternoon by Mrs. Carol Grant and 
Mrs. Verna Taylor, their teachers, and a parent, Mrs. Beshara. 
 
I’d just like to say that it’s a pleasure to see Mrs. Grant again. 
She taught my kids in playschool and I hope she has a better 
time with these groups than she had with my son. I look 
forward to meeting with them later on and answer their 
questions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of my colleague, the member from Rosthern, I’d like to 
introduce a group of students seated in the east gallery, 58 grade 
11 and 12 students from the community of Hague. They’re 
accompanied today by their teachers, Margi Corbett and Scott 
Richardson, chaperons Martha Krahn, Val Reddekopp, and Jake 
Unger. 
 
I’d like to ask the members to join with me in welcoming the 
students to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, coming from 400 kilometres 
away, it’s not often that I introduce guests; however today I 
have two large groups seated in the gallery. 
 
First of all in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to 
kindly join with me in welcoming 25 students from Ecole 
McKitrick School in North Battleford. They are accompanied 
by their teacher, Bob Clipperton — please stand; chaperons, 
Brent Scheler and Rita Meckling. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And while I’m on my feet, in the west gallery, 
I would remind all members this is Mental Health Week, and 
I’m pleased to introduce to you members of The Approved 
Homes Association of mental health division from North 
Battleford. I’d ask the following women to stand in order; 
Elaine Dyck, Laurie Calder, Marlene Chubala, Joan Klima, 
Dora Etcheverry, Marlene Bell, Kay Hankowich, and Mary 
Kamineski. 
 
Please join with me in welcoming all these women. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature, my 
cousin, Arlin Olson, and his wife, Ruth, and their five children, 
not in order of age, but Timothy, Benjamin, Lois, Karen, and 
Daniel. And they are here visiting from Afghanistan. They live 
in Mazar-e-Sharif in Afghanistan. Unfortunately just about a 
year ago they had to leave the country because of all of the 
troubles there. They’ve been living in Strongfield, 



May 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

Saskatchewan this year as they await word whether their jobs as 
community development workers in Afghanistan will be able to 
be continued or whether they’ll have to return to another 
country in that part of the world. 
 
Let’s all give them a big welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the House, a good friend of mine, and 
he has a large part in the reason that I’m here. And that is Bob 
Clipperton from North Battleford. He and his wife Carrol have 
been great supporters of mine and also good personal friends. 
And if Marie is with her dad, I’d like to have Marie Clipperton 
and Bob stand, and please say hello to them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I would also like to introduce some people sitting in the 
west gallery. Present here today are some members of the 
Moose Jaw branch of the Approved Homes Association. 
President, actually, of the Moose Jaw branch of the Approved 
Homes Association is Joan Edmunds, and she is accompanied 
here this afternoon by other members, Susie Blacklaws, Debbie 
McDonald, Doreen Tarrant, Rose Andrews, Jackie Grill, Marj 
Barret, Shirley Harrison, and Corrine Jacobson. Unfortunately 
Shirley Barnsley and Anne Humphries were not able to attend 
this afternoon. 
 
But certainly we are looking forward to talking to them again 
later this afternoon, as all of my colleagues had earlier in the 
afternoon. 
 
So I’d just like everybody here to welcome them this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I notice seated in 
the government gallery a friend of mine I’d like to introduce to 
the Assembly today; Natashia Stinka is joining us. Natashia of 
course, is the past president of the University of Saskatchewan 
Students Union. 
 
I suspect she’s probably here . . . As you know, she’s not the 
first former USSU (University of Saskatchewan Students 
Union) president to be here. The Premier is a former one 
himself, as am I. I hope she’s here to try and size up a seat as 
well on this side of the House. 
 
So if you’d join with me in welcoming her. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
welcome the Minister of Justice’s cousins here today. I don’t 
know them personally but I think I heard him say that they’re 
residing in Strongfield, which would make them constituents of 
mine. So because of that, I’d like to welcome you here today 
and hope you enjoy the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Fund-raiser for Multiple Sclerosis 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you. On Monday of this week the 
Battleford chapter of Multiple Sclerosis Society held their 
annual flag raising ceremony at both North Battleford and 
Battleford city hall to raise public awareness of this disabling 
disease. 
 
Today, May 7, is the nation-wide carnation campaign kick-off. 
Proceeds from the carnation sales help the MS (multiple 
sclerosis) Society’s quest for a cure. 
 
Multiple sclerosis is the most common disease of the central 
nervous system affecting young adults in Canada. An estimated 
50,000 Canadians have MS. It affects more women than men 
and usually strikes people between the ages of 20 to 40. As yet 
the cause and cure are unknown, but recently drugs to reduce 
the frequency and the severity of MS attacks have become 
available. 
 
Both the member from Saskatoon Greystone and myself will be 
participating in the MS walkathon, and I encourage all 
Saskatchewan residents to support any of the Multiple Sclerosis 
Society’s worthwhile fund-raisers and watch your donations 
blossom into a cure. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Multiple Sclerosis Support 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments as well regarding MS and the fact that 
today we think of those who suffer with MS. And, Mr. Speaker, 
as an individual who happens to have a brother-in-law who’s 
struggling with the disease, I’m quite well aware of the 
problems that multiple sclerosis brings to people. 
 
And as we stand in this Legislative Assembly today, Mr. 
Speaker, and we enjoy good health, it’s hard for us to imagine 
what people who struggle with MS are facing today. For some 
people it’s become a very debilitating disease that’s really 
limited their abilities to be very effective and active individuals. 
 
But I would like to say that I’ve met a lot of MS patients and 
individuals who lead very productive lives, individuals who 
face the challenge of the disease very positively and are a 
positive influence in our community. So I think as legislators, 
it’s only appropriate for us to stand and offer our support to all 
those who happen to suffer with this debilitating disease. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Approved Homes Association Picket Line 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today, Mr. 
Speaker, members from the Moose Jaw branch and other 
branches of the Approved Homes Association brought their 
pickets to the legislature. They were protesting this 
government’s decision to deny them a small increase which the 
NDP had all ready extended to operators of other types of 
homes. 
 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, these homes provide 24-hour care to those 
suffering from long-term mental illness. By offering this care, 
the approved home operators with us today are helping clients 
avoid hospital stays and live as independently as possible. Each 
day of hospital stay avoided not only encourages independence, 
but saves the government close to $400 per patient. 
 
The value of this work in human terms however, cannot be 
understated. It is my understanding the approved home 
operators will be meeting with the Minister of Health later 
today. If the minister and his colleague, the Minister of Social 
Services, are sincere about promising wellness and helping 
people avoid our already overburdened hospitals, they will be 
fair and equitable and fulfil the commitment they made to this 
group in the ’97-98 budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Importance of Listening 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the things I 
enjoy most, I think, about politics is the opportunity to listen to 
people’s concerns and listen to what they have to say. And I 
have to tell you that I’ve been doing a lot of listening lately, as 
has the government, and there’s some definite positive things 
coming out of this. 
 
I want to note in particular the announcement yesterday by the 
Regina District Health Board that they will be hiring more 
front-line workers this year. I want to report that the Saskatoon 
Health Board will be hiring more front-line workers this year. 
This is a clear sign that we are listening to what people are 
saying. 
 
I would note that even my friends the Liberals periodically 
listen to what we’re saying. After our criticism of them for their 
high profile role in the Save the Plains rallies, I note that their 
banner has been taken down from the front of them. I notice 
that they’re now trying to explain where the money is going that 
they’re taking in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only group left that I wish would listen — if 
only the media would listen to my speeches before they report 
on them, I’d be eternally grateful. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Jail and Bail Fund-raiser 
for Canadian Cancer Society 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to have the opportunity to congratulate the people of 
Humboldt on their very successful jail and bail fund-raiser in 
April, the proceeds of which went to the Canadian Cancer 
Society. 
 
The coordinating committee, made up of chairperson Paulette 
Benning and assistants Joan Hergott, Lynn Lieffers, and Ruth 
Sarauer, along with 30 volunteers, experienced a most 
rewarding, fun-filled day, resulting in $20,000 in pledges going 
to the Canadian Cancer Society. That was $10,000 more than 
was expected for a community the size of Humboldt. 
 

And it is with a great deal of pride that I congratulate all the 
volunteers, the 63 jailbirds who assisted in this fund-raising, 
and the coordinating committee, for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Employment in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People 
Patterns Consulting, an Alberta company, has just released a 
report which indicates Saskatchewan had the best employment 
conditions for youth ages 15 to 24 in 1997. 
 
Ten separate employment indicators from the Statistics Canada 
labour force survey and the survey of consumer finances were 
used in the study, as opposed to unsubstantiated stories in the 
local media, Mr. Speaker. 
 
According to the study, youth employment was up 5.6 per cent 
over 1996. Saskatchewan also had the lowest overall youth 
unemployment rate. We also enjoyed the lowest unemployment 
rate for summer students and the highest employment rate for 
full-time students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was 1997, but that was also the third year in a 
row that Saskatchewan had finished first in the area of youth 
employment. Mr. Speaker, that was the past, but as a 
government we shall remain vigilant for, and act on, 
opportunities to help create employment for our young people 
— this year and every year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that none of the foregoing will satisfy the 
opposition. But, Mr. Speaker, unlike the Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party, which talks a lot about opportunities for 
young people and invites us to ignore their absolutely wretched 
record in office — the second worst youth employment in 
Canada — we shall not rest in our efforts to create real 
employment opportunities for young people when we are in a 
position to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteer Recognition 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
volunteers are the backbone of this province and today I would 
like to recognize a special volunteer, Mr. Roger Pitstick from 
my constituency of Kelvington-Wadena, who was recognized 
as a finalist for the Volunteer of the Year Award of Excellence 
by Tourism Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Pitstick was nominated for his work as chairman of the 
Saskatchewan Watchable Wildlife Association and an active 
volunteer in the Wadena tourism committee. When Mr. Pitstick 
first became chairman of SWWA in 1996, the organization was 
approximately $10,000 in debt and the number of active 
members were at an all-time low. 
 
Since that time, a manual entitled Developing Your Wildlife 
Viewing Sights, written and edited by Mr. Pitstick, was 
published; a brochure and logo were developed; a series of 101 
interpretative wildlife and vegetation signs were prepared; texts, 
photographs, and maps from the Wadena, Quill Lakes and Last 



May 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

Mountain area were included in a new CD-ROM entitled Eco 
Regions of Saskatchewan. All debts were paid and memberships 
increased to 50 sites, operators, organizations, and individuals. 
 
During this time, Mr. Pitstick also participated with Wadena 
wildlife wetlands, the shorebirds festival, and many other 
community activities. Mr. Pitstick believes that tourism is the 
biggest thing that can be done in rural Saskatchewan in terms of 
economic development and has worked hard to ensure that 
Wadena and area utilize the natural resources in their area and 
benefit from tourism. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Association of Saskatchewan Care Home 
Auxiliaries Meet in Manitou Beach 

 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like 
to report to you that I just returned with the Minister of Health 
from an annual meeting in the constituency of Watrous and 
Manitou Beach. Today meeting in Manitou Beach are the 
Association of Saskatchewan Care Home Auxiliaries. 
 
These are all volunteer people from right across the province 
who on a daily basis raise money to help and help take care 
voluntarily of people in care homes. They provide services from 
friendship to raising money for homes for things that are 
needed. These people are continuing with a long tradition in our 
province of voluntarism. They work very hard. They know the 
value of volunteering in our province, and I want to commend 
each and every one of them for the great spirit they carry 
forward from our forefathers to today. Saskatchewan is a 
province that takes care of each other. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Save the Plains Advertising 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As members of 
this House are aware, the Liberal opposition has spent a great 
deal of time and effort on the campaign to save the Plains 
hospital. We are staging public meetings across southern 
Saskatchewan which are filled to capacity. We launched a 
letter-writing campaign which has resulted in thousands of 
responses of support from the public. And just this week we 
launched a billboard campaign on city buses here in Regina. 
 
At first the city had no problem with the ads, which promote the 
May 29 rally at the legislature. But now they’ve succumbed to 
pressure and pulled these ads. We now hear that they’re too 
political. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is it that the Save the Plains ads on city buses 
are apparently viewed as too political, but bus-stop benches 
with literature promoting the NDP policies and the Premier 
apparently are not. It certainly makes one question the motives 
behind this decision and it makes one question just who was 
pulling the strings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to send a picture across to the 
Premier of his bus-stop benches that are apparently not so 
political as our bus ads. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier says the decision to leave thousands of hepatitis C 
victims out in the cold is the best deal that’s on the table. He’s 
saying that’s the best deal that’s on the table. Mr. Speaker, I 
think that’s a pretty cold-hearted statement. 
 
Mr. Premier, why don’t you show some compassion and some 
leadership and bring a better deal to the table? You have no 
problem taking a lead role when there’s a constitutional debate 
going on, but when it comes to helping out tainted blood 
victims the Premier has no plan. None. 
 
Mr. Premier, other provinces are admitting they made a mistake 
and are now staking out their new position. Ontario and Quebec 
are now prepared to work toward a full compensation package. 
Will you do the same? Will you tell this Assembly what 
position your government will be taking to the Health ministers’ 
conference next week? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve given this answer I 
think in the House before and I certainly have outside the 
House; I’ll repeat it very briefly. 
 
We believe that in the area of health solutions of this nature 
surrounding a very complicated matter, one which obviously 
tugs on the heart-strings and the emotion, the compassionate 
feelings of all of us, are very difficult to solve. And in some 
ways there are no perfect solutions, given science — the 
imperfection of it — and finances and everything else that is to 
be taken into consideration. 
 
None the less the ministers of Health for the federal 
government, the provincial governments, and the territorial 
governments met five weeks ago and came up with the best 
possible solution that was available to us as governments, given 
all the circumstances. 
 
That’s the deal. That’s the deal that stands. That’s the deal that 
we endorsed. And we believe that when you make a deal you 
stick by the deal. And when the ministers of Health, Canada, 
provinces, and territorial leaders meet again next week, they’ll 
consider any new variations and we’ll be there to consider those 
variations as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think the 
Premier doesn’t have a problem . . . didn’t have a problem with 
the farmers of this province when he broke a GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) contract. He didn’t have a problem 
with the judges when he broke his own contract that he had 
signed with them. 
 
Mr. Premier, your lack of leadership and compassion is 
appalling to all, all hepatitis C victims. Other provinces are now 
admitting they made a mistake in negotiating the original 
package. Other provinces are now saying that all victims of 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

hepatitis C through tainted blood should be compensated, not 
just those who fall within an arbitrary time frame. 
 
Hepatitis C victims are asking you for your help. Are you going 
to get behind these victims and their families? Or are you going 
to continue to line up behind Jean Chrétien and Allan Rock, 
who keep telling us the file is closed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — This government is in the position of 
supporting, and in concert with, governments like the 
Government of Alberta, Conservative; the governments of the 
Atlantic provinces, Liberal; all of the governments, including 
the governments of Ontario and Quebec who signed on on the 
deal which was negotiated by the provincial, federal, and 
territorial ministers of Health. 
 
The argument has been advanced — and I think it’s one which 
was a well thought out argument — you compensate where 
there is fault. Where there’s fault, there’s compensation. But 
where you could not reasonably detect fault, where there was no 
mechanism for doing so in the Canadian system, it is not 
possible to compensate under those circumstances. That is the 
position taken by the ministers of Health. 
 
In the meantime, for everybody infected, affected — whether 
hepatitis C or in any illness — they deserve the very best, top 
quality care that we can provide them. And we’re doing that 
provincially here in this province. And I’m sure in other 
provinces they’re doing it as best as they can as well. 
 
That is the position of all the provincial governments and we’ll 
see what happens at the conference next week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Premier, it 
certainly appears that your position is not a position of 
compassion and showing leadership. I believe, Mr. Premier, it 
would be appropriate for this legislature to help you develop a 
position. 
 
Immediately after question period, I will be moving an 
emergency motion calling on the federal and provincial Health 
ministers to work together at next week’s conference to extend 
a hepatitis C package to all victims of tainted blood. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have created a leadership vacuum on this 
issue. The legislature should be given the opportunity to fill the 
void. Mr. Premier, will you allow this important debate to take 
place today and will you support our motion calling for 
extended compensation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the 
position taken by the Tory Party in Saskatchewan here really is 
one which is occasioned by — I hate to say this but I believe it 
— by pure, simple, raw politics. I understand this Chamber is a 
political Chamber of nature but it is also of nature a 
policy-making Chamber. 
 
The policy of the government with respect to this very, very 
difficult question was made by the ministers of Health Canada, 

ministers of Health, provinces and territories. They’re meeting 
again next week and they should be deciding that issue again in 
the light of whatever new evidence may or may not come 
forward. 
 
In the meantime, in our position, the deal stands as is attending 
the discussions which take place in Toronto, or wherever the 
ministers are meeting next week. And my advice to the hon. 
member would be that he too should await the outcome of that 
meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regional Hospital Services 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, Saskatoon 
surgeons are now being forced to travel to Humboldt to do 
surgery. This is a problem, but it could also be an opportunity. 
This clearly shows that our city hospitals are over-utilized while 
in some circumstances our regional hospitals may be 
under-utilized. There is clearly a lack of planning and 
coordination by your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, St. Elizabeth’s Hospital in Humboldt has about a 
million dollars locally saved up for expansion, and has been 
waiting for the province to give it a green light to expand. If 
services at St. Elizabeth’s were expanded, maybe instead of 
Saskatoon surgeons doing surgery in Humboldt, we’d have 
Humboldt surgeons doing surgery in Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the plan? What plans do you have to make 
better use of our regional hospitals like the one in Humboldt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to say a couple of things to the member opposite. First of 
all, when I read the article it doesn’t say that physicians in 
Saskatoon are forced to do anything. What physicians say here 
is that they’re going to be taking some of their services and 
providing them in rural Saskatchewan, and providing a broad 
range of services to people in rural Saskatchewan along with 
individuals who by their own choices, what I hear and read, that 
individuals from Saskatoon are going to do this on their own 
because they say that . . . and this is how it reads: 
 

It is inconvenient for me, but at the same token, I do only a 
couple of elective procedures in a month, but I cannot even 
do it in the city because I have to wait a year, and most 
patients do not want to wait that long. 
 

So what’s happened here is that patients are making the 
decision on their own, are making a decision on their own that 
they want to go to Humboldt and they want to have those 
services provided. 
 
And I say to the member opposite when you asked me about 
what the plan is for rural Saskatchewan, this is the exact 
example of what our plan is, to see that rural physicians, that 
physicians from the tertiary centres, will go to the rural 
communities like the Humboldts, and like the Moose Jaws, and 
like the Swift Currents, and like the Yorktons, and provide 



May 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

those emergency services to people closer to home. That’s the 
intent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, when 
your government closed down 52 hospitals in 1993 it was clear 
you had no plan for the future, and we’re paying for it today. 
Dr. Lewis Draper’s comments in today’s paper speaks volumes 
about that lack of planning. The NDP closed 52 hospitals and in 
the NDP caucus there was no debate, no consultation, and no 
planning. Even the member from Shaunavon supported the 
NDP’s decision to close down 52 hospitals and nobody gave 
any thought to the future. And today Saskatchewan people are 
paying the price — not enough nurses, not enough beds, not 
enough services, because there was no real plan. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you please table your plan for dealing with 
the health crisis and ensuring quality regional services to take 
some of the pressure off our overworked city hospitals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I appreciate the member asking this 
question again because I want to reinforce to the member 
opposite that the plan that we have for health delivery across the 
province is exactly the one that you’ve just articulated, Madam 
Member. And that is that we want to ensure, through just the 
completion of the physician contract that we’ve just completed, 
that we’re going to see specialists practising in rural 
Saskatchewan — that’s exactly the plan. 
 
And today what you see is the beginning of that plan where you 
have Saskatoon physicians who are saying that not only are we 
going to provide services to the areas of Humboldt . . . or 
Tisdale and Melfort, we’re now going to take some of those 
services to the Humboldts of the world. And that’s exactly the 
plan that we have developed and that’s the exact plan that we’re 
going to use for utilizing regional services. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, when we talk about 52 
hospital closures, your previous leader, or maybe your current 
leader yet of your Tory Party, said this in an article in the 
Kindersley Clarion where he said . . . Last July he said, during 
the opening comments of health boards, and then quote: “Boyd 
again cautiously praised the Romanow NDP for closing rural 
hospitals that had to be closed.” 
 
Now that’s the comment that your member opposite, the leader 
of your party, who was then and is today supporting the need 
for the closure of those facilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan registered 
nurses are asking this minister for a plan because they think 
there is an alarm happening out there. They say Saskatchewan 
is headed for a severe shortage of nurses if changes aren’t made 
very quickly. Mr. Minister, we are losing young nursing 
graduates who are forced to move to Alberta or the United 
States or even Australia to find full-time employment. 
 
We are losing experienced nurses who are quitting because 

they are overworked and stressed out. You’re asking too many 
nurses to work in two or three different hospitals on a part-time 
basis because the health districts don’t offer full-time jobs. 
 
Mr. Minister, where is the NDP plan? What specific action is 
the NDP taking to stem the tide of nurses leaving their 
profession or leaving the province because of your failed health 
care policies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting 
dichotomy. First we talk about the importance of getting 
physicians to practise in rural Saskatchewan, which is the 
comment that the member just finished making, and urging that 
that occur. Which what follows, the assertion of having 
physicians come to practise in rural Saskatchewan is additional 
jobs, is additional jobs. And we’re interested in seeing nursing 
jobs come to rural Saskatchewan as well. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, how do you want it? I mean 
how do you want it? Do you want to see additional services to 
rural Saskatchewan that enhances jobs, or do you want to see, 
do you want to see all of the services consolidated to the urban 
centres of the province. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, we’ve had discussions with 
the nursing community. We’re going to provide additional 
enrichments to nursing staff within the province of 
Saskatchewan. We’re going to see additional staffing in the 
nursing community and in the facilities across the province 
because we’ve just announced that. And we’re working very 
closely with SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' 
Association) and SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) to 
ensure that that happens. 
 
And within a short time period you’ll see some of those 
initiatives further enhanced in the province in addition to what 
we’ve done through the budget process, which you’ve just seen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Surgery Waiting-lists 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know for a fact 
that the average wait for general surgery at St. Paul’s Hospital 
in Saskatoon is 370 days. Today of course, in the Star-Phoenix 
in Saskatoon it reported that several surgeons from that city are 
performing elective surgeries for their patients in Humboldt 
because the waiting-list in Saskatoon is inaccessible. Mr. 
Speaker, it gets worse. 
 
We also know that surgeons are taking their work to Nipawin, 
to Melfort, to Kindersley. The Saskatoon Health District says it 
could bring the overall waiting-list for surgery down to six 
months if they had an immediate 3 to $4 million earmarked 
specifically for this purpose. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you make a commitment today to inject 
funding into the Saskatoon district to bring the waiting-list 
down to an acceptable level. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is an amazing 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

switch in strategy by the Liberal Party. Because in the last 
several weeks, and within the last month and a half, I’ve been in 
rural Saskatchewan with them all over the place at their public 
meetings, and they continue to talk about the loss of services to 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And today we have a group of surgeons from Saskatoon who 
make a decision that they’re going to move their services 
further into rural Saskatchewan; they’re going to provide some 
enhanced services to the community of Humboldt. And we’re 
having discussions with the medical community to provide 
those additional services in the Yorktons and the Swift Currents 
and the Moose Jaws. And the member opposite stands up today 
and says, why don’t we consolidate everything back to the city 
of Saskatoon. 
 
Now I don’t understand from what position the member comes 
from. A rural member, a rural member from Saskatchewan who 
has some — or should have some — appreciation of enhancing 
rural services, which is part of the strategy of which we’re 
working on with physicians across this province, and you take a 
different direction. 
 
Where are you? We know that you like the two-tier health 
system, which is fees . . . (inaudible) . . . Now do you want to 
see services to rural Saskatchewan or do you want to see them 
all concentrated in the larger urban centres. What is your 
position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, governing is about 
choices, Mr. Speaker. It’s all about choices. It’s all about 
priorities. The people of this province continually tell that 
government that their priorities and their choices are all screwed 
up, Mr. Speaker. The $4 million the Saskatoon district says it 
needs to cut its waiting-list in half is the same amount of money 
that this government spent on an executive airplane last fall. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you can find the money to purchase an 
executive plane, surely you can find the money to cut surgery 
waiting-lists in half in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I see, Mr. Member, that the member 
from Arm River hasn’t stopped his tactics that he’s been taking 
around the province. He continues to bring them into here when 
he goes and does his campaigning across the province, which he 
calls Save the Plains, because today now he makes the 
argument that there aren’t enough services in rural 
Saskatchewan again. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that rural Saskatchewan is 
being served in a better way today than they have in a long 
period of time, and certainly before the administration of the 
Tories, and clearly long before the time that you people had 
government. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, today we have in rural 
Saskatchewan, we have increased services for renal dialysis. 
We have increased services for diagnostic services in CT 
(computerized axial tomography). I say to the member opposite, 

we’re doing that on our own. In Saskatchewan we’re doing that 
on our own; 70 cent dollars or 78 cent dollars, the 
Saskatchewan dollars; 13 cent dollars from Ottawa, Mr. 
Member, 13 cent. 
 
And I say to you, you need to start recognizing the value of 
services Saskatchewan people are receiving on behalf of this 
government and quit going around the province suggesting for a 
minute and fearmongering that those services are disappearing. 
Because it’s inaccurate and it’s the Liberal process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
waiting time for surgery in our regional centres is becoming a 
major problem. As an example, one year ago the wait for 
cataract surgery in Swift Current was two months. 
Ophthalmologist Dr. Malcolm Banks tells us that people are 
now waiting an average of 10 months. That’s right, Mr. 
Speaker, the wait for cataract surgery has gone from 60 days to 
more than 200 days in the past year. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, many 
people waiting for cataract surgery can’t drive, they can’t even 
read. And I want to know if you, Mr. Minister, find this 
10-month waiting period acceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the 
member opposite raises the issue of the number of surgeries that 
are done around the province today. Because when you look at 
the number of surgeries that are performed around the province 
today, from 1991-92 to today’s ’96-97 numbers, we’re doing far 
larger number of surgeries today than we ever have in the 
province, far larger. 
 
Our day surgeries are up over the period of 1991 to 1997 by 51 
per cent as our day surgeries are up by that amount. When you 
look at the number of surgeries that we’re providing in-patient 
today, they’re exactly the same number of surgeries today that 
we’re providing that we did in 1991. So our day surgeries aren’t 
down at all. 
 
When you look at cataract surgeries in this province, they’re up 
by 81 per cent. And when you look at the number of hip and 
knee surgeries that are done, orthopedic surgeries, they’re up by 
57 per cent. 
 
So when the member talks about the reduction of surgeries in 
this province, they’re absolutely false; they’re inaccurate and 
they’re misinformed — which is not unusual, or unlike the 
information that the member continues to spread. Because when 
you look at the information the member has spread over the 
past, we know that the information’s inaccurate and 
inappropriate. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, get the facts right; bring 
them to the House; apologize to the people of Saskatchewan for 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 



May 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, the only surgeries that are 
increasing in this province are the hospital beds that they’re 
surgically removing from the hospitals, the nurses that they’re 
surgically removing from those hospitals, the long waiting-lists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by any measure of common sense, 10 months is 
far too long to wait for cataract surgery. And do you know why 
the waiting period has increased so dramatically? It’s because 
Dr. Banks is only permitted to do six operations a day because 
there aren’t enough nurses in the surgical wards for pre- and 
post-operations, and because of the costs to the districts — 
some $300 for each cataract surgery. 
 
My question again to the Minister of Health. You gutted health 
care. Why have you put quotas on necessary surgeries at our 
regional hospitals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say to the member opposite 
that if he were to look at Dr. Banks’s article a little closer — 
and I don’t have Dr. Banks’s article with me specifically today 
— but if you look at his article, what he would say to you, Mr. 
Member, is that when you look at waiting-lists in the province 
today, they haven’t increased substantially from what they were 
over a period of the last 10 years, is what the doctor said. 
 
Now he says, is it important for us to do some work to reduce 
those surgery waiting times? Absolutely. Absolutely it’s 
important for us to reduce those waiting times, Mr. Member. 
 
And when you say we’re doing nothing with nurses in this 
province, absolutely inaccurate. Absolutely inaccurate. We’ve 
had discussions with the SRNA and SUN, with the Department 
of Health. We’ve given the indication, Mr. Speaker, to them 
that we recognize the kinds of pressures that they have working 
on the floors of these health facilities all across the country, all 
across the province. 
 
And we make the commitment, Mr. Speaker, and to the member 
opposite, that we’ll provide enrichments for people who are 
working on the floors to ensure that people are well served in 
all of our health care facilities and home care programs across 
the province. That’s the commitment that I’ve made and that’s 
the commitment that this government has made to further 
enhance services to people who are working in the field. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you are the one 
with all the inaccuracies. You are once again saying that these 
doctors and nurses and patients are not telling the truth, and 
shame on you for that. And you’ll be the one to apologize 
before this is all over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Banks tells us that he could easily do double 
the amount of cataract surgeries that he is permitted on his 
quota system today. He could do 12 a day, easily. The fact that 
people are forced to wait for 10 months for surgery is 
unacceptable. Many cannot drive, they cannot read, and their 
only option is to travel to Alberta where they can have that 
cataract surgery, but it’s going to cost them $2,400 per eye. 
 

Mr. Minister, you and the Premier talked about the evils of 
two-tier medicine. Well this is two-tier medicine if I’ve ever 
seen it. What do you call it? People are faced with unacceptable 
waits for surgery or massive bills to have this surgery 
performed out of province. You can’t find that acceptable. 
Surely you can’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Member, I want to say, in 
speaking to the member opposite, that there is no question that 
when we will look around the province, we recognize that there 
are areas that we need to improve the length of waiting time 
that people have for surgery. But when you pick the areas of 
cataract surgeries and hip surgeries across the province, I say to 
you, Mr. Member, that we are doing more today than we ever 
have. 
 
But you need to look at what the agenda of your party is and 
what your agenda is, Mr. Member. Because when you say that 
in this province the 10-month waiting period are too long, you 
and your leader have been advocating to bring in privatized 
services into this province to do two things: hip surgeries and to 
do cataract surgeries. This is what you and your members say. 
 
And what does your leader say recently? And your member 
says, your member, the leader, the good doctor, says he’s 
prepared to find savings in Health by the tune of $1.3 billion, 
first of all. And then he talks about, and then he talks about the 
issue of two-tier medicine, Mr. Member. 
 
And when he’s asked, and when he’s asked, Mr. Speaker, about 
where in fact, where in fact he would get some of these savings, 
he would privatize . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Death Statistics 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The child advocate 
stated in the March 24 issue of the Star-Phoenix, and I quote: 
“No one really knows how many Saskatchewan youth take their 
own lives each year because there is no consistent standard for 
reporting the deaths . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Social Services reports only the 
death numbers of youth involved with the department. 
Department statistics show that four youth committed suicide 
between April 1996 and March 1997. The age range is zero to 
21 years. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan Institute on Prevention of Handicaps in 
its report notes 97 youth committed suicide between 1989 and 
1994, age range between 10 and 19. 
 
Mr. Minister, last year in this House I clearly pointed out to you 
that there is no consistent monitoring mechanism in place to 
ensure accurate information on child and youth death. 
 
Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan youth could be dying 
unnecessarily. How can you and your government help if you 



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

do not even know what is really going on? What are you and 
your government doing to ensure there are precise and 
consistent monitoring and reporting procedures in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to the member’s 
question is contained within her question. We work very closely 
with the institute for prevention of injury and handicap. They 
have reported those numbers. Those numbers of course, are part 
of statistical accumulations by the Department of Health 
through vital statistics. 
 
When child death numbers are reported from the Department of 
Social Services, I think it’s understandable and expected that 
we will report child deaths of children in families who have had 
involvement with the department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this House unanimously would stand behind every 
effort to prevent each child death which could be preventable, 
Mr. Speaker. And this government is engaged in a wide variety 
on a wide number of fronts to work with families, to work with 
children, to make their lives as productive and as safe as is 
possible. 
 
Every child death is a tragedy, Mr. Speaker, there can be no 
mistake about that. Every child death is a tragedy. We need to 
work together to prevent every death. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — The minister’s response was calling into question 
the child advocate’s statement. The fact is that 291 children and 
youth died in Saskatchewan in 1995 and 168 in 1996. These are 
unnaturally high numbers and should be of great concern, 
because the fact is that death should not be deemed as a natural 
occurrence — not child death. 
 
Mr. Minister, do these high child and youth death numbers not 
raise some questions and doubts in your mind about the 
efficiency and the effectiveness of your government’s health 
and social policies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member will know that 
the child advocate, whom she quotes, is closely at work with the 
Department of Social Services, with the provincial government, 
with the coroner’s office, in a review of each child death in our 
province. 
 
Every, every . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, if the 
member would listen I could answer. Mr. Speaker, every child 
death, I repeat, is a tragedy. In the statistical reporting this year 
we have seen a decline in child death. Are we satisfied with 
that? Of course not. Every member, every citizen of our 
province, would wish that that would be zero. Tragically, Mr. 
Speaker, through accident, through illness, some of our children 
we will lose. If any of those deaths are preventable, we need to 
work together to make sure that every effort is taken to give 
those children long and healthy lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working with the child advocate to refine 
the definitions, to put together for the people of our province, 
clear and statistical information. But what is key is the work of 
prevention. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 50, 
The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 51, 
The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 52, 
The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Teachers Superannuation 
and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move first reading of The Teachers 
Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Two matters, Mr. Speaker. Two 
matters. Firstly, with leave, to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Sitting behind 
the bar is a former member of the Assembly, a former cabinet 
minister and a much respected clergyman in the city of Regina, 
Alex Taylor. I’d ask Alex to stand and be recognized by this 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I also, Mr. Speaker, with leave, have 
a number of changes to committees. I understand they have 
been discussed with my colleagues opposite. So with leave, I’ll 
move them. 
 



May 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

The Speaker: — Is the Government Deputy House Leader 
requesting leave to introduce one motion or more? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I have six motions. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members on Committees 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move, seconded by the member 
from Regina Elphinstone: 
 

That the name of Mr. Tchorzewski be substituted for that 
of Myron Kowalsky on a list of members composing the 
Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair did not hear the Deputy House 
Leader identify the seconder to the motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move, seconded by the member for 
Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That the name of John Wall be substituted for that of Mr. 
Bob Pringle on a list of members composing the Standing 
Committee on Privileges and Elections. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move, seconded by the member for 
Lloydminster: 
 

That the name of Andy Renault be substituted for that of 
Bob Pringle on a list of members composing the Standing 
Committee on Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview: 
 

That the names of Andy Renault, Ms. Violet Stanger, 
Walter Jess, and Harry Van Mulligen be substituted for 
that of Ms. Doreen Hamilton, Mr. Myron Kowalsky, Mr. 
Ed Tchorzewski, and Mr. Kim Trew on a list of members 
composing the Standing Committee on Estimates. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move, seconded by the member for 
Rosetown-Biggar: 
 

That the name of Ron Osika be substituted for that of Mr. 

Jack Hillson on a list of members composing the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move, seconded by the member 
from Regina Dewdney: 
 

That the name of Jack Hillson be substituted for that of 
Glen McPherson on a list of members composing the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well to ask leave to submit names 
for the Standing Committee on Regulations, one name. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by the 
member from Canora-Pelly: 
 

That the name of Mr. Dan D’Autremont be added to a list 
of members composing the Standing Committee on 
Regulations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask leave to present 
a motion of pressing and urgent nature under rule 14 . . . 46, 
pardon me. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader requests, 
wishes to introduce a motion under rule 46, and I will ask the 
Opposition House Leader to very briefly describe the nature of 
the motion he wishes to introduce, and very briefly his reason 
for wanting it to be considered pressing and urgent necessity, as 
well as to very briefly advise the House of the nature of the 
motion. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we believe 
it’s necessary to debate this government’s lack of leadership 
and compassion on the issue of hepatitis C compensation. 
 
The provincial Health ministers are meeting next week to 
discuss the possibility of reopening the compensation plan. 
Before that is to happen, the people of Saskatchewan want to 
know what the government’s position is. So far, all we have 
heard is how the Minister of Health plans to work as convenor 
and facilitator of the meeting. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan deserve to know what the Minister of 
Health’s position will be. 
 
And in general our motion is calling for the federal and 
provincial ministers of Health to work out a fair and 
comprehensive plan, and that the debate this afternoon be 
forwarded to the federal Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, this government tries to 
answer the questions as soon as possible, and I hereby submit 
the answer to question 61. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 61 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The On-farm Quality Assurance 
Programs Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of my remarks I will move the second reading of the 
Saskatchewan On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act, 1998. 
 
Saskatchewan producers have a reputation for production and 
quality of products. However, there is increasing consumer 
demand for a means to confirm the high quality and safety of 
food products. Food production and . . . the food production and 
processing sectors are establishing quality assurance programs. 
 
We will eventually require the suppliers of their raw materials 
to demonstrate the existence of on-farm quality assurance. 
On-farm quality assurance programs are being developed at the 
national level to augment the existing food inspection system. 
This will result in a cost-effective and safer food inspection 
system for consumers of Canadian food products. This will 
ensure our quality products have continued access to markets. 
 
We are addressing increasing consumer demands for high 
quality, safe food products in this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What are the reasons for the legislation? Well the industry is 
establishing and incorporating standards into their national 
on-farm production processing quality assurance programs. The 
legislation will provide Saskatchewan with the ability to ensure 
that compliance and adherence are established standards. It will 
establish audit requirements for program validation. 
Performance and maintenance of program standards will ensure 
customer confidence in Canadian food products. This 
legislation will contribute to a system of quality assurance from 
the farm gate to the final product. We will ensure our access to 
markets is maintained, and this legislation is consistent with the 
desires of the farm sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of the Assembly to support this 
Act and I move the second reading of Bill 35, The 
Saskatchewan On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments in regards to the piece of legislation before us, the 
on-farm quality assurance programs Act. It certainly would 
appear that with the agriculture being a major component of the 

economy or the economic engine of this province, and the fact 
that we’ve had major changes in the way agriculture is viewed 
in the province of Saskatchewan, the fact that we’ve had 
changes to the grain transportation Act, many producers are 
now looking at other alternatives and ways in which they may 
increase the revenue off of their farm produce. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s only appropriate that we begin to look at, 
and we have over the past number of years, looked at ways and 
looked at methods of improving the financial rewards of the 
products that we’re producing. And what I’m basically talking 
about, Mr. Speaker, is setting up manufacturing, setting up 
processing within the province of Saskatchewan whereby we 
process the product . . . we already ship it out and move it out of 
this province. 
 
Rather than as a raw product that’s processed and then returned 
to this province, we take the time to process that product. And it 
would only be fair, Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that there 
are many organizations and farm groups looking at ways and 
means and methods whereby they may add quality and add 
economic spin-off to their products, that they would look at it, 
look at that through the process of manufacturing plants or 
processing facilities. 
 
And with that in mind and the fact that consumers will then be 
consuming that product at the end of the day, that there be some 
guidelines in place to make sure that when the consumer . . . 
that product reaches the shelf, the consumer can be assured that 
that product has been processed in the healthiest environment. 
That it meets a number of requirements, and I think, believe, 
that’s what the minister is talking about in this piece of 
legislation — making sure that when we begin the process of 
adding value to our product, and as we see processing plants 
springing up around the province, that those plants meet 
stringent criteria so that the consumer, at the end of the day, and 
the government will not be held accountable or be held 
responsible for a product that may hit the shelf that may find 
itself in recall because of a failure to meet regulations. 
 
So with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, it certainly appears that this 
legislation has an important role to play. However, Mr. Speaker, 
I think it would be important as well to take a closer look to see 
exactly what the legislation covers, the area it covers. We hear 
talk about fines; we talk about auditors and appointing auditors; 
and we’d like to take a closer look and make sure that indeed 
we have a better understanding of what this piece of legislation 
is doing — the intent of the legislation. 
 
And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Noxious Weeds 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want 
the members of the opposition to get nervous on this Act, 
because I’ve exempted them from this Act. This is The Noxious 
Weeds Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, 1998. I’ll be moving this 
Act at the end of my remarks. 
 



May 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

Mr. Speaker, the provincial government continues to respond to 
the need of . . . and a just legislation to address changing 
circumstances in the agriculture and food industry. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re constantly identifying and adjusting legislation to ensure 
that it remains consistent with the current environment and 
intent, and that legislation continues to meet the needs of the 
industry. 
 
This legislation is another example of that commitment to 
improve and simplify provincial regulatory processes. We work 
closely with those affected to ensure legislation meets the 
changing needs. This amendment maintains the integrity of the 
legislation and it will enable the government to address any 
future changes to the schedule of noxious weeds in a timely 
manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason for this legislation is that the existing 
Act includes the schedule of plants or the seeds of any plants 
that have been declared to be a noxious weed. There are other 
occasions when the province has been asked to consider 
additions or deletions from the list. 
 
Deletions to the scheduled noxious weeds can only be made by 
amendments to the Act. This makes it hard to quickly respond 
to change. For example, the federal government has moved to 
license production of industrial hemp in Canada. Industrial 
hemp is currently listed in the schedule of noxious weeds. The 
transfer of the schedule to regulation will enable changes to be 
made in a timely manner without introduction of legislative 
amendments. 
 
The amendment does not change the intent of the Act. It 
ensures the needs of the industry are being well addressed and it 
enhances the government’s ability to address future changes in 
a timely manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will enable producers to take 
advantage of economic opportunities for diversification through 
the production of industrial hemp. This government is 
committed to provide the necessary regulation changes which 
would allow producers with the opportunities to diversify their 
operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask members to support this Act, and therefore I 
move second reading of Bill No. 37, The Noxious Weeds 
Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I invite all hon. members to put their 
comments on the record when debate begins, but it’s not yet 
beginning. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 
having listened to the minister and to some of the comments 
that have been flowing back and forth across the floor, it would 
almost appear that this is one piece of legislation that could 
possibly be moved right into adjourned debates and committee 
and be passed this afternoon. But I’m not exactly sure if we’ve 
reached that stage yet, Mr. Minister, or Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as I understand this piece of legislation, it’s 
basically dealing with changes that have already taken place or 
are coming forward at the federal level. And the minister talks 
about the diversifying of the agricultural economy in this 
province and certainly crop production in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I guess as many people would look at this piece of legislation 
and the fact that we’d be adding hemp to a species of crop that 
could be grown in the province, certainly for individuals who 
may have been looking at that in the past, even contemplating 
it, this legislation may just remove the fact that they would be 
growing it in the corn patch and bring it out in the open as a 
product that can be a benefit to the agricultural commodity and 
producers in the future. 
 
Certainly it’s also a product that I’m sure the department and all 
of the concerned officials will be taking special note of, the fact 
that it’s close proximity to the marijuana plant, Mr. Speaker. 
And I would . . . I think as we’re discussing the legislation, 
we’ll certainly want to make sure there are provisions to 
certainly address any concerns that there might be an expansion 
of the growth of that product in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister talked about . . . and I believe the Bill removes the 
list of noxious weeds from the Act and puts it in regulations. 
Now whether or not this is a positive move will be something 
that will need to be addressed a lot more carefully, to determine 
whether it is appropriate to move it out of legislation into 
regulations. 
 
As you’re aware, Mr. Speaker, in regulations changes can be 
made fairly quickly, and I believe that’s what the minister 
talked about. And that’s something that we need to look at; 
make sure that indeed if there are changes to be made, that they 
are positive changes. And in those situations it might be 
appropriate to be in regulations versus legislation. 
 
I see as well the legislation does provide municipalities with the 
authority to appoint inspectors and to inspect properties for 
noxious weeds, and to require destruction of those weeds. There 
again this is I think . . . and I’m not exactly sure, we do have 
some weeds that are appearing in the province that are certainly 
becoming . . . expanding across the province. Whether or not 
that’s there to address that concern to try and . . . or even future 
weeds that we might have to deal with. 
 
But it would appear, Mr. Speaker, that this piece of legislation 
deals with a number of issues. And while it attempts to certainly 
create the avenue for hemp seed to be available in the province 
for producers to get into that production, there are other parts of 
the . . . pieces of the Bill that I think would be appropriate to 
review a little more in depth before we actually move into 
committee and address some serious questions. 
 
Therefore at this time I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

Bill No. 38 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 38 — The 
Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill makes 
some routine changes to The Highway Traffic Act and our 
caucus has no significant objections to this Bill. The Bill makes 
three changes that are really just a recognition of reality. 
 
First it allows drivers to cross a solid line into a left-hand 
turning lane. This is an important clarification because I’m sure 
the situation has confused many drivers in the past. I know that 
if you drive up to any of the auto dealers on the north Broad 
Street here in the city, they all have left-hand turn lanes but the 
lines are all solid leading into the lane. If you follow the strict 
letter of the law as it stands, the left-hand turn lane is useless 
because there is no place that you can legally enter that lane. 
 
Likewise the Bill also clarifies that drivers are allowed to cross 
a red light where there is a green left-turn arrow provided. Now 
this part of the Bill we do object to. Our caucus stand opposed 
to any measures that would make it easier for the people of 
Saskatchewan to turn left. Obviously this is a . . . this is an 
obvious part of most people’s driving habits if not their political 
habits. 
 
The Bill has removed the requirement that the Highway Traffic 
Board approve any passengers transported in a public service 
vehicle such as delivery trucks. This previous requirement was 
an example of unnecessary bureaucracy, and again I’m sure that 
the majority of drivers of these vehicles were unaware that they 
had to seek permission. 
 
I guess if there is any concern to bring up about these changes, 
is why it took so long to put them into place. And you have to 
wonder how many people received tickets from over-zealous 
traffic cops for these meaningless infractions. 
 
I think we as legislators have to work harder to eliminate this 
kind of red tape that is out of step with how drivers and other 
citizens actually operate in their day-to-day lives. It also serves 
as a caution when we are drafting future legislation and 
regulations, that we have to avoid getting ourselves into the trap 
of passing too many laws that are unrealistic and that ultimately 
will never be enforced. 
 
There is one final new clause to the Bill which allows the 
owners of vehicles to appeal the impoundment of a vehicle that 
has been driven by a disqualified driver. This is a simple issue 
of fairness, especially in situations where the driver was not the 
owner of the vehicle. It also speaks to the whole issue of the 
right of property and puts a further and much-needed restriction 
on the Crown’s powers of confiscation. 
 
We will want to look at some of the individual clauses in detail 
in committee but at this time we have no objections to passing 
the Bill on further. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 39 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 39 — The 
Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like Bill 38, which 
we are also looking at today, this is another routine Bill related 
to traffic safety. Our caucus has no major objections to this Bill. 
 
Primarily what this Bill does is allow the province to enter into 
agreements on withholding drivers’ licences with the federal 
government or with the governments of any other country. 
Previously the legislation only allowed for such agreements 
with other provinces. 
 
Clearly, we all want to see our highways as safe as they can 
possibly be. We can’t achieve that kind of safety if we have 
proven irresponsible drivers cruising up and down our roads at 
any time. This is the situation that we have right now. If 
someone is charged with criminal driving offence in the United 
States, they can still come back to Saskatchewan and drive 
around scot-free. 
 
I’m sure all members of this Assembly and all members of the 
public will agree that we don’t want to be driving along 
wondering if the car coming at us is being driven by someone 
who kills people in drunk driving accidents, either in the United 
States or in another jurisdiction. 
 
I think this Bill also recognizes the legislative changes that are 
going on in many countries and in many areas of law as we 
grow more and more towards global mentality in this world. 
People have finally started to realize that we can’t draw neat 
little lines around international jurisdiction. This applies no 
matter whether you’re talking about big issues like trade and the 
environment or small issues like highway safety. 
 
This Bill also makes other changes to improve highway safety. 
It adds psychologists and addictions counsellors to the list of 
health professionals from whom a driver’s licence applicant 
may be required to submit a report. It goes without saying that a 
person’s mental stability or their propensity to abuse drugs will 
affect their driving. It is entirely proper that people with these 
problems are required to submit reports to demonstrate that they 
are suitable to drive. 
 
Again on the whole, our caucus supports the Bill that will help 
improve driving safety here in Saskatchewan and throughout 
North America. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Election Amendment Act, 1998 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Johnson): — I would ask the minister 
to introduce his officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 



May 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

Darcy McGovern of the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Welcome, Mr. Minister, and to your official as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have a number of questions regarding Bill No. 
20 as I indicated to you in our last time that the Bill was in 
adjourned debates. And I guess I want to begin by indicating to 
the House and to yourself, as I did last time, is that the proposed 
Bill, Bill No. 20, the conditions that you’ve outlined in the Act, 
in the amendment Act, are probably supported by us on the 
whole. 
 
It’s not so matter what’s in this Bill, it’s a matter I think of what 
has been left out of the Bill. And that’s where we’re having 
some concerns. There are specific questions of understanding 
that we want to have you clarify today regarding some of those 
sections that are in the Bill. 
 
And I want to begin by asking whether or not you would 
identify the changes that you’ve proposed in the way the Chief 
Electoral Officer will be selected and the operations that will be 
done with the Chief Electoral Officer as well as the assistant. 
On the whole, if we have those two people selected as officers 
of the legislature, do you see any changes in the operation of the 
chief electoral office as a whole with those kind of changes? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, I do not. 
And the reason why I do not is that the office of the Chief 
Electoral Officer has operated with full independence from the 
workings of executive government for decades through 
successive governments. 
 
The position has operated, as best I’m able to understand it, as 
best I’m able to inform myself on it, as an independent officer 
anyway. And that no government has, for as long as anybody 
can remember, dared to interfere with the way in which the 
Chief Electoral Officer has conducted the business of the office. 
So I don’t look for any changes in the way in which the office 
operates. 
 
Now I am wanting to place upon the record the process for 
selecting the Chief Electoral Officer. And I interpreted part of 
your question in that direction. You might indicate by a nod 
whether this would be an appropriate time for me to discuss the 
process. Well perhaps we can get to that a little later. Yes. 
Okay. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, we’ll have 
some specific questions regarding process, and I appreciate the 
fact that you’re going to be bringing us up to speed in terms of 
sharing that with us. 
 
One of the other concerns I think that we have as a opposition 
party, and of course on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, is 
that the changes that are being outlined for both the chief officer 
and the assistant, do you feel that this will affect the costs of 
operating the office on the whole? 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I don’t think so, Mr. Chair. The budget 
of the office has until now been included in the Premier’s 
estimate for Executive Council. It will, after we pass this Bill, 
be set by the Board of Internal Economy. 
 
And I know what a difficult forum that is on financial matters. 
I’m sure that their attention to the budget will be every bit as 
intensive and as restrictive as the Treasury Board process that is 
now used in order to set that budget. So I don’t anticipate that 
there would be any cost. 
 
Now having said that, today as we debate this matter, the office 
consists of an Acting Chief Electoral Officer and a secretary. 
Under the scheme of this Act, there will be a Chief Electoral 
Officer, an assistant, and a secretary. 
 
So a year from now there will be three people. Well there’ll be 
more than three because a year from now we’ll be into a 
pre-election period I would think, based on the rumours that one 
hears. But in a normal year it may be that there’ll be three 
people there instead of two. 
 
But I, having said that, I don’t anticipate that this office will 
become more costly as a result of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, is it accurate then to say that 
there was no Assistant Chief Electoral Officer before? And if 
that is correct, then how were the duties carried out? And could 
you identify then, if you see a change in terms of the possibility 
of number of employees, will their duties change and their 
powers change relative to what was prior to the implementation 
of this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think we should properly look at the 
present situation that I’ve just described, as we’re debating this 
today, as being unusual. It is unusual because the Chief 
Electoral Officer, Myron Kuziak, resigned and the assistant 
chief electoral officer became the Acting Chief Electoral 
Officer. And so the office is temporarily understaffed. 
 
There is nothing in the present Bill that will change the duties; 
so I don’t expect that there will be any increase in the amount of 
work to be done in the office. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I realize now that 
we are understaffed if the acting officer has been appointed for 
awhile. 
 
Could you tell me, in relationship to the other provinces, how 
many provinces have the Chief Electoral Officer as an officer of 
the legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that we have 
checked out all of the provinces west of Quebec, including 
Ontario and the four western provinces, and we are the last to 
do what we are trying to do here today — to make the Chief 
Electoral Officer an independent officer of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Based on those 
statistics . . . and as you’ve indicated, we don’t know exactly 
whether the Maritime provinces are on board. I’m assuming 
that they are. I think the very appearance that the Chief 
Electoral Officer is a member of the Premier’s staff has 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

probably caused some concern out there. And I know you’ve 
indicated that, as you believe, for decades the Chief Electoral 
Officer has operated without interference. 
 
Your government has been in power now since 1991. That’s 
well into seven years now. This type of change, has it been 
considered before, and why did it take so long to make what I 
think is a necessary change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well I don’t know if I can answer the 
member’s question with precision. I know that the subject was 
raised during the debate on the amendments to The Elections 
Act in the last session, and so far as I’m concerned the subject 
took on importance during that debate. And I asked myself the 
same question as the member has just now asked — how come 
we’re not already doing this? And the Premier of course, 
reacted almost immediately when the matter was put to him and 
said yes, we’ll do this. And so here we are. 
 
And I know that’s not an explanation or a full answer to the 
member’s question, but I’m afraid it’s the best that I can do. I 
do not recall ever having had the matter discussed and said no, 
we’re not going to do that here. I think it’s just an idea that 
hadn’t surfaced until the debate last year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’m glad that 
that debate took place. While Saskatchewan, as you’re 
indicating, is last in this, in this venture, I would hope that we 
would move ahead and try to be not necessarily first, but at least 
move up in terms of changes that are necessary. 
 
And as I indicated, I think it’s not a matter of whether or not the 
office has been in some way affected by cabinet and by Premier 
and by council — it’s the perception. And I think that’s what 
has bothered people in the past, that the perception is that the 
government controls the Chief Electoral Officer. And I’m glad 
to see that we’re moving out of that type of perception. 
 
As you’ve indicated, the acting . . . the assistant is now the 
Acting Chief Electoral Officer. We expect, as you have 
indicated, there are rumours that we’re probably a year or so 
away from an election. When do you see, based on the passing 
of this Act, when do you see a permanent Chief Electoral 
Officer being put in place to conduct the affairs of the office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I and the government want 
very badly for a Chief Electoral Officer to be named during this 
sitting of the legislature. That we would bring a resolution to 
the House in a way contemplated in the Act, and have the 
matter settled by the end of this session. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I guess I’d ask you then what 
would be a contingency plan if for whatever reason that 
resolution is unable to be brought to this session. And I know 
you’re going to be talking very quickly about . . . very soon 
you’ll be discussing the plan that you have in place for actually 
conducting the process of putting forth a name by resolution to 
this Assembly. 
 
What would happen, I guess is the question, if we do not have 
that resolution passed. Will the Acting Chief Electoral Officer 
now continue to operate for the remainder of this year and make 
the plans for the next election? 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — No, Mr. Chair, that’s not our plan. If 
this session were to wind up quickly before the process 
produces a name, we would then rely upon the section of the 
Act that we’re now passing to take the matter to the Board of 
Internal Economy and have the Board of Internal Economy 
appoint an Acting Chief Electoral Officer who would hold 
office until the person or a person is appointed pursuant to the 
Bill. 
 
I would refer the member to the proposed section 4.2(3). So if 
we don’t get it done in this session we would go to that 
subsection and that provides that where the office of the Chief 
Electoral Officer is vacant, the Board of Internal Economy shall 
appoint an Acting Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Member, we want to do this right; so 
we’re hoping and working towards the eventuality of having a 
resolution passed formally on the floor of this legislature in this 
session. Somebody has to be in this position though and start to 
work soon, because as you’ve said, according to rumour we 
have a little more than a year before the next election and that’s 
more than enough time to organize for one. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I think you’re very, very accurate there, Mr. 
Minister, and we would believe that preparations probably are 
under way already by the office. Is the current acting officer 
making plans already for the next election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I don’t know. I would assume though 
that that would be the case, as you apparently assume that’s the 
case, that steps are being taken, but I don’t know that. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — And again if the session ends without the 
resolution coming to this Assembly, and you have to rely on the 
clause in section 4.2 as Board of Internal Economy, I’m sure 
that’s going to take awhile. We do know that there will be a 
by-election in Saskatoon Eastview based on the resignation. 
And that procedure I think, is somewhere through the end of 
October probably is the limitation of time. Is the current Chief 
Electoral Officer preparing for that by-election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — It’s our understanding that the office is 
aware that there will be a by-election in Eastview and under the 
legislation, under the legislation in effect, that has to take place 
within six months of Bob Pringle’s resignation, which takes us 
to the end of September or October; so they’ll know that there 
has to be a by-election by that time so they must be working on 
it now. I don’t know that for sure because I’ve never spoken to 
the people over in that office but I’m sure that it is under way. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I was just wondering, I was just 
wondering if you could enlighten everyone and indicate to us 
the date of the by-election and the date of the next provincial 
election. But I know you can’t do that. Mr. Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Come on now, he wants to answer. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — We’ll give you the opportunity to answer that 
one. 
 
The Act itself doesn’t identify the process by which the 
committee that you’re talking about that might be established, 
will actually undergo its search and I guess that’s the kind of 



May 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

explanation that we require. What kind of public search? What 
kind of interview process will be put in place to enable a name 
to come forward to, by resolution, to this committee? And could 
you identify what you see as the time frame, based on the fact 
that we have you know, X number of days left in this particular 
session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for that 
question which I had . . . which I almost had answered at an 
earlier stage here today. We have a number of officers of this 
legislature who are appointed in a manner similar to the way, to 
the manner, prescribed for the Chief Electoral Officer in this 
Act. I think of the Ombudsman, Children’s Advocate, 
Provincial Auditor to name three. I think there are others too. 
And the process is not spelled out in any of those Acts creating 
those offices as to what the process shall be. 
 
Because it is a . . . because these are offices that are filled by 
resolution of this legislature, it is the government’s position that 
they must be done in full consultation and with the full 
participation of members of the opposition parties — the 
official opposition and the third party — in the present House, 
considering the way in which we’re constituted. 
 
(1515) 
 
So I’m now going to describe the process that we have set out 
in this situation, which is one that the member is familiar with 
because of consultations that we have had. But I think it’s 
useful to lay it on the record because this is not the last Chief 
Electoral Officer to be named in this province. They’ll be 
coming at this again and again and it’s well that succeeding 
legislatures know how we have done it in this case. So I’ll now 
proceed to describe that. 
 
We are going to establish a three-party committee consisting of 
six people: three elected members and three of the staff of the 
three parties in this legislature. So that each of the three 
caucuses will name a member of this Assembly and a staff 
person to serve on this committee. 
 
We expect that the staff people will begin work immediately, if 
they have not already done so, to talk about some of the 
logistics of this. Including a look at the job description and 
approval of the job description; consideration of the time lines 
to be observed; including how long people have to apply for the 
job, what period of time in which they may apply and then how 
quickly after that the interviews take place. 
 
This is not something that the government has any intention of 
prescribing. This is a matter that has to be worked out between 
the three parties on the committee. And that includes the job 
description itself, although the legislation I think, will make it 
clear what that description should be, but we don’t have any 
particular job description in mind. 
 
We expect to see the posting advertised in the newspapers of 
this province at least. If the committee wants to advertise 
outside the province we have no objection to that, but it should 
be a public advertising and it should contain of course, a 
description of the job and should contain some idea of what the 
pay range is and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I think they 
think they could do the job better than I if they were up here. 

They’re helping me to do it. 
 
In any event, that’s up to the committee though. I have nothing 
to offer by way of advice to them. They then would advertise it. 
There’d be an appropriate period of time in which applications 
could be received and then the committee will receive those 
applicants, and I think they will screen the applications, the 
six-member committee, and reduce the list to a short list. And 
from the short list conduct interviews and then arrive at 
consensus as to who should be the successful candidate. 
 
I would hope that that could be all accomplished within three or 
four weeks. But that would be a very short period of time in 
which people would have to apply — very short. 
 
But as I say, that’s up to the committee. And the committee 
may just decide that it’s not possible to do it within that time 
frame, in which event we’d be back under section 4.2 and the 
Board of Internal Economy would have to make the final 
appointment. But as I say, I’m hopeful that we’re able to do it 
on the floor of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Minister. While 
you’ve identified a process that I think can do the job and can 
do it properly, my fear . . . and I don’t see anything in the Bill 
that would prevent government caucus or cabinet from 
unilaterally putting forth a name and saying, committee’s taking 
too long; committee hasn’t been able to reach any consensus on 
what type of job description or what type of things are 
necessary for the officer to meet, and as a result the committee 
puts . . . or the cabinet puts forward the name of a particular 
person. 
 
Is that what could be allowed because it’s not defined within the 
Act that that is not permissible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — In my view that just ought never, ever 
to happen. 
 
I want to tell the member a story of when it actually did happen 
in this Assembly, and the year was about 1986 or 1987. I was 
then a member of the opposition along with many of my 
colleagues, and the government of the day who, the member for 
Moosomin will recall, came with a resolution appointing an 
Ombudsman. And it was done without any consultation or 
without any kind of previous contact, even tell us the name, 
leave alone participate in the process of agreeing on a name. 
And we objected to it very strenuously but unsuccessfully. We 
came away from that debate determined that if and when we 
became the government, we would not ever do that this way. 
And we have not. 
 
I must say that until this Bill began to take shape, we had not 
considered standardizing a process for the selection of any of 
these public officers. And I think that’s something we should 
look at. And not just in relation to this Bill, but generally with 
respect to the appointment of officers of this Assembly. 
 
And so I’ll undertake to the member that the government will 
give appropriate consideration to a standard process or 
procedure for the selection of officers of the Assembly, 
whatever that . . . whoever is included in that description. 
 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

I’ve given some examples today of people who have been 
appointed. Members will recall the procedure followed in the 
appointment of the present Ombudsman and the child’s 
advocate. I was involved in both those so I remember the 
process quite well, and it was a successful process. And in the 
end, everyone said good work and everyone was pleased. I 
think if I’m not mistaken, the member from Moosomin was a 
member of the committee that selected the Ombudsman. But 
that’s by the by. 
 
What I’m trying to say though is that we will undertake a 
review of an appropriate process to put in place with respect to 
the appointment of officers of the Assembly. But we’re not able 
to get that together in time to put in this Bill, nor should we 
address it independently for this office alone without also 
addressing the more general question of other officers who are 
equally important to the system as this one. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate your comments 
and as I’ve indicated to you before, I think that if we can clarify 
and ensure that it’s contained in legislation — the process, the 
committee structure, all that kind of material — I’m sure that 
you would have the support of opposition members in that, and 
I encourage you to do that. 
 
For clarification could you indicate — I know it’s not relative to 
the Chief Electoral Officer— but when were the other choices, 
when is the last time that a choice was made of an officer of the 
Assembly, either the child advocate, or the Ombudsman, or 
auditor? Is it in the last couple years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I come, Mr. Chair, without having been 
briefed on what happened there, but I recall the appointment of 
the Ombudsman. I recall myself consulting with opposition 
members. Now I’m not certain; I think that the actual selection 
was done by a committee of public servants, but they produced 
a short list and a recommendation, and I think we consulted 
about the recommendation. But we certainly didn’t have a 
process in place like we’re proposing here. This is a significant 
advance. 
 
But the point that I was trying to make was that there had been 
full consultation. I mean we had an agreement on the name 
before we brought it to the floor of the legislature; that’s my 
recollection anyway. And I was personally involved in the 
selection of the Ombudsman, in a sense that I was the minister 
responsible at the time. Is this ringing a bell with anyone? Yes. 
Good. I didn’t think I dreamed it; I thought it was real. 
 
And there is a great deal to be said for a standardized process. 
But I’d never thought of a standardized process till the member 
mentioned it in connection with this piece of legislation that 
we’re now considering. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And the point that I 
was making — and I didn’t want to put you on the spot and I 
know you weren’t — you know, you don’t have to have that 
type of information at your fingertips. 
 
But the process as we’ve . . . as been indicated by the Clerk is 
that the last time something like this took place was in March of 
’95. So it’s prior to the last election of June of ’95, which was 
something that I was trying to figure out, whether I had missed 

it. 
 
And I think what it clearly identifies though is that we do need a 
standardized process for all of the Assembly people. Because in 
that respect then, we’ll know what the process is whenever it 
needs to be done and we’ll be able to work on that. 
 
So I encourage you to look towards bringing about another 
amendment again that would clarify that, place it in legislation 
so that there’s no . . . be no situation where a minister or the 
Premier suddenly decides that that’s not something that’s going 
to be followed. 
 
Mr. Minister, with all general elections and the one coming up 
shortly, when are returning officers appointed at the 
constituency level? And in this case now I guess we’ll be at 58 
constituency levels. At what point prior to an election are they 
appointed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There is no prescribed time in the Act. 
And I just don’t recall when these appointments are made. So 
I’m not able to answer the member’s question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, whenever the people are 
appointed — I guess my question would be that — would you 
consider that the duties of the returning officers are a very, very 
large, intrinsic part of the entire electoral process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, at the level of the 
constituency, the returning officer is of course an important 
officer acting under the Office of the Chief Electoral Officer. 
And there are a number of duties that are described in the Act. 
Unfortunately they’re not collected in any one section. They’re 
sort of scattered through the Act, but they’re important at the 
level of the constituency. 
 
And I can’t be more specific than that because I don’t want to 
take the time to go through the Act and pick out all of the 
various duties. But of course the office is an important office. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. While 
you’ve identified that the electoral . . . the returning officers are 
very important — they do serve certain rules and duties as 
you’ve indicated are scattered throughout the Act — what 
qualifications then would you or would the government be 
looking for in people to be selected as returning officers at the 
58 constituency level. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The only qualification set out in the Act 
is that the returning officer be a voter residing in Saskatchewan 
in the constituency for which he or she is appointed. 
 
But on a practical basis we look for people who are . . . who can 
do the job, who can administer the program; so that informally 
the bar is set at a pretty respectable height, because the last 
thing any of us need is an election that is run at the constituency 
level by someone who is incompetent. So we take some care in 
appointing people of competence for the job. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I think you indicated 
the words that the returning officers are really acting under the 



May 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

Office of the Chief Electoral Officer and now you’ve indicated 
that you’d be looking at of course, a certain criteria level for 
people to be able to meet. And I think that what we’re seeing 
though is that it’s very, very important that the people who are 
appointed to the position of returning officers appear to be 
completely non-partisan. 
 
And I’m wondering if leaving them in the current situation, as 
you have, and that’s as I’ve indicated before — the Act has not 
dealt with the returning officers in terms of changing those 
particular appointments — will this not again leave the 
perception that we have partisan appointments of returning 
officers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, the member’s question is 
difficult to answer in a way that does justice to the question. 
 
I want to begin by saying that the present system, all of it, 
works really well in this province. We’ve had some trouble with 
the enumeration because we have a very short election period. 
And historically the enumeration is not triggered until the 
election is called, which means these are matters that we 
discussed during the Bill, The Election Act amendments, that 
were passed last year. So we’ve got a very hurry-up 
enumeration. And we took steps in the last amendments to The 
Election Act to deal with that. 
 
We can do an enumeration that can start before the election is 
called, and ultimately in this country we will have a permanent 
voters’ list, and I look forward to that. I think that’s a very 
useful, valuable idea that is going to do a lot towards 
regularizing election processes in this country. 
 
We think the present system works well. I’ve been running in 
elections for a long time. I first ran as a candidate in 1982. I 
didn’t win in ’82 but then I’ve had ’86 and ’91, ’95. Sometimes 
the elections had returning officers that were appointed by the 
Tories of the day and then an election officer appointed by the 
present government. And for me the experience was pleasant 
both ways, and I wasn’t any more successful with some of my 
objections with one person than with another, but each time I 
felt I was dealt with fairly. 
 
And so it’s our perception that the present system works pretty 
well even though the appointments of the returning officers are 
made by order in council, by the government of the day. So we 
don’t have any sense that the machine is broke and needs to be 
repaired. 
 
Now we look around to the other jurisdictions in Canada and 
almost everybody is doing it the way we do it. B.C. would do it 
the way that your suggesting, where the Chief Electoral Officer 
makes the appointment. We’re reluctant to take that step 
because it’s a lot of work for the Chief Electoral Officer to 
accomplish something that is working pretty well the way it is. 
 
In other words, I think that the idea of constituency returning 
officers being appointed by the Chief Electoral Officer is more 
cosmetic than real. I think the present system is working pretty 
well. 
 
I don’t know of any abuses. I don’t know of any hint of scandal 
around the operation of any of these constituency returning 

officers. There are, for example, at the ballot place, 
representatives of all of the parties, or at least all those who are 
organized enough to have people in the polling booth at the 
time, checking the identity of everybody who comes in to 
present themselves for a vote, checking to see they haven’t 
previously voted and that sort of thing. 
 
And then when the votes are counted, there are representatives 
of all the parties in the room; so that the process is a pretty 
well-regulated process by virtue of the people who are there. 
 
In addition, the district or at least the constituency returning 
officers are using material, forms, and following rules and 
procedures laid down by the Chief Electoral Officer that are in 
effect right across the province for everybody. They’re not 
making very many independent decisions themselves. 
 
So just to sort of bring my answer to some kind of a close here, 
we recognize that the member’s point is an interesting point and 
it has some appeal, but we have concluded that the present 
system is working pretty well and we don’t feel it necessary to 
change it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. I 
guess what I’d rely now on is I’d rely on your experience. And 
you’ve mentioned a couple of things in terms of how the current 
procedure works for the appointment of returning officers. You 
mentioned orders in council, you’ve mentioned the government 
of the day. Could you add to that the actual process — for 
myself, not being aware of that — how do returning officers 
actually get appointed from the early stages of selection? 
 
You’ve mentioned that the only criteria is that a returning 
officer must reside in the constituency. Do they have to meet 
any other qualifications? Is there a posting, an advertisement 
that says that the government of the day is looking for returning 
officers and would ask for submissions? How do the names 
come forward, not only in constituencies I guess where 
government members are currently represented, but in all 58 
constituencies? What is the procedure that will be followed for 
the appointment of returning officers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I’ll give to the member my own 
experience when we formed government. Someone asked me 
for the name of someone who could be a returning officer in my 
constituency. I canvassed practically everybody I knew and 
nobody wants the job. It pays a grand total of $660 a year. And 
when there is an election, I think it’s $4,340 for the year. And 
it’s a lot of work. If there’s anybody in this country that earns 
$4,340, it’s the returning officer in a constituency. It’s a lot of 
work for a very small amount of money. I had a very difficult 
time finding somebody. That’s the point I’m coming to. And I 
finally found someone and she’s still a returning officer there. 
She just carries on, and I thank her for that. It’s a lot of work for 
a very little compensation and there’s no glory in it. 
 
And I’m sure that all of the members had the same kind of 
experience trying to dragoon somebody into taking this 
particular position. It is no plum. And I think people take it 
because they’re interested and because they want to participate 
in the process. They certainly don’t do it for the money. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — With that explanation, Mr. Minister, I’m 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

wondering if as a result of the ’95 election where your 
government, the current government, was also the government 
of the day prior to the election, whether you’ve had any 
revelations whether or not a returning officer that was selected 
for the ’95 election in any of the 58 constituents was indeed 
showing NDP partisanship and conducted themselves in that 
fashion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I’m not aware of any 
situations where there has been any allegation of partisan 
behaviour. And it certainly hasn’t been in my . . . there hasn’t 
been any in my experience. The officers are sworn. They have 
an oath that they take before the Chief Electoral Officer, and 
there’s all kinds of checks and balances. And if anybody is not 
satisfied, I think they phone Regina and try and get the 
intervention of the Chief Electoral Officer if it’s not being done 
right. 
 
But as I said earlier, we have no sense that the system is not 
working, that it’s broke, that it needs reform at the level of the 
constituency. So we’re not of a mind to fix it. We’re reluctant to 
interfere with it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Further to that, Mr. Minister, as a result of the 
’95 election, are you aware of any instances where the returning 
officer was just not able to handle the tasks given to them? 
They were unqualified or unprepared or just unable to do the 
job adequately and that these have been reported to the Chief 
Electoral Officer, saying that there are problems in one example 
or ten examples? Do you have any records of those kinds of 
things occurring in the ’95 election. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I have to say to the member, Mr. Chair, 
that I’m not aware of any such situations. They may exist. I’d 
be surprised if . . . No doubt there’s an uneven level of 
performance, but none have come to my attention. And I would 
think they would have, but I don’t know. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, to the minister, you’ve indicated of course that the 
returning officers as they currently are appointed, is something 
that you’re going to continue to keep in force. And while we 
disagree with you . . . and we want to suggest that you might 
want to change that down the line. 
 
I guess the reason that I’d like you to answer this question as to 
why you think it’s appropriate to keep the current system in 
place is . . . and I’ll use the auditor as the example. The auditor 
is a member appointed by the Assembly. The staff that that 
member requires to do the job adequately, of auditing all the 
necessary corporations, committees, etc., whatever the 
objectives are, the auditor is the one who will choose the 
appropriate accountants and employ the people, based, I think, 
on their skills, their experience, their expertise. 
 
Here we have a system where the Chief Electoral Officer, who 
is responsible for the carrying on of an election in the province, 
will now have 58 returning officers not selected through the 
same process. I think that that opens the door for a system that 
will fail in some instances; and as you’ve indicated, on the 
whole it probably works fine. 
 
(1545) 

But I think what we need to do is to establish a system whereby 
we totally remove the perception of the public that government 
has control over the electoral process. Because the election 
process that we have in this country and in this province is 
something that we have to respect and that we have to ensure is 
protected. 
 
And I’m wondering if that wouldn’t lead you to believe that the 
process of getting the returning officers selected by the Chief 
Electoral Officer is very similar to the auditor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well my thinking on it is conditioned 
by my own experience I guess, and by the experience of many 
of my colleagues with whom I’ve discussed this. 
 
If someone had placed an advertisement in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix inviting voters in the Fairview constituency to 
apply for this position of returning officer for a salary of $660 a 
year, with a special consideration for election years in which 
it’s $4,340, and then describing what the qualifications are, I 
don’t know who in my constituency would have applied. I had a 
difficult time going practically door to door, by telephone, 
trying to persuade someone to take this job. 
 
And if it had been sort of a public selection process by 
advertising and by interviews, I cannot imagine that we would 
have found an individual with the quality, with the 
qualifications, with the ability, the intelligence of the returning 
officer that is acting in my riding. 
 
Now I may be wrong, but based on my experience it just 
wouldn’t have worked. We would have no doubt received 
applications, but I would have been very surprised if the Chief 
Electoral Officer would produce a better returning officer than 
my own efforts. 
 
Now in my case, as in your case, as in the case of all of us, we 
know our constituencies. We know the people who live there. 
We have an estimation of their ability and it is in our interest to 
have somebody there who can run an election. 
 
Now they may be of the same political party, and I have an idea 
that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I don’t want to make a 
joke of this at all. I mean these are the people that we know the 
best. But I would have no hesitation at all in appointing in my 
constituency a returning officer of another political stripe as 
long as it is a person of integrity. 
 
But even there, in the Act as it is set up, the opportunities for 
cheating or for making partisan decisions is very, very limited. 
And only I think in the case of a tie vote or something like that 
does it become a matter of partisanship, but we don’t have 
many of those. We didn’t have any in the last election and none 
at all in the elections that I have personally run in. 
 
So I know that the present system is subject to the unease that 
the member has expressed, but I am far from being convinced 
that the process which the member suggests would produce 
better returning officers or better-run elections. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I asked a question a few 
minutes ago and I don’t recall the answer. When you’ve 
indicated the current process is in place for selecting a returning 



May 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

officer and you’ve identified the process that you used as a 
member and you are satisfied that you have a very competent 
individual — if we’re looking ahead to the next election 
whenever that may be — I asked you the question as to would 
you explain how the returning officers will be selected in all 58 
constituencies? You’ve indicated how the process is going to 
occur in your constituency where you are a government 
member. Could you explain the 17 other opposition 
constituencies as to how that process will work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I don’t know how we did it. The staff 
work is done by whoever. The Executive Council staff I would 
think would be primarily the ones involved in finding 
appropriate candidates in each constituency. Where there’s a 
government MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), the 
MLA is involved. I know I certainly was. 
 
In the opposition seats, I dare say they contacted people that 
they knew in the constituency and asked for them to canvass 
around and see if they could find anybody who would serve. 
These are not big, heavy, political decisions because they’re not 
plums of any sort; it’s a dirty job. You know, it’s a hard job and 
it’s not a pleasant job; it’s not a fun job. Although obviously 
there are people who enjoy doing it. 
 
And when we appoint the returning officer then they serve until 
they resign or until they are replaced for whatever reason. In my 
experience I don’t recall ever having replaced a returning 
officer. I don’t recall an order in council going by, replacing a 
returning officer. But obviously if they resigned or if they died 
or something like that, we would have a replacement. So they 
just continue on. But the process I think is quite informal and 
quite sort of variable between constituencies. 
 
In the case of your constituency, that was a government seat, so 
no doubt the person appointed in your constituency was 
appointed in consultation with your predecessor, and probably 
continues to be the returning officer in that riding, although no 
one on this side of the House would know who that is. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you again, Mr. Minister. And further 
to that, because there are 17 opposition members currently, will 
that process be in place for next year, or whenever the election 
will be held? Will there be any consultation with the current 
MLAs who represent those constituencies? Or will it be as 
you’ve indicated, staff of cabinet that will be out in all 58 
constituencies working with the government MLAs in their 
appropriate constituencies, and then determining what the 
returning officer — whether it’s the current one that will remain 
in that position or whether there will be any changes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I’m not in the position to 
commit on that. I’ll have to do some consulting within my own 
ranks before I could commit to such a thing. In the meantime 
probably we’re going to go into the next election with the same 
set of returning officers we had last time unless someone has 
left. 
 
I can though, undertake to the member that I will discuss the 
matter with my colleagues and discuss the matter further with 
him. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You indicated that 

returning officers receive pay while there is no election. And 
I’m wondering what is expected of a returning officer in a 
non-election year. What kinds of things will they do? And I 
know you indicated that it was a paltry 600-and-some dollars, 
but I’d like to know what do they actually do during the year 
that there is no election, excluding by-elections and elections. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think we would all agree that the 
duties are not onerous during that time, but they’re still 
returning officers. They continue to maintain the office, and 
they’re usually in their home; every one I think is in their home. 
So they continue to keep those offices there and keep the 
records of whatever it is that flows through from the Chief 
Electoral Officer. 
 
They also have to be planning ahead because they have to think 
about the question of DROs (deputy returning officer), and poll 
clerks, and enumerators when an election is coming up. So 
they’ve got to kind of keep track of their lists and be prepared 
or else they’ll be caught short with disastrous consequences 
when an election does come along. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
mentioned enumerators. And I think you have probably 
received — and I know we’ve had a little bit of discussion 
about this — you probably received the largest number of 
concerns around enumeration that was done in the last election, 
and the weaknesses of some enumerators and the process that 
they’ve put in place all around the province. 
 
The changes that have been made federally with the 
enumeration process, how will this affect the next election? 
And will we be undertaking an enumeration process or is this an 
ongoing thing, as I think you have indicated to this House 
before, that that process is going to be something that will be 
right up to date, and we may not even have to have that type of 
process in place. 
 
Could you tell us how the enumeration will take place for the 
next election? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think that . . . my guess is the next 
election will be run with an enumeration done at the time. The 
member will recall that we talked a lot about enumeration 
during last year’s debate. And the amendments contemplated 
consultations between the leaders. And following such 
consultation the Lieutenant Governor in Council could direct 
that an official voters’ list be prepared by an enumeration 
conducted other than during an election. 
 
Now no such consultations have taken place because we’re just 
. . . we haven’t addressed the question yet. So I want to rewind 
my tape a bit and say those consultations may well take place. I 
don’t know what the Premier has planned, if anything, with 
respect to that. 
 
What I know is that the way we’ve been enumerating our 
electors has not worked. It seems to me it gets worse every 
election. And we have to improve it. Now we’ve been working 
with the federal government on their plans, and we have been 
negotiating with them about access to certain kinds of data that 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

we maintain. I don’t know the details of that. But we certainly 
have a lot of data here about who lives in Saskatchewan and 
where they live. And my understanding is that there were 
negotiations going on between Mr. Kuziak and the federal 
government in relation to that. 
 
And speaking for myself and for many of my colleagues, we 
want to plug into that federal system as soon as we can because 
we want the enumeration in this province to be much, much 
better. 
 
Whether we will in fact have a pre-election enumeration for the 
1999 election I do not know. I hope so. I hope so, but I can’t 
stand here and say for sure that it will happen. But the 
consultation between leaders, which is contemplated by section 
30, ought to take place. 
 
And I suggest that the two leaders who are in the House now 
take steps to ensure that that happens so that we will know just 
what the situation is with respect to an enumeration. Because on 
that respect I’m on your side on that. I think our enumeration 
processes have been deficient and the voters’ list has been 
inadequate, and we ought to do whatever we can to remedy that. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And yes, I agree 
with you very, very much that that process has to be improved 
and I thought we were on the road to that in terms of improving 
it. And after the last federal election I’m saddened to see that 
that has ground to a halt and that we haven’t moved forward. 
 
Because it was my understanding that we were going to have 
very current, very up-to-date voters’ lists for all constituencies 
because of the federal election and because of the new 
monitoring that would take place both provincially and 
federally, and that was going to be in place for the next election. 
And I hope that we can still arrive at that situation because then 
if we can improve the voters’ lists and ensure that there’s more 
accuracy, the better off everyone will be. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I could refer to a couple of sections within the 
Bill, and I would ask you to clarify sections 4(1) and 4(2). 
They’re both talking about suspension and removal from office. 
One is dealing with the suspension and removal while the 
session is ongoing, and the other one when legislature is not in 
session. In the second reference, you have indicated sort of the 
reasons why an officer may be removed: incapacity to act, 
neglect of duty, or misconduct. 
 
In section 4(1) there is no reference at all to reasons. Are you 
suggesting that the reasons of 4(2) will be the reasons that will 
be followed in 4(1)? Like how would the Assembly or why 
would the Assembly suspend someone in 4(1) when there’s 
nothing . . . there’s no clarity there as to why that would 
actually occur. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 
structure here is I think exactly the same as with other officers 
of the Assembly, the information officer for example. This 
legislature has not sought to bind itself in respect of its future 
decisions. If you follow me, this is the sovereign body here. 
This is the Government of Saskatchewan; this is the Assembly; 
this is the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan — let me put 
it that way. This is the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

and we are sovereign within our area of jurisdiction and we are 
presumed in this Assembly to act in the public interest. 
 
And so we don’t bind ourselves with criteria such as we have 
prescribed for the Board of Internal Economy, which is not the 
Legislative Assembly, but which is a committee of this 
Assembly. We lay down criteria for them but we in this House 
are free to act as a sovereign power and we don’t lay down 
conditions for the way in which we will act in making our 
decisions in the future. 
 
It is presumed that we will act reasonably and in the public 
interest. And I think for practical purposes probably that is the 
list, you know, that we would all have in mind when 
approaching the question of whether we should suspend an 
officer like the Chief Electoral Officer, but we don’t bind our 
hands on the question. We remain free as an Assembly to arrive 
at whatever decisions we consider to be appropriate. 
 
If we were acting, if we were acting according to specified 
criteria then perhaps we set up a situation where the courts may 
review whether or not we did what we were supposed to do or 
whether we acted properly or that sort of thing. That would not 
be appropriate. We are in this Assembly a sovereign, and we 
have the ability to act in the manner that is how many hundreds 
of years old now in the system in which we govern ourself. 
 
So this is the approach that we’ve taken, and that all Assemblies 
take, with respect to questions like this. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You open two points, Mr. Minister, and the 
couple of comments are, would not the Board of Internal 
Economy be subjected to the criteria as well and you’re saying 
that the court may challenge? If the Board of Internal Economy 
is instructed to remove an officer due to those criteria, is that 
challengeable? 
 
The second question that related to what you’ve said is, is the 
process for the other officers of the Assembly the same as 
you’re proposing here when we are in session, in that this is an 
autonomous body that will handle a suspension resolution based 
on the decision that we make here in this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
question, let me say that . . . let me answer both points, one at a 
time. 
 
It is an open legal question as to whether the courts could 
review a decision by the Board of Internal Economy that was 
beyond their jurisdiction or was otherwise improper. I’m 
advised that that precise question is in the courts now, and so I 
don’t know for certain what is the law. We won’t know until 
those cases are complete. 
 
Subsection 2 of section 4.2 contemplates that the Board of 
Internal Economy decision about suspension will be temporary 
in the sense that it cannot continue past the end of the next 
session of the legislature. And this clearly contemplates that the 
decision of the board would be reviewed or at least reviewable 
by this Assembly. 
 
So in the sense the Assembly is an appeal body from the Board 
of Internal Economy in the event that they go off on a matter 



May 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

that is not within their jurisdiction or is otherwise improper. But 
we do know that at least it opens the possibility of court 
challenge to have words like that. So, you know, I can’t answer 
the member’s questions in any detail. 
 
These provisions are I think exactly the same, or at least 
modelled upon the freedom of information legislation, that 
piece of legislation most recently passed by this House. But the 
. . . Sorry, it was the Conflict of Interest Commissioner that 
these are modelled after. And the rest are kind of a hodgepodge 
of provisions. But it seems to us that these were appropriate in 
the case of The Elections Act. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, under sections 4.5 and 4.6 you 
talk about the salary — 4.4 deals with the salary. Could you 
explain . . . and I note there that you have the Public Service 
Commission salary. There will be consultation of the Public 
Service Commission regarding salaries for the Chief Electoral 
Officer and the assistant, yet they are not employees under the 
control of the Public Service Commission. 
 
Explain how you see the salary situation working. And I think 
you indicated beforehand that we wouldn’t see salary changes. 
And I don’t know what the former Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. 
Kuziak, what his salary was, but do we see a similar type of 
salaries set up for the two employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The member has observed the salary of 
the Chief Electoral Officer will be fixed by the Board of 
Internal Economy. In the preparation of the legislation we asked 
ourselves how will they determine what is an appropriate level. 
The person in our government system here who knows the most 
about salary administration and pay levels and pay ranges is the 
Chair of the Public Service Commission, which is why we 
inserted that as the consultation process. 
 
The salary of the Chief Electoral Officer should bear some 
relationship to what else is happening in Saskatchewan in the 
public sector. And so that consultation was directed, although 
the Board of Internal Economy has the jurisdiction to set the 
salary. And Kuziak’s salary was I think related to a provincial 
court judge if I’m not mistaken. I think it was informally related 
to a provincial court judge. I’ll just check this if the member 
will . . . 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Chair, I misinformed the member. Yes, I confess. I leaped 
to my feet and said the salary was related to a provincial court 
judge and I’m told that’s not so. Paid less than a provincial 
court judge, although we don’t know how much he was being 
paid as we sit here today. This can easily be found out, but 
neither Darcy nor I know for certain how much he made. 
 
So we’re not able to say whether the new Chief Electoral 
Officer will be paid more or less. We can say by way of an 
escape hatch on this question that that’ll be up to the Board of 
Internal Economy. We have asked the Public Service 
Commission how they think this job would rate, just informally, 
just to get some idea of what we’re talking about here and how 
attractive this job may be to people who are potential 
applicants. 
 

And it is not a highly . . . it’s not likely to be a highly rated job. 
Or at least that I think is the advice that the Board of Internal 
Economy will get from the Public Service Commission. Yes, 
that this is not a high paid job relative to say deputy ministers or 
the like. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, one of the other concerns that 
we raised and that’s missing from this Bill, is all around the 
area of provincial tax credits for political parties. And I raised 
that in my comments under adjourned debates, where we realize 
that a section of The Election Amendment Act that’s been 
passed before in this legislature . . . not all of the sections have 
been proclaimed. 
 
And while that may happen to this Bill as well, we may see 
sections of this Bill that may not be proclaimed, my question to 
you is: when will the sections that have been passed by this 
legislature, when will they be proclaimed to ensure that all 
political parties in Saskatchewan are treated equally and fairly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The reason why they haven’t been 
proclaimed is directly related to the reason why they’re in the 
Act. The member will recall, or at least some members of the 
Assembly will recall, that the provisions were put into the Act 
in response to a rumour that was then current that the federal 
government was thinking about rescinding the tax credit, 
rescinding the federal tax credit scheme. And if that was the 
case, we wanted to be able to move quickly in the province to 
have our own tax credit scheme that would be applicable to 
political donations. 
 
Now that rumour that we were acting upon has not proven to be 
the case. The federal tax credit system is still in effect. And 
therefore our provisions sit there because the trigger that we had 
planned for them has never been pulled. We have not . . . We 
still have the federal tax system and that was to be the trigger. If 
it disappeared, then our provisions would be proclaimed. 
 
Now I don’t know if the member was involved in those 
discussions personally, but that was the whole basis for the 
inclusion of the provisions at the time. And so we have not, we 
have not felt pressed on that account to proclaim a section. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, could you inform the House as 
to how many other provinces follow the system that 
Saskatchewan does, in that they also do not have provincial tax 
credits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think that we’re relatively lonely on 
this. We don’t have the figures with us. That was last year’s 
debate. But our best recollection here, between Mr. McGovern 
and I, is that New Brunswick and Saskatchewan are the only 
provinces without a provincial tax credit system and just go 
with the federal system. And the other provinces have some 
kind of a double credit system which we just haven’t gone to. It 
has fiscal consequences, and I . . . that’s been standing . . . that 
was our first consideration when the idea first surfaced in the 
amendments to the Act last year. 
 
Now the creation of your new Tory Party, or however you 
would chose to describe it, does create an unique situation in 
that you have no federal counterpart to use to take advantage of 
the federal tax system. If we created a, if we created a 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

provincial tax system then the Liberals and our party would still 
be at the advantage of having both systems working for us or 
available to our contributors, in that . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, but you can take, you can split your contributions in 
such a way to make it to come out to your advantage. And 
there’s no way we can level the playing-field; although I 
understand the member’s point. 
 
Let me say this though; let me say this. We’re prepared to 
continue discussing this and debating it with you and that sort 
of thing. You have not persuaded us yet that we should do it, 
but it has nothing to do with the Bill that’s in front of us today. I 
think you’ll admit that. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well I understand that, Mr. Minister, what 
I’m indicating though is that certain sections of today’s Bill 
may not be proclaimed either because government may choose 
not to do so. So what my concern is, and I’ve indicated this to 
you before, eight provinces have moved to have provincial tax 
credits without having the loss of the federal tax credit. As 
you’ve indicated, New Brunswick and Saskatchewan are the 
only two. 
 
I don’t want to be last on this issue. Not specifically because 
this is the Saskatchewan Party, but we also have the formation 
possibly of another political party in Saskatchewan, again at a 
disadvantage. Whether or not they form or not is not for me to 
answer. The question though, Mr. Minister, is that there is an 
advantage currently for your political party and the Liberal 
Party because of the relationship to the federal tax credit. 
 
The other situation that comes into play, and you have stated 
this many times I think in this House, is that there needs to be 
accountability. There needs to be assurance to the people in 
Saskatchewan that there is accountability, that we’re willing to 
inform people, through a reporting process, that everyone who 
makes a contribution of a particular value, that that is disclosed. 
 
And we’ve seen some problems with the federal tax credits, 
those of not only in Saskatchewan, but I think everywhere. 
Eight provinces have recognized that. Now while they may be 
able to take advantage and be able to split, there still is only the 
same dollar that they can receive a credit for, whether it be 
provincial or whether it be federal. 
 
So I’d encourage you, and I know I think our political party will 
continue to pursue that with the Premier, with yourself, to 
ensure that indeed we do have a level playing-field. And I think 
it will make it a level playing-field if we have a provincial tax 
credit that all political parties can take advantage of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think the Premier would welcome 
those discussions. We are, of course, the party of fairness and 
equity. And I’m sure that the discussions can proceed in a very 
civil atmosphere and something can be worked out. 
 
In the meantime, I think that it is clear, and I think the member 
agrees with this, that what we’re debating today is a very 
significant advance in terms of the position of the Chief 
Electoral Officer, and I think we’ve consensus on all parties to 
support the Bill. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, and 

Darcy, I know that you’re very capable and competent . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order, order. It is, in the 
committee, it is quite proper for questions to be addressed to the 
minister. Officials are not to be involved in the discussion. 
Officials are here to advise the minister. 
 
Having said that, I wish to apologize to committee members 
because I now recollect an earlier mention of that official’s 
name and I see the minister recognizes who did that. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much. I was merely welcoming 
an old friend, an acquaintance. 
 
Mr. Minister, just to follow up on what the Leader of the 
Opposition was talking about, I know there is some concern 
about the tax credit system which has led to some confusion, 
some concerns that you and I have debated, Mr. Minister, and 
you’ve even accused me of having spun-out about some of 
those very concerns. I’ve come back to earth, but those 
concerns still do exist. 
 
There are in fact tax credits for political donations; so there is 
still some recognition through a different system, the tax 
system. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not for us there isn’t. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Well anybody that donates to a political party 
can submit that as, on their income tax, as having donated to a 
political party. I did that on my tax return. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You don’t know what you’re talking 
about. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Well I suspect that some of the people from the 
official opposition don’t pay federal income tax. 
 
Anyway, with respect to the services that are provided during 
the course of elections, is that from province to province? Is 
that in fact recorded in some way, shape, or form? I’ve just . . . 
for example, if there is an election held in another province that 
a provincial party is offering assistance, is there some tracking 
of that for the purpose of . . . in kind for donations or cost for 
services? Are you aware of anything that’s in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I’m not because I don’t think we’ve 
every had the experience of another section of our party 
contributing anything to our election. The reverse is true, but I 
don’t ever remember us receiving it; so I don’t think we’ve ever 
had the problem of how to donate it. And I could be wrong, but 
I’m not involved in the internal accounting of the party so I’m 
not certain. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Were there services from your party in this 
province to another province during the course of an election? 
Those types of services, whether personnel or whether any 
other kind of services. When those are offered or if they . . . 
first of all I should say have they ever, to your knowledge, been 
offered and if they have, how is that kept track of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I must confess I just don’t know the 
answer to that question. I’m just not involved in the internal 



May 7, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

processes of the party enough to know or even attempt an 
answer. My earlier answer was, just it reflects the fact that the 
New Democratic Party is so strong and so well established in 
Saskatchewan so I was sort of playing upon that image. But I 
am not able to answer the member’s question. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thanks, Mr. Minister, but if in fact there were 
such services offered to other provinces, there would need to be 
a record of that kept and reported or documented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I suppose it would depend upon the 
electoral spending laws of the province in which the service 
was supplied. You know, if we were sending people to Nova 
Scotia or something like that and if that required an accounting 
in Nova Scotia, I suppose it would take place there. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. It’s a matter of disclosure of 
donations in kind or otherwise — either coming in or going out. 
And that’s the questions that I’m raising with respect to the 
disclosure of any such type of services, either going out or 
either coming in — in province or out of province. 
 
And I take it that there would in fact need to be an accounting 
as far as The Election Act is concerned and that’s what I’m 
trying to establish —if in fact this does happen, if there is an 
accounting and a disclosure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I’m advised that our elections Act in 
section 250 contemplates the filing by the registered political 
parties with the Chief Electoral Officer of a return which 
includes the operating expenses of the political party during the 
fiscal year — no doubt that’s what the member is referring to 
— be found in 250, section 250 of The Election Act. 
 
The operating expenses, the total expenses, particulars of those 
expenses, and the total of all other expenditures — so it’s pretty 
wide, pretty wide sweeping — so if they spent money in the 
way that the member suggested, I would expect that to be 
reflected in the annual returns. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and that would include 
any expenses that may in fact be related to another . . . or an 
election in another province. Okay, I thank you; that clarifies 
that. 
 
I’m pleased to see that we’re moving towards the selection of 
an unappointed Chief Electoral Officer as you know. There 
were some concerns with respect to the processes and 
procedures that existed prior to the previous Chief Electoral 
Officer leaving, and it still leaves some questions in people’s 
minds with respect to the findings of his report and the 
subsequent non-conclusion, if you wish, as far as relating to 
proper reporting of donations — an identification of donations. 
And I’m pleased to see that there will be a process in place that 
the Chief Electoral Officer will now be an independent officer, 
and report and follow through on any reports or concerns with 
respect to violations of The Election Act. 
 
So I have no further questions, but I wonder if you might have a 
comment with respect to those concerns that you and I debated 
some time previously and some concerns that still do exist. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well I recall those exchanges with 
pleasure. I thought that was one of the most stimulating debates 
that I participated in in this House. It was testing and we were 
questioning assumptions that had been held generally for years 
and we were all having to go back and look at the words of the 
Act and see whether they meant . . . whether they said what we 
thought they said or whether it meant what we thought it meant. 
And it was a very, very stimulating period in the House and I 
think resulted in very substantial improvements to the 
legislation. 
 
And that’s what the process is all about. I thought it was a 
classic case of debate in this House resulting in stronger laws. 
And I think that the member and his colleagues can take great 
credit for the fact that you pressed those issues so hard. And I 
think we deserve credit for being responsive to the very points 
that the member was raising in trying to ensure that the laws of 
this province were strong enough that we would not have any 
questions arise in the future such as we were now facing. 
 
The member will realize that we were all proceeding in the . . . 
at least certainly speaking for my party — we thought we were 
complying precisely with the law, and you were alleging that 
we were not complying with the law. So we went back and 
looked at it and, although we still thought we were, we said, 
well let’s make the law stronger, let’s make the law say what 
you said it should say — so that we could have a law that would 
be clear to everybody and that all kinds of practices like 
bundling would be dealt with in the legislation and we would 
have a clearly transparent set of requirements for reporting. 
 
And I think we have an Act that is the very best in Canada so 
far as election reporting is concerned. I think the requirements 
are the clearest and the public disclosure is at a maximum. I 
think we’ve set the bar in this province very, very high. And 
we’re not claiming credit for it; we’re sharing that with you and 
your colleagues for the vigorous way in which you pressed your 
point of view with respect to those matters. 
 
Now I’m not trying to be patronizing in any way. I’m merely 
acknowledging what I don’t think I was prepared to 
acknowledge last year. In the heat of that debate, we were not 
giving any quarter to each other. But I think in retrospect we did 
a very fine piece of work all the way around and it resulted in a 
very strong law in which we can take considerable credit. 
 
I think that what we’re debating today also reflects credit on all 
of us, and again the ideas in this Bill are not exclusively ours. 
As I said earlier they were largely in response to suggestions 
that were coming to us from the opposition. And this again is an 
example of this democratic institution in full flower and full 
operation producing sound laws for the people of this province. 
And I think we can all take a lot of pride in that. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1998 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. As I 
indicated to the minister, and I’ve circulated a copy to the 
minister earlier on this day, I’m proposing an amendment under 
clause no. 4 and I move that clause 4 of the printed Bill be 
amended by adding the following section after section 4.6 as 
being enacted therein: 

 
“Returning officers 
 
4.7(1) Notwithstanding section 9, the Chief Electoral 
Officer may appoint a voter residing in Saskatchewan as 
the returning officer for the constituency in which the voter 
resides. 
 
(2) If an Act is passed as contemplated by section 23 of 
The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993 establishing one or 
more new constituencies, the Chief Electoral . . . 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order, order. The Hon. 
Leader of the Opposition is proposing an amendment to the 
Bill. I’m having difficulty hearing it although I thank the hon. 
member for providing the Chair with a copy of the amendment. 
 
I request all members give the Leader of the Opposition the 
opportunity to state what the amendment is and certainly the 
committee will deal with that as it chooses. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I believe I 
concluded section no. 2 or point no. (2): 
 

(3) As soon as possible after each appointment, the Chief 
Electoral Officer shall publish in the Gazette the name of 
each new returning officer being appointed. 
 
(4) The Chief Electoral Officer shall immediately notify in 
writing an individual who has been appointed a returning 
officer of his or her appointment. 
 
(5) As soon as possible after being notified of his or her 
appointment, a returning officer shall take an oath or make 
a declaration in the prescribed form and forward the oath 
or declaration to the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
(6) If a returning officer dies, is absent or is unable or 
unwilling to perform his or her responsibilities, the Chief 
Electoral Officer may cancel that returning officer’s 
appointment and appoint another voter residing in the 
constituency as the returning officer. 
 
(7) A returning officer may administer any oaths or 
declarations that are required by this Act or the regulations 
to be administered during an election. 
 
(8) If a returning officer wishes to resign or is unable to 
perform his or her responsibilities, the returning officer 
shall forward a written notice to the Chief Electoral 
Officer.” 
 

I so move. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I thank the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, the hon. member for Canora-Pelly, for not only 
making the motion but for an advanced copy of the motion. 

However I find that the amendment moved by the hon. member 
to be out of order. As the title indicates Bill No. 20 is an Act to 
amend The Election Act, 1998. The amendment moved to 
clause 4 addresses the subject of returning officers which forms 
part of section 9 of the parent Act, but it’s not part of Bill No. 
20 that’s before the committee today. 
 
I refer hon. members to Beauchesne’s 6th Edition, paragraph 
698 (8)(b) which reads as follows: 
 

An amendment may not amend sections from the original 
Act unless they are specifically being amended in a clause 
of the bill before the committee. 
 

Because the member’s amendment seeks to amend sections of 
the parent Act not being addressed in Bill No. 20, I must rule 
this amendment out of order. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 5 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:43 p.m. until 4:46 p.m. 
 
Clause 8 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 17 
 
Van Mulligen Wiens Mitchell 
Johnson Kowalsky Calvert 
Teichrob Koenker Renaud 
Sonntag Nilson Hamilton 
Jess Kasperski Murray 
Murrell Thomson  
 

Nays — 10 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
Osika Hillson McLane 
Goohsen   
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20  The Election Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:51 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1007 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1008 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1008 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1008 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1008 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1008 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1008 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1008 
  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................1009 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1009 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1009 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1009 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1016 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Fund-raiser for Multiple Sclerosis 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................1009 
 Multiple Sclerosis Support 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1009 
 Approved Homes Association Picket Line 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1009 
 The Importance of Listening 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1010 
 Humboldt Jail and Bail Fund-raiser for Canadian Cancer Society 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1010 
 Youth Employment in Saskatchewan 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1010 
 Volunteer Recognition 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1010 
 The Association of Saskatchewan Care Home Auxiliaries Meet in Manitou Beach 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1011 
 Save the Plains Advertising 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1011 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1011 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1011 
 Regional Hospital Services 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1012 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1012 
 Surgery Waiting-lists 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1013 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1013 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1014 
 Child Death Statistics 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1015 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1016 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 50 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1016 



 

 Bill No. 51 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1016 
 Bill No. 52 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1016 
 Bill No. 53 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 1998 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1016 
MOTIONS 
 Substitution of Members on Committees 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1017 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1017 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1017 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1018 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 35 — The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1018 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1018 
 Bill No. 37 — The Noxious Weeds Amendment Act, 1998 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1018 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1019 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 38 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1020 
 Bill No. 39 — The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 1998 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1020 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 20 — The Election Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1020 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1021 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1030 
 Recorded Division (Clause 8) ....................................................................................................................................................1032 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 20  The Election Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1032 
 


