





























































Hansard: April 30, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 869 
 April 30, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. Speaker will 
not be present to open this day’s sitting. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of 
residents of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from the 
community of Radville. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also 
have petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Radville and Oungre areas of the 
south of the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by the good folks from Radville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health care crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 

 

And these are signed by the good people in Oxbow and Estevan 
and Grenfell. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Radville and 
Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition as well this afternoon on behalf of 
Saskatchewan residents dealing with the issue of the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre. The petitioners come from the 
Radville area of Saskatchewan and I’m pleased to present on 
their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of the people of this 
province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition has signatures on it from the 
community of Indian Head, and I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also rise 
to present a petition today. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people that have signed the 
petition are from Mossbank. They’re from Killdeer, from 
Gravelbourg, Assiniboia, and all throughout the land, and I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
from the communities of North Portal, Rockglen, Killdeer, 
Mossbank, and Scout Lake. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
from people of the North-west: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to relocate Highway 40 to east 
of the David Laird Campground in order to alleviate the 
congestion at the entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Your petitioners come from Hafford, North Battleford, and 
Edam. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I present a 
petition on behalf of concerned citizens with respect to the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition are primarily from the city of 
Regina, particularly Regina south. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I rise today to present petitions on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan who are seeking justice for the men and women 
who have lost their spouses in work-related accidents. And I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures are from the Regina district, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to save the Plains Health Centre; to call 
an independent public inquiry into the Channel Lake issue; 
to put a moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre; and to have The Workers’ Compensation Board 
Act amended to reinstate pensions for disenfranchised 
widows and widowers. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I give notice that I shall on day no. 41 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

Given the serious problems that are anticipated with the 
arrival of the new millennium: (1) what dollars has the 
government budgeted for planning, capitalization, 
alternative methods and liabilities, to ensure safe and 
responsible transition in the year 2000; (2) what 
committees, task forces, and coordination is taking place, 
who is involved, and what delegations have been given; 
and (3) what are the reporting structures and what 
evaluative systems are in place to ensure targets are met, 
issues dealt with, that reporting is timely, and 
accountabilities are clear? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, 25 students in grade 5 and 6 from St. Pius School in 
Regina Lakeview, accompanied by their teacher, Paulette 
Belisle. I look forward to their questions and our discussion 
later after they’ve had a tour of the legislature. Let’s all give 
them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I as well would 
like to welcome the school group from St. Pius, but I would 
particularly want to welcome one smiling young face in the 
front row there. Members of the legislature and the media will 
know Ms. Kiesha Peter. Kiesha has been a frequent visitor to 
the legislature for many years when her mother, Kathy Peter, 
worked in our office. 
 
So certainly welcome to Kiesha and welcome to all of her 
classmates. I hope you enjoy your stay here this afternoon and 
please welcome the students once again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you, because I know it’s his last day 
here in the Assembly, — I just saw him walk in —Mr. Peter 
Chartrand, the head of the cafeteria. And he’ll be leaving us 
today; we’ve had a reception a couple of days ago. But I want 
all of us, I would say, to welcome him today and bid him au 
revoir, I guess. Okay, thank you. Everyone please join with me 
in welcoming Peter here today. 



April 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Health Care Cuts 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are two things 
that I know to be true: the first is this government has no 
commitment to health care and the second is this government 
has absolutely zero commitment to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan. And well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they can 
destroy both of them at one time it’s all the better. 
 
Yesterday the mayor of Wynyard began a passionate campaign 
to save health services in her community. In order to deal with 
this government’s tight purse-strings, the Living Sky Health 
District was forced to make serious cuts, the worst of which fell 
on the town of Wynyard. But instead of taking the 
government’s decisions to kill rural health care . . . the Minister 
of Health continues to pit one community against the other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government learn. In the last five 
years they’ve closed 52 rural hospitals, and in October they’ll 
be closing the Plains despite the cries from people of southern 
Saskatchewan and Regina. It is time for this government to 
admit their health care cuts have gone too far. As a matter of 
fact, the members opposite seem to have forgotten an important 
lesson they may have learned in their youth — there is honour 
in saying that you are wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge the Minister of Health to take 
responsibility for the health care in this province; open their 
eyes and see that rural Saskatchewan is dying because of the 
cuts, not the other way around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Wildlife Federation 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week the 
World Wildlife Federation released its annual endangered 
spaces progress report and Saskatchewan was given a B minus, 
the second highest grade in the ’97-98 progress report on 
wilderness preservation efforts across Canada. 
 
Our vast improvement here in Saskatchewan can largely be 
credited to one factor. That is the Premier’s announcement this 
February that the province plans to set aside 250,000 hectares of 
prairie and forest from development. 
 
Alan Appleby, WWF’s (World Wildlife Fund) endangered 
spaces coordinator for Saskatchewan, acknowledged both the 
Premier’s long-standing commitment to endangered spaces 
protection and the elevated status the Minister of Environment 
and Resource Management has placed on the issue. 
 
While we can take pride in our progress, we also need 
continued commitment to build and complete our endangered 
spaces network in Saskatchewan, and to include such areas as 
the Doré-Smoothstone area before it is too late to do so. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Current State of Health Care 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Fact or 
fiction? That’s the question the Premier has put to the Liberals 
about the current state of health care. Well let’s take a look at 
some of the facts. 
 
People from Regina filled the Plains Health Centre auditorium 
last night, joining the Liberal opposition in sending a very clear 
message that the closure of the Plains makes absolutely no 
sense. 
 
The media was reporting today that the people are walking into 
the town office in Wynyard crying because there aren’t enough 
beds for their parents. The NDP (New Democratic Party) is 
chopping another 11 acute care beds in Wynyard under the 
latest phase of its scorched earth policy called health care 
reform. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just one more fact. The people of 
Saskatchewan have reached a point where they are not going to 
put up with this government’s “we know best, we know all, 
trust us” mentality any longer. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Saskatchewan Abilities Council Ability Bowl 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On Saturday, 
April 25, an important annual event occurred in Swift Current. 
Individuals, corporations, service organizations and political 
parties — well at least one — joined together for a day of 
bowling and fund- raising. The 10th Annual Saskatchewan 
Abilities Council Ability Bowl was held at the Frontier Bowling 
Lanes in Swift Current. The lanes were provided free by the 
owner of the Frontier Lanes and 12 teams of 5 players each set 
out to have fun and raise money. And raise money they did. At 
the end of the day, the bowlers had raised $44,000 through 
pledges for the Saskatchewan Abilities Council. 
 
I would like to take a moment to quickly acknowledge the many 
sponsors of this important event. They were: CJFB TV, 
CKSW/94.1 FM, the Booster, City Sun, National-Spar Inc., and 
the Paterson foundation. Numerous prizes, as well as financial 
support, were provided for the Ability Bowl by the fine 
community-minded people who belong to these organizations. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all who 
participated and supported this year’s Ability Bowl. Special 
congratulations and thank you to Jim Mohagen, chairman of the 
Saskatchewan council in Swift Current, Irene Ens, the CEO 
(chief executive officer), and Jennifer Kisell, a staff member 
who worked so hard for the event to be a success. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farewell to Cafeteria Manager 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 
Wednesday afternoon this week, there was time set aside to 
formally recognize the work of an individual who has 
contributed much in his 18 short months at the legislature. 
Some members and staff were able to be present at that tea. 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

I would like to say thank you, on the public record, from all of 
us who work in this wonderful building, to Peter Chartrand for 
his excellent leadership and professionalism in his role as 
manager of the cafeteria. 
 
Peter, his wife Lisa, and their children, Kayla and Jessica, are 
moving back to Medicine Hat, Alberta where they will be able 
to live near family members while Lisa assumes new and 
exciting duties. With Peter’s obvious talents we know that he 
will approach whatever he chooses to do with the same 
creativity and fervour that he demonstrated from the moment 
that he arrived here. 
 
I simply say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker: thank you, Peter, for 
your great service, your friendship, your ability to bring 
together such a great team, and for making life much better for 
so many of us who have to spend a lot of time away from home. 
 
We will miss you, and wish you and your family the very best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Scholarship Program 
 

Ms. Murrell: — Thank you. I am pleased today to report that 
today Saskatchewan’s family of Crown corporations made 
another contribution to the youth of our province. Yesterday the 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation told students at 
Aden Bowman Collegiate in Saskatoon that SaskEnergy will 
offer half a million dollars to support post-secondary students in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Beginning this fall and over the next five years, SaskEnergy 
will help develop a highly skilled workforce in Saskatchewan 
by offering 20 scholarships of $5,000 each to students of 
disciplines from arts to business administration, engineering, 
computer science, environmental science, and the trades. 
 
SaskEnergy will support training of young people at all the 
province’s post-secondary learning institutions, including the 
universities at Regina and Saskatoon, SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology), SIFC 
(Saskatchewan Indian Federated College), Gabriel Dumont 
Institute, Dumont Technical Institute, and the Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technologies. 
 
This investment in education reaffirms SaskEnergy’s 
commitment to increasing the skills of the province’s future 
employees and to improving opportunities for Saskatchewan’s 
young people. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If it 
wasn’t clear to you in this House before last night that several 
of our hon. NDP colleagues from Regina and southern 
Saskatchewan would not be rejoining us after the 1999 election, 
it sure is now. 
 

I hope the message came across loud and clear — keep the 
Plains open or you will not be back. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want to vote on the future of the 
Plains and that vote will be in 1999. It is becoming increasingly 
clear you will not hold off the closure and allow that to happen. 
That is why the Saskatchewan Party is calling on the Premier to 
hold a free vote in this legislature on the closure of the Plains 
and unshackle its members so they can vote with their 
constituents. 
 
It’s high time the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone, the member from Swift 
Current, and the member from Estevan, and each and every 
member who represents the fine people of Regina, start 
protecting the people instead of protecting their Premier. 
Because let me tell you, if you don’t, there’s going to be a big 
price for you to pay. 
 
Last night, we asked each and every person in attendance to do 
two very specific things when they woke up this morning: 
number one, call the Premier at 787-9433 and demand that he 
allow a free vote in the Assembly; and number two, call their 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and tell them 
how they should vote. 
 
When we told the crowd last night to call the Premier, they 
demanded his home phone number. Out of respect, we didn’t 
give out your number, Mr. Premier, but if you want to give it 
out, it would certainly be of service. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 

Outstanding Students in Pelican Narrows 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Once again 
I rise to talk about some successful people from northern 
Saskatchewan. I want to thank Marc Caron, who is the 
secondary vice-president of the Opawikoscikan School in 
Pelican Narrows, for giving us this information. 
 
He spoke about three very positive students within his school 
system. Rita Cook is a successful example of an adult coming 
back after leaving school for many years to raise a family. This 
33-year-old mother of three graduated in 1997 with a complete 
grade 12 diploma. Rita is now currently enrolled in business 
administration program at SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian Institute 
of Technologies) and is doing very well. 
 
Karrie Dorion is currently in grade 10 at Opawikoscikan 
School. She is 14 years old, and Karrie achieved an 89 per cent 
average at this mid-term of the second semester in the classes 
she is currently taking. Her abilities do not end within the 
classroom. She is an accomplished square dancer and is a great 
example of how education can work. 
 
And finally Gloria Merasty. Gloria graduated in 1989. She 
enrolled in nursing at SIIT in North Battleford. In 1993 Gloria 
was accepted into the NORTEP (northern teacher education 
program) program in La Ronge, and October 1997 she received 
an STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) award at her 
convocation, and this award goes to the student with the highest 
average within the College of Education. This is the first time 



April 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

this award went to a student in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the Assembly to congratulate these three 
fine students for work well done in northern Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my questions this afternoon 
are for the Premier, but I will direct them to who’s ever 
available over there. Mr. Premier, Jack Messer is now saying 
that you asked him to give back the $300,000 severance 
payment that you gave him. This begs the question: why did 
you give it to him in the first place? Why did you give him 
$300,000 and then turn around and ask for it back a little while 
later? 
 
The reason is simple. This was a political decision right from 
the very beginning. You made a political decision to pay off 
Jack Messer and you made a political decision to ask for the 
money back, and that’s exactly what happened. And then you 
went about covering it up. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s time for you to start telling the truth to the 
people of Saskatchewan. It’s time for you to explain your 
involvement in the Channel Lake scandal, before the 
committee, under oath. Will you now agree to start telling the 
truth, come to the hearings, under oath, and testify before the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the member opposite who asks about why the severance was 
paid, to outline for him again, the routine was that Mr. Milt Fair 
was asked by the board of directors to deal with this issue. In 
fact when Mr. Fair on March 12 was interviewed, he was asked 
by a reporter: “Milt, did the cabinet or minister in charge tell 
you to do a severance package?” and he is . . . in his return 
comment and I quote: 
 

No, I have had no direction from the government or 
cabinet. This is a decision that I have taken with the 
agreement of my board and the counsel and my legal 
counsel. 

 
Now you can go on maligning everyone. And it’s interesting 
how you have taken the approach that Jack Messer, who was 
the most evil person in the world in the last session, is now your 
source of authority. It’s interesting how that has worked. How 
interesting what a difference 12 months makes. 
 
I say again that we all need to take our responsibility on this 
issue. As we said at the opening of the session, we wished it 
wouldn’t have happened. I say again at some point in the future, 
months or years from now, Mr. Messer too will . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, the Premier was involved in Jack 
Messer’s firing. He was involved in paying him off and he was 
involved in asking for the money back. Five of your ministers 
and two of your senior staff people were on the CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) board, at the CIC 
board meeting where Jack Messer was forced to resign. And 
you want us to believe that you, that the Premier, didn’t know 
anything about it. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Deputy Premier, just look at the headlines in a 
Saskatoon paper today. Nobody believes a single word you’re 
saying about this issue. And nobody’s going to believe you until 
you come before the committee, Mr. Premier, under oath; 
testify before the people of Saskatchewan. Will the Premier of 
this province commit to coming to that committee, testifying 
under oath before the people of Saskatchewan, so we can ask 
him questions about his role in this whole situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite — and he has the motion that was passed by the CIC 
board — he understands fully what took place. The board 
passed a motion and I quote in part: “John Wright was not 
authorized to discuss any issue of severance with Mr. Messer.” 
That’s what it says. 
 
Mr. Wright was indicating that Milt Fair, the Vice-Chair of SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) board of directors, would 
acquire the service of an outside legal adviser, such as a retired 
judge, to work out any package that would be appropriate. Mr. 
Milt Fair has said that that’s what he did with no consultation or 
pressure from anyone. That’s what happened. 
 
What you’re quoting, Mr. Messer is the authority, that he says 
something different. I know that. Yes, that’s right. And he says 
that Deloitte Touche produced a piece of trash. And he says 
Gerrand is wrong. And he says the Premier is wrong. And he 
says that this is wrong. 
 
Now it’s interesting that we have the Conservative Party and 
Jack Messer lined up against the rest of the world. When a year 
ago, when a year ago, he was the most devious, the most 
devious man in the world. I say again, I say again, that . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 

SaskPower’s Proposed Investment in Guyana 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier is 
hiding a big mess in Channel Lake and it looks like he is hiding 
even a bigger mess in Guyana. Your NDP henchmen, Mr. 
Premier, are refusing to release some important documents 
about Guyana. You won’t tell us who got paid for the Guyana 
deal. You won’t even let us ask questions about Guyana. Why? 
What are you hiding? 
 
All along you have said everything was done properly in 
Guyana. If that’s the case, why are you hiding? If everything 
was done right in the Guyana deal, why won’t you give us that 
information? Mr. Premier, what are you hiding and when are 
you going to start telling the truth? 
 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — When this question was asked by 
the member from Melfort, I indicated to the legislature that the 
member from Melfort was at the committee where Guyana was 
discussed. That’s how secret it was. We reported it every step of 
the way — the letter of intent, the plan, all of it. And the 
member opposite gets up today and says, what about that secret 
deal in Guyana — what about it? 
 
Well I say to the member opposite that we signed a letter of 
intent. We looked at the deal and decided not to invest in 
Guyana. Now if you believe that we should have made the 
investment in Guyana, have the principled position to stand up 
and say it — if that’s what you believe. We decided it wasn’t a 
good investment after looking at it. You may have a different 
opinion but I say to you truly that’s what happened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Premier, 
we found at least one thing you’re hiding about Guyana. 
Today’s Guyana Chronicle newspaper is reporting that 
Guyana’s negotiating team on the GEC (Guyana Electricity 
Corporation) deal believes it has a strong case for suing you. 
They feel the damages are at least $2 million U.S. (United 
States). That’s about 3 million Canadian taxpayer dollars, Mr. 
Premier. All because you wanted to mess around in Guyana 
with taxpayers’ money. 
 
And now when we ask legitimate questions about this mess, 
you want to cover it up. Mr. Premier, why won’t you let us ask 
questions about Guyana? Will you call off the gag order? If not, 
what else are you hiding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Again to the member opposite, it’s 
interesting that when your members were at the committee 
where Guyana was being discussed you never took the 
opportunity to move a motion to say we shouldn’t do it. Not 
once. No. Mr. Speaker, if you check the records you will find 
that not one word of opposition to the Guyana deal when they 
had a chance to do that. 
 
I say to the member opposite, if he were honest he would come 
clean and say, we went to the committee; we didn’t argue 
against Guyana but today we’ve changed our mind and now we 
don’t like it any more. You can’t have it both ways. And that’s 
why you’re over there as the rump of the Devine administration 
and you’ll stay there for a long, long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, my question today is for the Minister of Health or his 
designate or whoever. Mr. Minister, the Governments of 
Ontario and Quebec have now reconsidered their position on 
hepatitis C compensation. They are now calling for all victims 
of hepatitis C through tainted blood to be compensated. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are the Chair of the provincial Health 
ministers. Will you show some leadership, show some 
compassion, join with Ontario and Quebec and call for this 
unfair compensation package to be expanded. Will you do that? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As we’ve explained, Mr. Speaker, 
every government in Canada sat together at the table. There was 
a lot of time spent looking at this situation. There was many 
professional people involved in the deliberations. And at the 
end of the day, the particular package that was put together 
seemed fair and to account for the responsibilities of 
government. 
 
All governments agreed to it, and we agreed to it as well, as a 
government. And as far as we’re concerned, that’s the decision 
that was made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Minister, your minister knows that the package was not fair. 
Your minister is the Chair of the Health ministers. Your 
minister also is aware of the fact that other governments across 
this country have already admitted that they made a mistake. 
They are calling on you and Allan Rock to reopen the 
compensation issue and provide compensation to all victims 
who contracted this deadly disease through tainted blood. 
Madam Minister, that’s the compassionate thing to do. 
 
Will you ask your minister, the Minister of Health, to do the 
compassionate thing, the thing that’s fair, the right thing to do. 
Will you do that today, Madam Minister. Will you pick up the 
phone, call your minister and have him call Mr. Rock and tell 
him it’s time to reopen the issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I’ll 
reiterate that when you sit together at a table with all other 
provinces and come to an agreement, it’s certainly incumbent 
on all the provinces to honour the agreement that they’ve made. 
All of the provinces agreed to this package based on the best 
advice about the obligations of government for the 
circumstances that existed at the time. 
 
And certainly sufferers of hepatitis C who would not be covered 
by that package are covered by the health services that all 
people of the province are covered by. And so I just reiterate 
that that is the package that was agreed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to the Premier or the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy 
Premier, you are aware of the fact that this issue means a lot to 
many people in this country, that the package was not fair, that 
the package missed a number of individuals, that they’re 
innocent victims of hepatitis C who today are left on their own. 
And the Governments of Ontario and Quebec have recognized 
that, they have admitted their mistake, and they are now calling 
upon the federal government to sit down and reopen the issue, 
rediscuss it so that everyone in this country is treated with 
fairness. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, will you indeed do that today, that will 
you ask and instruct your Minister of Health to indeed follow 



April 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

the examples of Ontario and Quebec? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well again, I have to reiterate, the issue 
here was the liability of government for the blood system. It 
was looked at closely by a number of professional health and 
legal people, and they agreed to a package, across Canada, with 
the federal and provincial governments. All those governments 
who are now passing resolutions agreed to this package. We 
passed a resolution in this House the other day which 
reaffirmed that decision. 
 
And I again just say that people certainly will be covered by all 
the health services and drug services they require in the 
treatment of their disease. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, one fact is becoming 
crystal clear as the Liberal opposition continues to stage Save 
the Plains meetings across southern Saskatchewan — people 
don’t believe the Premier’s decision to close the Plains hospital 
makes sense in financial terms or health care terms. We heard it 
again last night in Regina. 
 
Mr. Premier, you’ve ducked all five Save the Plains meetings 
that the Liberal opposition has staged to date. What do you have 
to say to the people of Assiniboia, Indian Head, Redvers, 
Weyburn, and Regina who have packed halls to voice their 
serious concerns about your decision to close the Plains? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately this 
was the first rally I was able to attend last night; so I can’t 
compare it to the others, but it certainly struck me as a save the 
Liberals rally. 
 
There was a big Liberal banner across the back of the room. 
The hand-out says: send your money to the Liberal opposition; 
apparently it’s a Liberal fund-raiser as well. 
 
And I would have to say that this fearmongering and political 
opportunism that I witnessed last night, well you should just be 
ashamed of yourselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Liberal opposition 
simply gave the people of Regina . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Liberal opposition 
just simply gave the people of Regina last night a chance to be 
heard, and they spoke loud and clear. 
 
Unfortunately many who were in attendance submitted written 
questions and we just couldn’t get to them all before the 
meeting ended. Because you ducked the meeting last night, 

we’d like to put a few of these questions to you. 
 
Mr. Premier, you say the decision to close the Plains was made 
well before the 1995 election. Why then did some of the Regina 
New Democrats base their ’95 election campaign on saving the 
Plains? 
 
And, Mr. Premier, it takes a truly big person to admit that 
you’ve made a mistake. People will actually think more of you 
if you do what is right. Will you reverse this poorly thought-out 
decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I have to say that they’re accurate in 
one thing, and just about only one thing, and that’s that there 
was an election fought on this issue already. 
 
But what I’ll add to that is health care across Canada is in a 
difficult situation. I assume you read the paper like everyone 
else does, and regardless of political stripe, across Canada 
health care is in a difficult situation, no thanks to your 
counterparts, the federal Liberals, no thanks to the Tory Devine 
debt, and no thanks to the Liberals in this House for your 
campaign of misinformation. 
 
Now I suggest that there are things that need to be discussed in 
a changing health care system, and if you were responsible you 
would discuss them in a thoughtful and focused way and not be 
into this campaign of misinformation which then gets printed as 
fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier is telling 
the media that the Liberal caucus doesn’t have its health care 
facts right, and again we hear them saying the same this 
afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — He’s telling the media, and we’re hearing his 
government saying it here again, we’re fearmongering about the 
closure of the Plains hospital and on other health care issues. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, let’s examine some facts and you tell me 
which ones are not true — 53 rural hospitals closed; health care 
waiting-lists, 6,600, an all-time high; 968 acute care beds 
slashed; 461 long-term beds gone; 579 nurses eliminated. 
 
Mr. Premier, you say there’ll be no beds lost if the Plains 
hospital is allowed to close. Will you be honest with the people 
and tell them that’s only because you’ve already slashed 372 
beds in Regina, bringing the total bed count crashing down to a 
dangerous and . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Now the member has 
been very long and there’s several questions. And I will ask him 
now to put his question directly. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll put my question one 
more time. Mr. Premier, you’ve already slashed beds by 372 in 
Regina . . . 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I asked the member to 
put his question directly, not have another introduction to it. So 
I would ask him now to put his question directly or I will go to 
another speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, will the Premier admit 
that beds in this city are already at a dangerously low and 
unacceptable level at 675 beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no question the 
health care system is in transition. We’ve made adjustments and 
in the future there may be further adjustments, but that’s not the 
issue here today. The issue is this is a leopard that never 
changes its spots. 
 
I’m maybe a little older than the member over there, but I 
remember the atmosphere during the medicare debate. At that 
time his party wasn’t talking about how to provide services, 
they weren’t talking about how to provide more affordable 
services, they were out there spreading fear and division. And 
all I can say is that Dr. Melenchuk is back in the saddle again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Road Maintenance 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) and the city of Regina are planning to 
cost share construction work on three city intersections in the 
hope that this will cut down on the number of traffic accidents. 
At the same time, there are many, many rural roads with 
dangerous sections of potholes which look more like craters. 
The situation is getting so bad, I understand, that deer are now 
taking refuge in the potholes because they are that big. 
 
Will the minister in charge of SGI explain if the Crown is 
prepared to strike the same kind of cost-sharing agreement with 
municipal government to cost share construction work on 
dangerous sections of the road? They’ve cut back on their 
promise to fund rural municipalities to help them fix their roads. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Sir, I thank the member opposite for 
the question. I’d point out that the rural roads, in fact the whole 
road system in this province, the transportation system, is in 
transition as elevators consolidate and railways are abandoned, 
as the federal government allows that to happen at an 
accelerated pace, and puts . . . takes $400 million a year out of 
our economy in changes to the Crow and doesn’t put anything 
back in. 
 
So we have for our part increased this year our Highways 
budget by 10 per cent and our funding for rural roads by 14 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s easy to abdicate your 
responsibilities when you have somebody else to blame 
constantly. With the massive cuts this government has made to 
municipal governments, they simply do not have the funds for 
road reconstruction. However, a cost-sharing agreement with 

SGI might just allow some of the RMs (rural municipality) to 
do some really much-needed work in some areas. 
 
Motorists are demanding action. The local governments are 
demanding action. The president of SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) indicated last week that 
poor road conditions are to blame for the increasing number of 
fatalities on the rural road system — not unlike the concern 
with the intersections around Regina. 
 
Will you make a commitment in this House today to strike up a 
cost-sharing agreement with municipal governments which 
might make our roads a little safer for travel? And that’s for the 
minister of SGI. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for the question. We do have a commitment to the 
transportation system in this province. And I would ask the 
member opposite if he will act to get a commitment from his 
counterparts in Ottawa for a national road program, for them to 
contribute to the national transportation system, including the 
pressures that are coming on our roads because of their actions 
in allowing railways to abandon tracks. 
 
I would also ask at the same time, Mr. Speaker, if the member 
opposite would get a commitment from the federal government 
to return to 50 per cent funding on health care rather than the 13 
that they’ve declined to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this government has no compassion for hepatitis C 
victims and it has no compassion for the thousands of 
Saskatchewan people who want the Plains hospital to remain 
open. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government refuses to 
take responsibility for this decision by hiding behind the Regina 
Health Board. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a heartless, spineless 
act by a heartless, spineless government. 
 
To the Premier: Mr. Premier, if you had had the courage to 
show up last night you would have heard a lot of people who 
wanted the future of the Plains to come to a free vote in the 
legislature. I’m sure many of those people called your office 
this morning. They were all quite interested in your phone 
number of 787-9433. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you listening? Will you allow a free vote on 
the future of the Plains hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly 
pleased that it was this member that asked the question. And 
I’m just going to echo a letter in the newspaper that says: where 
were you when Grant Devine ran this province into the 
poorhouse? Where were you? Where were you? 
 
And where were you when Devine said that the finances of this 



April 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

province can be mismanaged and we’d still come out ahead. 
Where were you when he bought votes by building 
unsustainable facilities in areas where they were clearly not 
needed. You may not remember your history, but I’ve taken a 
greater interest in it since I became involved in politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I think I can look back with pride to the fact 
that the people of south-eastern Saskatchewan have access to 
water and are very proud of it. I think the people of 
Saskatchewan appreciate the Saskferco company and the 
contribution it’s made to Saskatchewan. I think Saskatchewan 
people are, as well, pleased with Weyerhaeuser. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are not pleased with this 
government and the compassion it says it has but it does not 
show to the people of Saskatchewan regarding the hepatitis C, 
regarding closure of the Plains health care centre, or the fact 
that the Premier and his Deputy Premier or even the minister 
responsible will not allow a free vote in this Assembly. 
 
Madam Minister, if you’ve got nothing to hide, why don’t you 
allow a free vote on the closure of the Plains health care centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to 
the member from Moosomin who today stands and defends the 
Tory record. Finally, finally, finally we have it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Finally we have it. The old Tories 
finally couldn’t take it any more. He had to get up in his place 
and defend his actions as a Tory. That’s great to see. Great to 
see. Finally. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The investment in Millar West or in 
the GigaText and the High R Door and all the Tory deals — 
there he’s defending. And I’m glad to see it. 
 
I want to say to the Liberals who went over to the Tories: 
you’re going to have to defend that record too in a by-election 
coming up very soon. And we’ll see if you put Mr. Hermanson 
into the by-election or whether you’re whistling by the 
graveyard as you go down the tubes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The Clerk is calling for Bills 
to be introduced and nobody can hear him calling it. So if the 
House would come to order, we would continue with the 
business of the House. 
 

Bill No. 37  The Noxious Weeds Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 37, 

The Noxious Weeds Amendment Act, 1998 be now introduced 
and read for the very first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 38 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
38, The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a pleasure 
to move that Bill No. 39, The Vehicle Administration Act, 
1998, and I move that it now be introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The SaskTel Pension Implementation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 40, 
The SaskTel Pension Implementation Act now be introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, later this 
day. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 33 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 33 — The 
Provincial Court Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to speak today to The Provincial Court Act because 
this is certainly an important piece of legislation, one which the 
Saskatchewan people and the Saskatchewan Party are very 
interested in. 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only does it deal with the power of 
provincial judges, but the method by which they are appointed, 
the amount of money they are paid, and the amount of time they 
can serve. These are all issues that the people of Saskatchewan 
are telling us we should visit and ensure they are consistent with 
the values of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
After all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these individuals have a great 
deal of power in our lives and quite often people feel like this is 
power without adequate levels of accountability. Right now the 
Saskatchewan Party is investigating different methods to 
increase that accountability, whether it be through committee of 
jurisprudence or alternative methods. The important thing is 
this: that we keep talking about ways of improving our justice 
system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the one thing which has become quite 
clear in the last five or so years since this NDP government 
came to power is that the people of Saskatchewan are seriously 
losing faith in the justice system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not suggesting that the sole 
responsibility for this dramatic loss of faith falls on our judges. 
As a matter of fact I would not even suggest that a large part of 
it falls on our judges. But what I would say is that people’s 
perceptions — or should I say people’s fears — are extremely 
significant. One of the basic human needs is the need to feel 
safe. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they need to feel that when people commit 
a crime, no matter what their age, they receive a fair trial, they 
receive the appropriate punishment, and especially if that crime 
is of a violent nature, the offender does the time. 
 
Nowadays people are not sure that is happening. We see 
offenders serving minuscule portions of their sentences. 
Sometimes we see those individuals re-offending after they 
have been released early and sometimes the results of those 
re-offences have been loss of life. 
 
This loss of faith has also been a result of the amount of time 
which elapses between the time an individual commits an 
offence, or allegedly commits an offence, and the time that 
individual gets their day in court. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
sometimes we see court battles unnecessarily dragging out, and 
this certainly creates a great deal of disillusionment. 
 
I’m also certain that it creates a great deal of pain for family 
members if, for example, it takes an extended period of time to 
determine the alleged murderer of their loved one is either 
guilty or innocent. The issue of backlog in our court system has 
a lot to do with this unnecessary time lapse and I believe it is of 
the utmost importance that the government address this very 
important issue. 
 
And when I say address, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I mean that the 
government must address it in a meaningful way. What we have 
seen in the past when this government gives lip-service to 
addressing a significant issue in the justice system is that, this 
government hiring a couple of consultants to produce an 
emasculated report which leads to the purchase of computer 
equipment for the Crown prosecutor’s office. Sound familiar? 
 

After some serious problems arose as a result of a few, very 
high profile cases, like the Martensville or the Latimer case, the 
government was quick to call an investigation. Unfortunately, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they forgot to the give the investigators 
the mandate to look into these high profile cases. Consequently 
the result was a 10-page, watered down excuse of a report 
which validated the government’s wish to buy more computer 
equipment. 
 
This is not how the people of Saskatchewan want the 
government to look into the justice system. The only way to 
restore their faith will be to launch a full-scale public inquiry 
into all aspects of the system. 
 
I will consider supporting this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe it’s a . . . we must also give an 
opportunity for other members of this Assembly to speak to the 
Bill before we allow it to go to committee. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s quite obvious there are a number of 
issues that need to be addressed, as I’ve indicated, in the piece 
of legislation before us. And with that in mind I would like to 
give other members the same opportunity to make . . . give their 
views, express their opinions in regards to The Provincial Court 
Act we now have before us. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, indeed The 
Provincial Court Act is an important Act for consideration 
because, as my colleague said, it deals with the power, the 
appointment, and the pay of judges. So we’ve certainly seen 
how this government has dealt with that particular aspect of 
jurisprudence. 
 
They came to an agreement with the judges that they would go 
to arbitration to determine the pay scales that provincial judges 
would receive. When the report came back — and this was 
supposedly binding arbitration; that was the agreement — when 
the report came back the government said no, sorry we can’t 
possibly accept that; that’s way too much; we are going to break 
the law. And indeed that is exactly what the Minister of Justice 
did. 
 
He broke the law then brought a Bill back into this House to 
make his judgement, his determinations, legal. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we know, the judges, their only 
recourse was to sue the provincial government, which they did 
do. And the provincial government, just before court, made an 
eleventh-hour settlement and gave them virtually what was in 
the original proposal. 
 
But nevertheless, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it cost the province, the 
people of Saskatchewan, money in dealing with this through 
both the court system and out of court. That is the kind of 
respect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government has for the 
Provincial Court judges. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have 
questions about how judges are appointed and how they 
exercise their power. People in the province want to have more 
input. They don’t simply want judges appointed by partisan 



April 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

means — because a judge happened to be the leader of a 
provincial party is no reason for them to be a judge. And that 
doesn’t matter which political party. Every political party that 
has governed in the province of Saskatchewan has been guilty 
of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker — every last one of them. 
 
And it’s time it changed. It’s time that there was some new 
ways of doing those sort of things in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We need more of an independent judiciary. But, 
Mr. Speaker, while they may be independent from political 
interference, judges since 1982 and the Canadian Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms have taken a lot of power onto 
themselves. They’ve taken the power to create law — to 
interpret law, interpret law is what their duty should be. But to 
create law, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would say was not to be the 
purview of the judges. That purview was given to the legislators 
of the land, given to this legislature, given to the House of 
Commons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not to judges. 
 
That is another area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it needs to be 
taken a very serious look at. We need to take a look at how 
judges are appointed, how they exercise their power, and 
indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how they are paid. For those 
reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move that we now 
adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 31 — The 
Enforcement of Judgments Conventions Act/Loi sur les 
conventions sur l’exécution de jugements be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak 
to The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions Act. 
 
My understanding of this Bill is that it is a piece of legislation 
that will be introduced in each of the legislatures all the way 
across Canada. Further, its purpose is to provide a process for 
civil judgements made by the courts in one country may be 
recognized and enforced in another country without the 
necessity of re-litigating the matter. 
 
I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that although we certainly 
support measures to lessen the burden on our court system, 
which is constantly bulging at the seams, we must ensure that 
when it is doing so, the citizens of Saskatchewan and of Canada 
are kept safe from any possible misuse. 
 
In explaining this piece of legislation, the Minister of Justice 
told the Assembly the following: prior to this convention, in 
most cases it would be financially impossible to seek to pursue 
a spouse who was avoiding maintenance by moving to France. 
With the assistance of this convention, it will now no longer be 
necessary to recommence litigation in France simply to enforce 
judgements which have already been rendered in Saskatchewan. 
So what the minister is saying is that it will be easier to enforce 
Saskatchewan judgements outside our borders. 
 
It would seem, Mr. Speaker, this would mean that the opposite 

might also be true. I do have some concerns with this, the 
majority of which can be expressed by Committee of the 
Whole. But I would like to take a couple of minutes to talk 
about them now. Before I do, I would like to say at the outset 
that I don’t want my concerns interpreted as advocating the 
obstruction of justice or judgements simply because that is not 
the case. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are circumstances where Saskatchewan 
citizens travel to war-torn countries or countries that do not 
embrace human rights in the way that we do here in 
Saskatchewan and Canada. In such situations, we do not want 
to make it more difficult to protect our citizens who find 
themselves persecuted in foreign prisons for minor offences. 
I’m certain that the countries we enter into such agreements 
with do not fit this category but I will certainly be asking for 
this information in Committee of the Whole. 
 
In favour of this legislation, I would like to say that anything 
which makes it easier to enforce maintenance agreements is a 
positive step. Of late there have been one or two high-profile 
cases where individuals tried to shirk their parental 
responsibilities by moving outside of Canada. It is unfortunate 
that families fall apart and find themselves in this position. But 
in the event that a marriage goes bad and the custodial parent 
finds themselves in a situation where the other parent leaves the 
country to avoid maintenance enforcement, the custodial parent 
should not be forced to rack up huge legal bills to get justice in 
another country. The only one who really wins in a situation 
like this is the lawyer. And certainly the big losers are the 
children. 
 
I would also like to speak for a minute on the incredible 
backlog often experienced in our own court system. This type 
of legislation will assist in that backlog, but it is clear the 
government must do more. 
 
We do see more alternative justice and sentencing measures 
being used, like youth justice committees and first nations’ 
sentencing circles. I don’t know the statistics but I would 
suggest that these measures have decreased the backlog 
somewhat. 
 
But I think it is time we step back and look at the long-term 
effectiveness of these measures and ensure that the offenders 
are not simply reoffending and returning through . . . into the 
court system. 
 
I think there are likely refinements or philosophical changes 
which we could make to these committees to ensure that young 
people, for example, realize that crime does not pay. If an 
offence is committed, it is not good enough to simply slap the 
offender on the wrist. 
 
I would also say, Mr. Speaker, it is important that the offender 
faces judgement in a timely fashion after their offence. That is 
why I believe the Minister of Justice should be investigating an 
innovative justice model being utilized in British Columbia 
which combines the appropriate components of a sentencing 
circle and the appropriate components of what is sometimes 
referred to as a boot camp. 
 
The results of this model have been a dramatic decrease in the 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

time between the offence and the judgement, and a dramatic 
decrease in the backlog experienced in youth court in that area. 
 
I would like to close by saying while I’m in favour of the 
principles of this piece of legislation, before it is passed there 
are certainly some questions which need to be answered. And I 
certainly will be in contact with other provincial Justice 
departments across the country. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 10 — The 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Amendment Act, 
1998 — be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 5  The Animal Products Amendment Act, 1998 
 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the Minister of Agriculture to 
introduce his officials as we begin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is Bob 
Ford, the manager of quality insurance for industry 
development branch. Behind Mr. Ford is Maryellen Carlson, 
director of industry development branch. And immediately 
behind me is Dr. Al Choquer, director of livestock and 
veterinary operations. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, a welcome 
to yourself and to your officials this afternoon. 
 
In reading this Bill and through your comments, I understand 
that the Bill was developed in consultation with the industry. 
Can you tell us who you consulted with on this piece of 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, we talked to the Saskatchewan 
Meat Processors Association. That is the association with many 
members across the province who process in small processing 
plants, to plants as big as Intercon; Sask Health, who are also 
involved in the inspection of meat; and Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency, CFIA, which is the federal agency that 
licenses federal plants; and we’ve also talked to the dairy 
industry. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The Bill extends the 
right of regulation to slaughterhouses and meat processing 
facilities to the provincial government. Who regulates the 
industry currently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I’ll give you a quick overview as to how 

it works. The Canadian Food Inspection Agency, or CFIA, 
inspects plants that are going to be moving product out of 
Saskatchewan, from Saskatchewan to somewhere else. The 
provincial inspectors inspect plants that are moving product 
within the province. And the Department of Health inspects 
basically very small operations that would be selling product 
within the province as well. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. In the introduction of the Bill, the 
minister of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) referred to a working group which is addressing 
the issue of harmonization of inspection regulations in all of the 
provinces. Can you tell us who serves on that working group? 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — There are many people from across 
Canada, from other provinces. I can give you our 
representatives. Mr. Ford, to my left here, is the representative 
from Sask Ag and Food, and Louis Corkery from Health is also 
a representative from Saskatchewan. 
 
Now this is a group that is working together with the federal 
government to coordinate the inspection services to ensure the 
food quality in our country is maintained at a very high 
standard, because there’s much demand on quality from 
importing countries. And if we want to stay in the game of 
exporting — which we are exporters as you know — then we 
have to work together with all the other provinces on 
coordinating an approach to inspection services and food 
quality assurance. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, is there conflict between the . . . in 
the regulations regarding inspections moving from one province 
to another, currently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I’m sorry, you said, is there a conflict. I 
don’t know what you mean. Conflict between whom? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — What I meant is, is there various types of 
regulations in each province across Canada — provinces across 
Canada — and what kind of conflicting regulations are people 
here in Saskatchewan confronted with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The federal system is a single system 
right across the country. In the case of Saskatchewan, 
Manitoba, and British Columbia, we contract services from the 
federal government. Other provinces provide their own 
services. And then as far as Health is concerned, they do the 
smaller local plants that sell within Saskatchewan. 
 
This is all part of a concept that has been put forward right 
across the country to enable us to have . . . to try to standardize 
our quality programs, to streamline them so that they’re not 
duplicating each other, and so that they’re . . . the safety of 
inspection is improved. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — In terms of the safety of products, meat products 
in Saskatchewan, have there been concerns raised about the 
safety of products on the tables of Saskatchewan people, and 
will this Bill address those problems, Mr. Minister? And in 
terms of the cost of it to slaughtering facilities here in 
Saskatchewan, do you foresee the new provisions of the Act or 



April 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

the changes in the Act adding additional costs to those involved 
in the industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Just to start with your last question first, 
the cost, there could be some increased cost at the 
implementation level for a quality assurance program but there 
also should be some reduced costs in the inspection side, the 
per-carcass inspection side. So the industry feels that it should 
be a relative . . . (inaudible) . . . when this whole thing’s 
implemented. It’ll just be a reallocation. 
 
As far as the safety and concerns of Saskatchewan people, 
there’s been no trend toward people worried about safety. Now 
the quality assurance program will enhance the safety even 
more than it is today, although it’s not a problem. Like there’s 
no identified problems in the province right now. But if that . . . 
it’ll enhance it. 
 
The main reason of course is, is to provide a system whereby 
people, no matter if it’s bought in the province but also if it’s 
bought in some other country, can be assured that we have 
hazard . . . critical control ports . . . hazard analysis, critical 
control points in control, identified, and action taken on those 
HACCP (Hazard Analysis and Critical Control System) . . . on 
that HACCP. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Will the licensing requirements only be for 
commercial abattoirs or are there such facilities? Or will 
farmers who slaughter their own cattle for . . . face grader 
licensing requirements as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — No. There’ll be no changes on the armed 
farm slaughter for your own consumption. No, it’s just for 
commercial operations. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — When you say commercial operations, perhaps 
you could define that a little bit for us. Are we talking about a 
farmer who slaughters a few cattle a year for sale to a few of his 
neighbours? Or is this a . . . what would we . . . how would we 
characterize a commercial facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Just to simplify it, there will be no 
change in the licensing requirements. If you’re licensed now, 
when this Act is put into place the same people licensed now 
will be licensed then. If you’re not licensed as a farmer killing 
half a dozen or dozen, you won’t be licensed after either. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — In the regulations a section has been added 
giving you the power to set fees for prescribed services. Can 
you tell us what those services will be and what kind of fees are 
expected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — With this legislation, initially there’s no 
anticipated change, but that is put in there to leave the door 
open to anything that may have to be changed. There could be 
some cost sharing, you know, down the road, but it’s not 
anticipated to be anything of concern right now. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The amendment extends the definition of 
“record” to mean electronic records. Under what circumstances 
do officials have to seize records currently and is there a 
warrant required for that? 
 

And can you give us the approximate number of cases in the 
past few years where animals, animal products, documents, or 
records have been seized under this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Just checking with the officials here on 
whether or not . . . We don’t have any data here, but to our 
collected recollection there has been no seizures under the 
programs that we’ve had. But I’ll endeavour to tell you that we 
will check that to make sure that our memory is right on that. If 
there is something, we’ll bring it forward to you. 
 
And also in terms of the access to records, there is a provision 
that the operations have to have records and they shall be 
accessed. The provision to access them through the law is 
always in there to make sure that if somebody does not 
cooperate, that the officials can get a hold of those. But we 
don’t anticipate any problems in those areas. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Under the section giving you the authority as the 
minister to suspend, amend, or revoke licences granted to 
people under this Act, it states the person must be allowed to be 
heard. Can you tell us what type of forum such a hearing takes 
place and are you and your officials the ones that adjudicate 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — In the final analysis the department are 
the adjudicators. But the process of adjudication has not been 
specified simply because . . . and would be specified only when 
the appeal was brought forward. Because you want to make 
sure that the process equals the breadth and depth of the 
problem. So it will be outlined . . . it would be outlined to 
achieve a fair hearing for the people who were involved. But at 
the end of the day the department adjudicates. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1500) 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to reintroduce or 
introduce his new officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is Hal 
Cushon, director of policy and program branch — program 
development branch in Sask Ag and Food; and to my right is 
Doug Winsor, senior livestock analyst with policy and program 
branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, welcome to 
your officials. Mr. Minster, you have moved the actual amount 
of deduction taken off per head of cattle under this Act out of 
legislation and into regulations. Why would you have done 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — This was done at the request of the 
industry to allow for the changing of collections from time to 
time, for the amounts, and we agreed to that and put it in the 
Act. 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

Mr. Boyd: — The industry was supportive then of that change, 
Mr. Minister? We would have your assurance of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes. For this whole Act we have letters 
from the industry, signed by the industry, saying that they 
would like this to happen — that out of the Act, and the rest of 
the Act as well. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The charge is currently $1. Will that change after 
this Act passes or will it be maintained? And if it is maintained 
at $1, how long will it be at $1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I think about July 1 there will be a 
change from $1 to $2. But the $1 that is currently there now for 
the provincial deduction will stay; the second dollar will be for 
the federal, for the national check-off, which this Bill enables us 
to be a partner in all the . . . right across Canada. So it’s at the 
industry’s request, a dollar. And the changes in the future, of 
course, will be decided through industry consultations. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Will this amount of the deduction be at your 
discretion or will the industry set it through their 
recommendations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I just checked with my officials on a 
couple of points. The change would have to come from the . . . 
to enact the change of course, comes from government through 
regulation, but that is from a recommendation from the industry 
on the provincial side, from the provincial industry. On the 
national side of course, that $1 would be recommendation 
through the national body. 
 
So while we make the change, it would be done in consultation 
and mainly at the request of the industry. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — How much is currently raised through this charge 
and is it . . . how much is actually spent in a given year on 
research and development in the industry and other aspects 
we’re told this deduction is used for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Now just so I’m clear. You’re talking 
about the national dollar, or do you want both? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Both. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Both. Okay, so we’ll have to guess what 
the national is and see if we have any numbers there, and we 
should be close on the provincial side. 
 
As far as the collections that you ask about, for the 
Saskatchewan program the income from that would be $1.1 
million from the dollar levy and of course the national dollar 
would add another 1.1, or roughly that same amount, for the 
national. In total, they’re expecting the national check-off to 
raise 6 or $7 million a year. 
 
And I believe you asked about expenditures. Now again, so 
we’re clear, do you want a breakdown of what we spend now 
through the research, what we, meaning the industry, spends 
and what the national industry will spend? I don’t know if we 
have a national budget yet; I’ll check. 
 
Under the national check-off there is . . . the board has not been 

established yet and the board will create the budget. So that is 
not . . . that information is not available yet. 
 
Under the Saskatchewan program, cattle marketing deductions 
fund, the money that they spent in 1997, I can just run down 
here what they spent through their budget. National beef 
information centre, they spent $450 million; operating 
expenses, 110 . . . $450,000, I’m sorry; operating expenses of 
$110,000. The beef development centre in University of 
Saskatchewan, $50,000; the cattle feeders association got 
$25,000; CBEF, the Canadian Beef Export Federation, got 
$100,000; stock growers, $25,000; and the hall of fame, $480; 
and the animal and poultry science, U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), $21,750. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does that add up to the 
total amount raised? Or what happens to money in excess of the 
expenditures for the year that we are looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well this varies from year to year. And 
this is a standalone fund; it does not come into general revenue, 
as you know, I think. Last year, 1996, under basically the same 
titles, although there’s a few more in ’96, that they gave 
$60,000 to the dairy research and VIDO (Veterinary Infectious 
Disease Organization) got $75,000, but last year they spent just 
about $1.4 million, which was probably more than they took in. 
And this year they spent 738 million. So it just stays . . . if they 
don’t spend it all one year, it just stays in the fund for them to 
spend it another year. But it all goes to the beef industry as 
dictated by the board. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Are there any anticipated changes to be made in 
the advisory board, the board that’s in place to manage these 
funds? And does the provincial government make appointments 
to the board or does the industry appoint the board members? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, there is. The industry recommends 
the names, and we put the names in place. The only change that 
is coming about this year is that the cattle . . . the western 
cow-calf association, which is basically not operating right 
now, is being replaced by Heartland Livestock. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — It appears that cattle producers will be able to 
claim a refund from the provincial account and not the national 
account. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — That is correct. The national check-off 
will be a mandatory check-off. The provincial is refundable at 
the request of the producer. The reason that the national went to 
mandatory is they plan on taking check-offs from imported 
meat. And once all provinces are under the same . . . under the 
national check-off, they will be able to do that. If it was a 
refundable program, of course they wouldn’t be able to get 
money from the imports. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Do you anticipate any difficulties, Mr. Minister, 
with the numbers of producers here in Saskatchewan requesting 
refunds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — We anticipate no change. It was about, I 
think, running around 3 per cent mark, give or take, over the 
years. 
 



April 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

Mr. Boyd: — Can the minister tell us how this Bill will affect 
those who sell their cattle outside of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — There should be no change. The cattle 
for the most part are inspected before they leave, if they’re 
going to the U.S. or if they’re going to another province, and 
the levies are collected at that point. And so there’s no problem. 
And we don’t anticipate any change in that respect. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Now the Bill contains a clause regarding 
inspectors. Can you briefly take us through the procedures that 
are in place to ensure that all monies are remitted to your 
department under the Act? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well the collections are made by either 
the cattle dealers . . . the manifests that are put forward, the 
money follows the manifest. So if it goes to the cattle dealer 
then that dealer is billed. If it’s an on-farm sale, a satellite sale 
or something like that, then the inspector would collect it there. 
So the money follows the manifests of the cattle. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — In terms of routine inspections, do inspectors 
have to provide any kind of forewarning that they are going to 
be going onto someone’s premises? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I guess for most of the time it’s at the 
request of the producer for sales purposes. There is provisions 
for audits to be done if deemed necessary, and then at that time 
accesses would have to be provided at a reasonable time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll just close by 
making a couple of comments. The people involved in the cattle 
industry here in Saskatchewan, we believe, have been extremely 
responsible in the growing of the industry that we have seen 
over the last number of years. And it’s through, I believe, 
through programs and Bills and Acts such as this one that have 
gone a long ways in terms of that growth in the industry. 
 
The industry has put this program in place, through the 
government, to provide research dollars and ongoing research 
involvement in Saskatchewan and the industry. And we believe 
that that is important and we believe that it’s very good to see 
that cattle people here in Saskatchewan are taking, have taken, 
and continue to take responsibility for their industry. And it 
certainly warms the heart of myself and members of the 
opposition here to see industries taking that kind of an approach 
to the growth of their industry here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So we are supportive of this piece of legislation. We believe it’s 
responsible. We believe that the cattle people here in 
Saskatchewan are very responsible and also we certainly . . . 
I’m very pleased to hear that there is a very low number of 
producers that don’t, or opt to not participate in this type of 
program. 
 
Again it is comforting to see, when people involved in various 
industries, in this case the cattle industry here in Saskatchewan, 
take the responsible approach of funding the research or helping 
to at least fund the research for their industry. And I think 
there’s perhaps industries that could take some lessons from 
them in this regard. 

So, Mr. Minister, I’ll just close by saying we are supportive of 
the piece of legislation and we want to see the cattle industry 
continue to grow as we’ve seen it here in Saskatchewan, 
continue to see the kind of exports of products and animals 
from Saskatchewan, continue to see the industry expand and 
evolve into the kind of industry that we are all hopeful for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well thank you very much for that. I 
appreciate your support, not for myself of course, but for the 
industry, and we work very closely with the industry because 
the beef industry is very vital to Saskatchewan. We’ve seen the 
changes in our transportation that have taken place and we have 
to work diligently to try to feed as much grain as possible right 
here in Saskatchewan to process those . . . And the two Acts 
that we’ve done now should help that — in this case, with the 
research and development. 
 
And I’d like to thank my officials for being here and working 
with the industry so well, trying to create that climate where we 
can have a very thriving cattle industry. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Stray Animals Amendment Act, 1998 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The committee will pause for a few 
minutes to allow the officials to gather. 
 
Before I invite the minister to introduce his new officials, I ask 
the indulgence of the committee that we revert back to item no. 
6, Bill No. 5, where your chairperson neglected to invite the 
minister to report Bill No. 5 without amendment. Is it agreed 
that we revert back momentarily? Agreed. 
 
I invite the Minister of Agriculture to report the committee 
move . . . pardon me, the committee report Bill No. 5 without 
amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
report Bill No. 5 without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Minister of Agriculture, will you please 
introduce your officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is 
Merv Ross, the manager of operations in the livestock and vet 
operations department of Sask Ag and Food. And again, Dr. Al 
Choquer, director of the livestock and vet operations. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, welcome to your officials as well, while we’re going 
to deal with Bill No. 8. 
 
Mr. Minister, I notice in the explanation section provided on 
this Bill, it indicates that this Act is going to extend to 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

non-traditional animals such as bison and wild boar and elk. 
What’s been the process in dealing with these animals prior to 
this particular Act being put in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well that’s the whole . . . one of the 
main purposes of this Act. There was no provisions under this 
Act to deal with these animals and there was none. And so what 
we would recommend, what we recommended until such time 
as now where we could get the Act changed, as you know the 
Act . . . We sit once basically one session a year in legislature. 
We recommended that the people get in touch with the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) if there was a situation where 
an animal is causing some problems or endangering somebody. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, the Bill defines the term, 
dangerous animal. Again, how have these animals been handled 
under the current legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well as I just stated, the animals that are 
now included in this Act — which are the ones I assume you 
are talking about — prior to the implementation of this Act, 
they were . . . I’ll give you a couple examples. There was some 
problems with some wild boar that were possibly endangering 
some humans. There was some problems with some bison who 
were on somebody else’s property and the owner wasn’t taking 
responsibility. 
 
So what we’ve suggested in those cases is that the RCMP be 
contacted and they take charge of the situation. Because we had 
no legal authority under the Department of Agriculture and 
Food to enforce anything. So when we got a call we would refer 
it to the RCMP because that’s the only provision that was 
available. And to the best of my knowledge, those were handled 
very well. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I would assume that this Act 
will be also enforced for sort of the more traditional animals as 
well. And I noticed that you’ve indicated that you’ve had some 
consultation with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, and the province. 
 
Can you identify, and you’ve mentioned the case of wild boar, 
has this been a problem, dealing with dangerous animals of the 
more traditional variety and stray animals of the traditional 
variety? Or is this Act being brought into place with 
amendments to deal with the non-traditional animals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — This Act is being implemented to deal 
with the non-traditional animals. And when we open the Act up 
though, there was some improvements and updating we did on 
the entire . . . you know, on different segments of the Act. 
 
But because there was, as you identified, and as I respond, there 
was no way of dealing with a wild boar that came up onto your 
doorstep or was threatening you or your family. If someone 
were to take the matter into his own hand they would be 
possibly liable. 
 
(1530) 
 
So there was enough cases, enough of a concern. And I guess 
the main thing is that in Saskatchewan today we are seeing the 
bison industry grow in leaps and bounds. We see the elk 

industry increasing by about 20 per cent a year. And we’ve seen 
a large increase in things like wild boar and other exotic 
animals. So in the production of these animals there will be 
sometimes escapes. 
 
And just like when we produce . . . If you had a bull that was 
maybe not the most pleasant beef cattle breed, was not maybe 
the most pleasant personality in the world, and he got out and 
threatened people, we have laws under this Act to deal with 
that. The same way, we need laws to handle these new breeds 
and new animals or species that are coming in. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, section 2, or clause 2 indicates 
that the municipal administrator is probably going to be the one 
that will have enlarged responsibilities under this Act. And as 
indicated, it’s probably he or she that will be most likely to be 
appointed as administrator of the Act. Is that what this clause is 
actually saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes. No change there, basically. The 
RM appoints someone to administer the Act. That would be . . . 
they’d appoint a poundkeeper and the poundkeeper then is 
responsible for if anyone calls in to register a complaint, the 
poundkeeper would then go to work and rectify that. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — In your consultation with rural municipalities, 
have they identified a problem with that section of 
administration, that is having to appoint a poundkeeper or the 
secretary-treasurer to actually handle the administration of the 
Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — This Act is the same as . . . will not be 
changed with respect to the fact that the administrator of the 
RM, or the secretary as you called it, administers the Act for the 
government. They appoint a poundkeeper. There have been 
instances, not just because of the new animals coming in, but 
there is some problems in some areas of finding someone who 
wants to be the poundkeeper. The RM has a bit of trouble 
appointing someone because nobody wants to do it. 
 
In this Act we’ve built in provisions whereby if the 
municipality can’t find or doesn’t have a poundkeeper, then the 
animal can be handled by moving it to an area where there is a 
pound. At the end of the day if there is a problem, then it does 
lie on the Department of Agriculture and Food to enforce the 
Act. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — What will you be talking about in terms of 
actual financial costs to a municipality? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The rural municipality, the RM, incurs a 
cost of impounding, maybe capturing, transporting, or whatever 
else it takes to get an animal under control. They incur that cost. 
That cost is then billed back to the owner of the animal. And if 
the owner doesn’t pay, then of course the RM has the right to 
sue. 
 
If an animal . . . if no one claims it, the RM, after a period of 
time, can sell the animal. The proceeds will go to the RM to 
cover the cost of that action, the cost that they incurred. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Follow-up to your comment, Mr. Minister. 
When a municipality cannot identify through the poundkeeper 



April 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

system whose animal it is, and it’s a stray animal and they’ve 
incurred costs, what . . . Have you had any indication from RMs 
in the past as to how big a problem this is in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — There has been . . . there was no 
indication from the RMs to the government that there was a 
problem in the past. But during the consultation process this 
came up as kind of a “what if” scenario, if this happened. And 
so then we tried to outline the procedures in the Act as they . . . 
who the responsibility . . . who incurs responsibility at the end 
of the day. 
 
So as I said, they do the capture and the transport, and then they 
will recoup that from the owner or from the sale of that animal. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
think one of the sections deals with the removal of regulations 
around the construction of the actual pound. Why did this take 
place? And what were the reasons for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The problem is that with the specialized 
livestock that we have now, like bison for example, where a 
fence sometimes, a barbed wire fence six or eight strands, 
would mean a nice back-scratch if they decide to go through it, 
although they are basically domesticated animals and they are 
fenced with barbed wire and respect those things like all other 
animals. But from time to time there may be an escape. 
 
It wouldn’t make any sense for each RM to have to build a 
facility that could hold and contain a bison that was very upset 
— these things are very powerful animals. So what happens 
then is that they don’t have to build a . . . everybody doesn’t 
have to build specialized handling facilities. They can sedate 
that animal and transport it to somewhere where there is a 
facility. 
 
You know, that may even mean . . . well there are several bison 
producers around and they have handling facilities that can 
contain these animals. We have facilities through the exhibition 
association here, specialized livestock handling facilities. So 
that just gives them a little break so they don’t have to incur the 
costs, each one of them incur the cost of facilities that could be 
very expensive. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You’ve indicated in the Act under one of the 
clauses that if the municipality cannot determine who the owner 
is and decides then to rid itself of the animal by actually selling 
it, that they must maintain a record of sale for two years. What 
is the purpose behind that section? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I was just checking to see . . . this is not 
changed. It was 24 months in the old Act, it’s 24 months in this 
Act, and the basic reason is for cases of lawsuits that may be 
incurred down the road. The reality is for most RMs the file 
wouldn’t even be an inch thick, I don’t think, on their animals. 
So it takes up very small space and it’s for the safety for 
themselves, to cover themselves off, and two years seemed like 
a reasonable length of time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, you mentioned that some of the 
RMs do have difficulty selecting a poundkeeper or appointing 
one. Are there any qualifications or any standards that this Act 
will be setting to the RMs regarding the appointment of a 

poundkeeper? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The person who is appointed 
poundkeeper doesn’t have to have any training. All that the RM 
would be looking for is someone who is prepared to look after 
the health and welfare of that animal in a humane way while it’s 
being captured, while it’s being impounded. So they would 
select somebody, you know if they could find somebody who 
knew something about the elk industry if there was lots of elk in 
the area, that might be an advantage. But it’s just the humane 
treatment of animals that is the main thought here. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, as you’ve indicated, this is 
introducing the ability for the municipalities to handle 
non-traditional animals. But I think a lot of the traditional 
animals, especially the cattle, I think as stray animals, will fall 
into this section as well. 
 
Do you feel that the changes to the Act dealing with the stray 
animal section will help the RM in being able to speed up the 
process, in being able to deal with that stray animal, either in 
finding its rightful owner, returning it, or with dealing it. Does 
this allow a much more speedier process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well you can’t say definitively because 
the Act . . . the new animals have not been in the Act before. 
We don’t anticipate much of a change at all as far as the time. 
There are some prescribed time lines in the Act that the animal 
has to be held . . . an animal has to be held for a certain period 
of time, and a decent attempt to find the owner, or . . . which is 
just, right. 
 
The reality is that this Act is a safety. There are very few cases, 
but we do need to include the new animals in the Act. In terms 
of an elk, for example, if an elk gets out of an enclosure it 
doesn’t wander off; it likes to get back in because that’s its 
home. If a bison is spooked and runs off, sometimes they’re 
hard to handle. Wild boar is very aggressive from time to time 
and can be a threat. 
 
So this Act will allow the municipalities to better protect their 
citizens because there are some prescribed ways in which they 
handle these animals that they didn’t have before. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, your definition of dangerous 
stray, has this changed with the addition of the non-traditional 
animals, or is it the same definition as was in the old Act? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The dangerous stray is a new definition 
in the Act and it’s there basically to give some guidelines as to 
what a person or an RM might do — an RM in case of 
collecting the animal and impounding it or an individual in 
terms of what might happen. 
 
And it wouldn’t really matter if it was a bull or a beef cattle that 
was being aggressive and threatening somebody’s life or 
children — or a bison or a wild boar. The dangerous stray is in 
the Act to ensure that there is a process that we can go through, 
that liability is known. Right now if you went out and there was 
an animal endangering you and you had to destroy it, there’s 
really no rules on liability. And so this Act prescribes some of 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

those things and lets you know what you can and cannot do in 
terms of an animal that is dangerous in your presence. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in the 
definition of dangerous stray it refers to the actual 
determination of that stray; it says: in the opinion of a 
veterinarian. That’s on page 1 under definition (c). 
 
Then on clause . . . or section 25 it refers to again dangerous 
stray — and I’m just pulling the words out of there — it says: if 
a poundkeeper believes may be a dangerous stray. Now who is 
actually going to determine whether or not the particular animal 
is a dangerous stray? Does the poundkeeper, through the 
administrator, have to call a veterinarian or is that decision 
going to be made by the poundkeeper himself or herself under 
section 25? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, the Act outlines, in section 25, it 
outlines if a poundkeeper . . . it’s worded, if a poundkeeper or a 
finder believes that the animal is dangerous. What happens is 
the veterinarian will advise the administrator, who will advise 
the poundkeeper, whether or not the animal is dangerous or a 
potential danger, is a potential danger. Now that is in instances 
where you have time to determine that. 
 
But further on in section 25, if that animal is threatening you, 
threatening your life or your children or someone in your family 
or neighbours, then there’s provisions in the Act for that animal 
to be destroyed. And that’s in there because right now if an 
animal was threatening you and you destroyed it, there was no 
. . . you may or may not be liable. I think you probably 
wouldn’t be. But now we’re putting it in the Act. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, under that same section, 25, 
there’s reference under clause 7. And I know in my 
constituency we have a lot of bison farmers, we have a lot of 
elk farmers, and of course we still have the traditional cattle 
farmers. 
 
Under section 7, and I just want this for clarification because I 
do know of a number of incidents that involve cattle, where it 
says that the proprietor, I guess in this case it is the owner of the 
land, and I’ll use that owner to be, just to give you an example, 
who’s a grain farmer, okay, who has an unfenced grain field. 
And it says that the strays have repeatedly damaged, okay, so 
therefore they must have been into that crop a couple of times 
or more. 
 
The second clause, part (b), says that the stray is on the land, 
and of course because it’s unfenced, because there are no 
corrals, because there is no system of capturing that animal, that 
condition is met. 
 
The third one says that the proprietor has notified the 
administrator. It doesn’t talk about a time period there, so I 
guess it’s a phone call to the person right now. And then the 
third thing it says, that the administrator authorizes the 
proprietor to kill the stray. 
 
Now I’ve heard those threats — idle threats so far — in one 
area where the particular grain farmer is saying — in this case it 
was cattle — if they’re out there again I’m going to do damage 
to those animals. This clause is saying that the proprietor can 

get that permission from the administrator. Isn’t this putting a 
lot of pressure on the administrator? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The administrator works as a staff 
person for the council. And in a case like this, you have to put it 
all together. It says repeatedly harmed, damaged or destroyed. 
So that means it’s not just like one instance. I know what you’re 
getting at. We all have people in our neighbourhoods who do 
feud from time to time, and if the prize bull gets out and 
somebody has a little bone to pick, it may not be very healthy. 
 
But there is liabilities involved in there. That’s why this is in in 
here — repeatedly — meaning that the animal has been in, 
chased off, been in, chased off a few times, and the stray is on 
the proprietor’s land and the proprietor has no reasonable means 
of capture — that means that they can’t corral these things — 
then the administrator has the . . . can authorize someone to 
destroy the animal. But that would be done in consultation with 
the council, probably. 
 
Because what happens here is we . . . and this is the area where 
you have to be very cautious and this is the area where we spent 
some time trying to find the right line in terms of what can and 
cannot be done, because you can’t allow someone to go out 
there and destroy a very valuable animal, any animal, and by 
someone else, without good reason. And this process sets out 
the good reason. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I’m glad to hear that, Mr. Minister, because 
as I indicated in the example that I gave you, was probably one 
dealing with cattle, but as we get into elk and bison, we’re 
talking about very, very valuable animals and I wouldn’t want 
to see the administrator work sort of on his own by granting 
someone the right to start, you know, eliminating animals that 
have strayed. I think that’s the point that you’re making, that 
this clause can indeed look after that, if the administrator and 
the council and everyone involved are doing their job, with 
more expensive animals. 
 
One more clause or section, Mr. Minister, that I’d like you to 
clarify. I don’t know in terms of which animals you were 
referring to, but why would something be considered valueless? 
We have a section that determines valueless strays. What kind 
of animal will fit into the category of being valueless? There 
must be something . . . I mean the old saying, I think, is that 
someone’s garbage is another person’s treasure. Surely we will 
always have a value to a particular animal that you’ve identified 
that will be dealt with in this Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well the best example I could use would 
be an animal with disease, that has no value for meat and 
somebody gets away and somebody doesn’t want to look after 
that animal because it’s no value to them, then that would be a 
valueless animal. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I didn’t read 
that section that way but I think what you’re indicating then is 
there will have to be someone that will determine that it’s 
valueless, most likely the veterinarian I would assume. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — That is correct. The veterinarian would 
. . . (inaudible) . . . value it. 
 



April 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, you made a comment that if the RM wasn’t prepared 
to appoint an administrator that eventually they could contact 
the Department of Agriculture. 
 
Who would they contact in the department in the case of a stray, 
to report it, to ask for some intervention, and who would the 
department send out to deal with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The responsibility would lie with the 
director basically of the department . . . the section of the 
Department of Agriculture and Food, and this in this case it will 
be the livestock and veterinarian operations under the direction 
of Mr. Choquer. And the Act states that the minister has the 
authority to either appoint the finder as a poundkeeper then, or 
arrange for the animal to be moved to a sufficient pound. 
 
And the person, if the RM doesn’t have someone, they probably 
will have the number or the name of the right people to contact 
in the department. If not, they just have to contact the livestock 
branch, and I don’t know how they would know that if they 
didn’t go to the administrator or else just phone my office or 
somebody else in the department. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — How would they contact your 
department after hours or on weekends? Not all of these 
animals become strays between 8 o’clock in the morning and 5 
o’clock in the afternoon. 
 
The reason I ask this is one of my RMs indicated to me that 
they weren’t interested in acting as poundkeepers. They were 
not interested in, as councillors, in being the ones that 
administered the Act in rounding up their neighbours’ cows and 
taking them to the pound and charging a fee or whatever it 
might be as a penalty. They wanted somebody else to have to 
deal with the neighbour. 
 
So in this particular case, they could phone your department, 
but who would they contact after hours or on weekends? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — You can give them my home number, 
that’s true. And I would gladly accommodate them if it was 
necessary. But the reality is there normally is nobody around on 
the weekend. I guess the same could be said for the RM if the 
administrator was away and somebody had an animal on the 
weekend. 
 
I think what happens here is that the Act, if that animal is 
dangerous or causing damage to property or humans, of course 
then if they have evidence of that, the animal can be . . . they 
can destroy the animal. If it’s not causing damage to property 
and/or person, then they would be waiting till Monday, the 
nearest work day, to make contact. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, when you say damage to 
property, that is a pretty broad definition for the purposes of 
destroying the animal. If a cattle producer’s livestock is out in 
his neighbour’s wheat field, he’s destroying his property. I 
would think to destroy the animals would seem to be a little 
extreme at that particular point in time. So I think there needs to 
be some other method to deal with it. 
 
Certainly the administrator who would normally administer this 

Act in the RMs might not be home, but everybody knows who 
the councillors are. Everybody knows who the reeve is. Out of 
those seven people, and the administrator making eight, there is 
generally somebody there if the RM is going to administer the 
Act. 
 
But in the case where the RMs are not administering the Act, 
how do they contact somebody to deal with the situation? 
Because surely the fact that the animals are out in someone’s 
wheat field is not a good enough reason to destroy those 
animals at that point in time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well there are a couple of options that 
are available. If it’s an emergency and it has to be done on the 
weekend, of course there’s always the RCMP who are 
available. And if it’s, you know, causing damage and the 
RCMP is called and that damage exceeds or is significant 
enough to warrant some kind of compensation, then of course 
the RCMP are there for witness and that type of thing. 
 
The other thing that we can do and we do in other areas is 
provide a contact name to the administrator. I mean you’re 
right, we know the councillors. The councillors may or may not 
know the process, so the administrator really is pivotal here. 
Even though we know the RM, if the minister is away we may 
have the same difficulty at the local level. 
 
But what we do in this case, another option is to have a name of 
a person available on seven days a week. And that’s not a 
problem. 
 
I understand your question. It probably happens . . . would 
happen very, very rarely but I guess if there’s a need to do that 
we’ll accommodate that need. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I think there would some value, Mr. 
Minister, in actually having a contact number for people in the 
RMs to contact in the case of stray animals where there is no 
one who is administering it on the local level. 
 
And we all have, as you admitted yourself, those chronic 
abusers who believe that once the pasture is worn down in their 
own field, open the gate and let somebody else look at them. I 
don’t know whether these stories are true or not, but I’ve heard 
the story of the neighbour who loaded his neighbour’s cattle up 
on the semi and shipped it to the market and sold them in his 
name. Solved the problem. I’m not just sure what would have 
happened in the meantime if he’d have got caught doing it 
before the cheque was written, you know. 
 
So at times there needs to be some sort of a means of dealing 
with those issues and a lot of times the RMs, the councillors, 
are not prepared to deal with it because that’s their neighbour 
who lives 3 miles down the road. So they are looking for 
somebody else to fill in that gap. 
 
If it’s simply a case where somebody’s animal gets out once, 
it’s not a problem. It’s where you have a chronic situation that’s 
ongoing, year to year; it happens every year at certain times of 
the year — somebody opens the gate and the animals are all 
out. 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

So I think in that particular case you need to have a contact 
available who’s prepared to deal with the situation and who can 
deal with it even on the weekends. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Minister, is when we get dealing with 
some of the other more exotic animals, such as elk, how do you 
determine that that elk out standing in the middle of a field 
some place is a tame elk or a wild elk? There may be elk 
producers in the neighbourhood, but how do you know if that 
animal standing in the field is a tame elk or a wild elk; how do 
you determine that if it’s threatening — as we know, at some 
times of the year elk can be quite aggressive; it’s coming into 
your yard and threatening either your animals or some of the 
people who live there — how do you determine whether that’s a 
wild elk or a tame elk? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — You would be able to identify it by the 
tags in the ears. It’s just like a lot of cattle have ear tags. That’s 
one way of visual identification. It would be . . . I’m not an 
expert on elk, although I’m learning an awful lot about them. I 
have not to my recollection or have anyone . . . had anyone 
relate to me the fact that a wild elk would be in your yard 
threatening your animals. If that were the . . . if an elk were in 
your yard, you could suspect that it was a domesticated elk 
because they are much tamer. 
 
And the reality with elk is that the escapes are reported 
basically by the producer. They want to get the word out that 
their elk is gone because most of these animals are in the 20 to 
$50,000 range. 
 
So an elk, as you described it, out standing in a field, how do 
you identify it if it was causing any damage . . . I mean SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) is also 
involved with wild elk or our department. But basically they’re 
tagged, and you can do that, you can identify through tag. And 
for the most part, you could identify it by the action of the 
animal. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, if there’s an elk out 
there that’s acting aggressively I’m not sure I want to get close 
enough to determine whether he’s got ear tags or not. 
 
So the other thing, having watched elk in Banff Park in the fall, 
they do — supposedly those are wild — they inhabit the town 
and can be very aggressive. In fact I’ve even seen them chase 
people myself the last time I was there. 
 
There is also a problem with wild elk though approaching elk 
farms in search of animals of the other sex or to fight with the 
bulls that are already in there. What happens in the cases where 
those kind of elk are causing a disturbance or causing property 
damage? What’s the procedures in those particular cases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I think you made the point yourself with 
the elk in the parks. Those elk who are around people all the 
time are very . . . would be the same . . . act very similarly to the 
elk that are domesticated and inside the fences here. And the 
difference is there’s no fences to surround them in the park and 
there is here. 
 
And the wild elk, I’ve never seen a truly wild who — you 
know, with the exception of the Banff, who may be termed wild 

but they’re living with . . . they’re semi-domesticated — I’ve 
never seen a truly wild elk, never seen it, never heard of it, 
causing any damage. Not that they can’t but it’s very, very rare. 
 
If there is an animal in season that is being aggressive — and 
this happens from time to time — where they basically try to or 
tear apart the fences to get at . . . a bull elk will tear a part of a 
fence, or try to, to get at a cow that’s in an enclosure. In that 
case the producer would call SERM because SERM has 
responsibility for the elk in the wild. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. By the 
time SERM ever arrives, because they generally are not 
anywhere in the neighbourhood . . . Sort of like police. They’re 
around when you don’t want them, and when you’re looking for 
one, you can never find one. 
 
What has been happening in my area is a phone call to the local 
Metis, and that solves the problem fairly quickly. And I’m not 
sure that’s the appropriate measure but that seems to be the 
measure that is working. And so perhaps in some areas there 
needs to be some clarifications as to exactly what the 
procedures are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well that can be taken up with the 
appropriate ministers in government, but it has nothing to do 
with this Act. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 6  The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6, The 
Cattle Marketing Deductions Act be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Stray Animals Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 8, The 
Stray Animals Amendment Act be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(1615) 



April 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Before we begin, I’ll invite the Minister 
of Highways to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to 
introduce first my deputy minister, Brian King, to my right; and 
to my left, Bernie Churko, who is the executive director of 
logistics planning and compliance; just right back behind the 
deputy minister is Barry Martin, the executive director of 
engineering services; and right behind me is Lynn Tulloch, the 
executive director of corporate information services. Thank 
you. 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
committees. I’d like to welcome the minister and her officials 
here today. 
 
Highways are certainly a very important part of Saskatchewan’s 
infrastructure, and the shape of them is even more important 
and more critical. And I think the term “critical” applies to a 
good many of those particular roads and highways that we have 
around this province because they are indeed in very critical 
condition, in sad shape, and in desperate need of repair. 
 
Now there are a few good roads; I don’t want the minister to 
think that I’m referring to all roads, because there certainly are 
some good ones, and I’d like to point one of them out — 33 
Highway from Lajord into . . . Lajord or Kronau into Regina is 
a very good road. I’m not exactly sure why you rebuilt it here a 
couple of years ago because it was a good road before that, but 
it is a very good road today. 
 
There’s a lot of other roads around the province though, Madam 
Minister, that are in very sad shape, including some of those in 
your . . . in the southern part of your constituency. If you have 
to drive down to Ceylon and Radville, you will find out just 
how poor some of those roads can be; or certainly talking to the 
people from that area, they have a great deal of concern about 
those particular roads and a good number of other roads around 
the province. 
 
We sent you some global questions, Madam Minister. They 
were sent to the government for all departments, to be 
distributed to all departments. Did you receive those questions 
and do you have the responses available? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Well it’s my understanding that we did 
receive those questions just this week and that we will have a 
response by the end of May for those. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
guess we’ll have to check and see why you’ve just received 
those questions because they were sent across to the 
government at the beginning of session — so we’re in day 36, I 
believe it is — so a month and a half ago they were sent to the 
government; so I don’t understand why it has taken so long for 

them to reach your department . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The minister from Energy and Mines said that the dog ate his 
homework and that’s why it didn’t get it. I think perhaps that’s 
the dog that’s been nipping at him from the Channel Lake 
affair. 
 
Madam Minister, since you don’t have the globals available, 
perhaps you could provide us with a list of projects that you are 
proposing to either do construction or rehabilitation to the 
highways that are currently in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, we’d be able to send that over on 
major upgrading, intensive preservation, the kind of work that 
we’ll be doing on our highways and roads this year. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Madam Minister, would it be possible to 
have that list fairly shortly so we could be looking at that to 
determine which roads you are actually going to do some work 
on, which ones you’re not going to do some work on, for our 
consideration and evaluation as to determine whether or not the 
roads are appropriate. 
 
I talked about 33 Highway, the area closest to Regina. There 
was a bridge there that needed fixing, but certainly not 32 
kilometres that was in desperate need of repair, which is what 
was done to it. There was other highways across Saskatchewan 
that certainly needed it a lot more than that. 
 
So while we’re looking at the information you’re sending 
across, can you please outline for us the major projects that 
your department is moving ahead with this year. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Well I can certainly just give you kind 
of an overview on where we’re at with our budget this year. As 
you were saying, on the conditions of highways and roads in 
this province, we certainly have made a commitment. We made 
a commitment last year in our budget, over 10 years, of $2.5 
billion. This year we had the additional increase of $20 million, 
followed by last year’s increase of $30 million, to our budget to 
address the needs of highways and transportation and roads 
across this province. 
 
I think everyone recognizes the importance of it for the 
economic and the social development of our communities. Now 
in this year’s budget, under the construction projects in which 
I’ve just sent you, some of the major work is the twinning 
projects, which is the twinning west of Wolseley to east of 
Indian Head of 21.3 kilometres; the twinning west of Gull Lake 
to Tompkins of 27 kilometres — those would be a couple of our 
more major projects. 
 
We are doing a lot of work in grading and new projects, like 
Junction No. 16, Lloydminster; the north of Humboldt to Pilger; 
Unity to Grid 787; the North Portal border crossing 
improvements. We’re completing the Besnard Lake Road 14 to 
33 kilometres north of Junction No. 2. We can go on that list — 
Junction No. 5 to Grid 756, that’s a major project that we’re 
doing. We’re completing the Athabasca Road in two different 
sections there. Another Junction No. 155 to south of Turnor 
Lake, completing 16 to 31 kilometres east of Junction 903. 
 
In total, of the grading contracts there, we’ve got 307.2 
kilometres. If you look at the surfacing projects that are being 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

done, there’s a number of those of 226.4 kilometres. We have a 
number of preservation, resurfacing projects — 340.5 
kilometres. And so I don’t know if you want me to go through 
the list. We’ve sent the information over, but that would 
indicate a lot of the major work that’s going to be done in this 
year’s budget. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In a quick 
glance over the list I notice that very little of that work is being 
done in south-east Saskatchewan where there is a very 
significant load on the highways because of the oil industry in 
that area. 
 
When you give consideration to building highways, Madam 
Minister, do you take into account the type of traffic that is 
going over those roads? Do you take into account the 
consideration of the heavy-haul oil industry trucks and grain 
industry trucks versus passenger vehicles? Is that part of the 
formula? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I think in all of the planning that goes 
into the highway and road construction, you certainly do look 
at, first of all, the type of traffic, definitely the volumes of 
traffic, what the needs are in each area. So we’ve got a number 
of things kind of going on because we’re seeing a number of 
changes also to our transportation system. So we’ve been 
working with SARM, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), and our department on the 
reclassification project in identifying both the kinds of needs 
and the type of roads that are out there. And looking at all the 
kinds of services that are present. 
 
So we’re looking at doing the provincial system, the national 
system, and so on. So there’s a reclassification being looked at. 
It hasn’t been finalized and we’re certainly working at looking 
at the uses and the needs in each of those areas. Also the 
transportation area planning committees that are up, in progress, 
they also are working on helping coordinate on what kind of 
things we need to do even between the municipal government 
and the province. And when you talk about heavy truck hauls, 
that is certainly one thing to look at and should we be 
designating some more roads on that, and coming up with some 
agreements between municipal government and the province. 
 
But I think we have to look at definitely the kinds of traffic and 
the types of traffic, the volumes. All of those things go into the 
decisions on what roads and what kind of work will be done. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think 
you definitely need to be looking at the types of traffic. That’s 
why I asked the question. Are you looking at the types of 
traffic? Are you giving consideration to the fact on No. 13 
Highway between Stoughton and Arcola is a very heavy-haul 
area with oil trucks. Is consideration being given to that and for 
the condition of that highway? 
 
In 1993-94-95, the part that’s the worst shape is actually . . . 
was in the Weyburn constituency at that particular point in time 
and needed to be fixed up. Obviously I never heard the MLA of 
the area at that time speak up in favour of getting anything done 
to that road and nothing happened to it. But perhaps because of 
the heavy traffic that is continually hauling over that road, 
going to the terminals south of Carlyle, or over to Alida, there 

needs to be something done about that particular road. It’s a 
dangerous piece of road. It continually breaks up every spring 
and is rough for the rest of the season, Madam Minister. 
 
Is any consideration being given to doing some repairs on that 
road, to upgrading that particular road? It’s a road with . . . it’s a 
thin membrane surface; basically simply a dust-free surface and 
with no shoulders on it. Is any consideration being done, 
because of the heavy traffic that’s on that road, to repairing, 
improving that road? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — On that highway piece that you’re 
talking about, there is work that’s going to be done on intensive 
preservation on that piece. In some of the decisions on where 
we will be doing major upgrades and so on, it’s part of our 
decision planning to also work with area planning, which does 
look at the kinds of traffic like you’re saying. 
 
I think one of the things that we’re faced with right now in this 
province is the changes also in grain transportation having an 
impact. Definitely the importance of the gas and oil industry is 
important. 
 
But we have to make sure that where we are putting the dollars 
in for those major upgrades is going to be the key for a 
significant amount of time. And so there is major intensive 
preservation work being done on that piece but at this point in 
time it’s not being upgraded. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. When 
you talk about preservation I wonder if you could indicate to us 
what you actually mean? Does that mean you’re going to fill the 
potholes up with something that’s going to stay there for a little 
while? Or does it mean in the wintertime you’re going to fill the 
potholes up with water so it freezes and at least there’s a 
smooth surface until spring. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, on the piece that it’ll be getting 
like intensive preservation, it is more than just filling potholes. 
 
It doesn’t refer to though . . . Like that would be kind of the 
more routine kind of maintenance upgrading measures. But 
what we . . . with intensive preservation it can be, depending 
again on each piece of highway, it can be involved in anywhere 
between $3,000 to $20,000 per kilometre of major work in 
trying to maintain that piece of road. 
 
But intensive preservation does not mean it will upgrade the 
road. But it’s intensive work that is done in maintaining the 
surface of that road. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well that 
particular piece of road needs more than just surface work. 
There is a stretch in there about 2 miles east of Stoughton that, 
in a low spot and the bottom, is very soft; it pounds out every 
year. There’s a stretch in there of about 2 miles that breaks up 
every spring. It’s too soft. It should really be dug out, a new 
base put in, and resurfaced. Is that the kind of thing you’re 
talking about in, of intensive preservation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — That is kind of . . . I think your 



April 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

description would kind of be along the line of what that means. 
It does mean though you can remove and replace entire sections 
of the highway still. 
 
It’s more than just doing, like I said, the surface, but we’re not 
adding . . . when I said it’s not like it’s a resurfacing whole 
project, but sometimes, like if there’s an area that needs some 
intensive work, it may be, like you say, kind of scraped out, 
rebuilt in that particular area. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So on this particular piece of highway, 
the stretch is roughly a mile to 2 miles long. Would that entire 
piece of road be dug out and rebuilt then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — On that specific one we’ll have to get 
back to you. We’ll get the work plan for it because we just 
don’t have that available to know the exact work that’s going to 
be done on that piece. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I note that 
that particular highway is not mentioned in your report. So 
that’s why I wasn’t sure exactly . . . If it is, I must have missed 
it because I quickly glanced through it. 
 
That’s on 13. And so that’s why I was enquiring about that 
particular stretch. 
 
And I recognize that 13 Highway goes right through your 
constituency also, Madam Minister, and so I’m sure that those 
people from the Manitoba border to the Alberta border have a 
great deal of concern with 13 Highway. I know when we were 
down to a meeting at Eastend, I believe it was, or Lafleche the 
other day, people were certainly complaining about that stretch 
of road from Shaunavon across to Cadillac, about how poor that 
particular road was and how broken up it was. That it was 
literally dangerous to drive on it because of the pieces of 
pavement that were coming up on that particular road. 
 
And that’s not an unusual circumstance, Madam Minister, 
around this province. I know that your own constituents have 
complained about the north-south highway — I can’t recall the 
number of it, perhaps 35 — that runs through your 
constituency, or 25. I should have my map here so I can look up 
all these numbers, but the highway that runs down through 
Radville and that direction has caused a great deal of concern 
for people. 
 
One of the things that people are very concerned about with the 
Highways department and the highways, is the damages that are 
caused to their vehicles by hitting the potholes, by breaking 
wheels, by destroying their axles. What is the department’s 
policy on paying for those kinds of damages where a vehicle 
hits a pothole on the road that’s unmarked and causes some 
damage to their vehicle? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — First of all I just wanted to comment on 
some of the remarks there also on Highway 13 because that 
certainly is an important highway across the province, the Red 
Coat Trail. And actually I have been out to the communities and 
met with in Eastend and with some people also from 
Shaunavon, and they were working very closely with the 
department people there on looking on the types of work that 
can be done and the preservation work that will be done on their 

highways in that area. 
 
I also want to comment on some of the other highways within 
my constituency. As in many of the thin membrane surfaced 
highways throughout the province, we’re doing over 2,900 
kilometres of low volume highways in intensive preservation. 
 
But on the part where you say that . . . asking the question about 
the potholes and if somebody has some damage claim, there’s 
kind of three categories in that. If it has been clearly marked 
and there is a way that it could have been avoided, then we’re at 
no fault. There probably would not be a damage claim paid. If 
clearly there hadn’t been marking and it was our fault that the 
damage had occurred, definitely the claim would be paid. 
 
Now sometimes there are those that are, I guess, in between the 
two categories a bit; there’s some question, and we try to sit 
down and get a very clear understanding of what the 
circumstance has been and try to negotiate a suitable agreement. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Some of 
these potholes always seem to be just over a rise and when the 
sign marking the pothole — if it’s there — at best is situated 
right beside the pothole, it does cause problems. 
 
And I know that some of the signs have reflective tape on them. 
I’m not sure that they all have. I notice at nights you’ll come up 
to a pothole and you’re on it before you actually have a chance 
to react to that pothole, particularly if there isn’t any reflective 
tape beside the pothole. So there is a concern in that area, 
Madam Minister. 
 
You said that there was three different categories. I guess that’s 
the kind that you’re clearly at fault, the kind that the driver 
should have been able to avoid, and those that are in the middle. 
 
I wonder if you could give us how many complaints you get, 
and how many fall into the various categories. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — The information that I have here is 
we’ve had about . . . what we get, approximately, is 300 to 400 
formal claims in a year. And they can cover situations that 
range right from, you know, something that might only be 
worth about $20 to a large claim. But we . . . at this point I 
don’t have them broken down to be able to give you that and we 
could certainly try to look into the different aspects, but I just 
don’t have those numbers available. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Would you have some indication, 
Madam Minister, as to how many claims that were settled and 
you paid out on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I do have what we settled in the last 
fiscal year, that we paid 100 of the 300 claims. The average 
claim was about $400. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Four 
hundred dollars for hitting a pothole seems to be a fair amount 
of money. When you look at a hundred claims, you’re looking 
at $40,000. I realize that wouldn’t fix a mile of road up to No. 1 
standard by any means, but it certainly is an indication of the 
problems that are out there, Madam Minister, that we do need to 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

start improving our highways. 
 
You’ve admitted, Madam Minister, that you’re working at 
improving the highways. But I look at last year’s budget, and 
over a 10-year period you’re talking about putting $250 million 
a year into construction and preservation and maintenance of 
roads. But you fell behind by 52 million last year. 
 
This year in your budget you’re falling behind by another 32 
million. So some place in the future — and I would indicate to 
you, Madam Minister, it won’t be in your future as the Minister 
of Highways — to meet that commitment is going to have to 
come up with an additional $84 million at some point in time to 
make that up. 
 
So, Madam Minister, if you’re going to put $250 million a year 
into the highways over a 10-year period, why didn’t you at least 
put $250 million in at the beginning of it rather than at the end 
perhaps. Because if you did it at the beginning, the roads would 
have been in better shape, you wouldn’t have to do as much 
maintenance in the meantime, and you wouldn’t have to do as 
much preservation and it wouldn’t be in a position of doing 
such a difficult job at the tail end of it. 
 
If you’re going to fall behind with these kind of averages every 
year, it’s going to take you five years just to come up to the 250 
million and you’re probably going to be looking at a shortfall of 
150 to $200 million to be made up in five years. That’s simply 
not acceptable, Madam Minister. The money has to be 
dedicated at this time not in the future. 
 
You’re bringing in roughly 380 million, 350 to 380 million in 
fuel taxes. You’re bringing in between 80 and $100 million in 
licensing fees. You’re looking at $450 million that you’re 
collecting from licensing fees for vehicles, and for highway fuel 
taxes for fuel taxes, and yet you’re not putting anywheres near 
that money into the Highways department. You should at least 
be making up the $250 million, Madam Minister, that you’ve 
been promising, that your Premier has been promising will be 
spent on highways on average for the 10-year period. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Okay, I am very glad that you kind of 
asked this question, because we have made the commitment and 
the commitment is good on the 2.5 billion. 
 
Now it’s very interesting. It’s kind of, I guess, the way that you 
would like to do math, but put more dollars in, like you say, 
sooner than later. It’s all part of, of course, a balanced budget is 
what we’re talking about here. And these dollars . . . I mean, I 
know maybe that’s a new concept to you, but we have to take 
our time. And as we can increase our dollars, we will continue 
to invest in the priorities, and one of those priorities very 
definitely is Highways and Transportation. 
 
Now one of the interesting things that . . . Now today I just was 
at the road builders and I’ve certainly met the road builders on 
various occasions. And what they have said also, what they’re 
very pleased with is that they have got a long-term commitment 
and that we didn’t ramp up the budget too quickly, because you 
get into other factors, so that they have time that they want to 
build their industry. 
 
We also have to be very concerned about the inflation factor 

that, if you put too many dollars in too quickly, you’re not 
going to be able to . . . you’re driving the cost up of building 
those roads. 
 
And they actually commended us that we’ve given a long-term 
commitment, that they know that there’s increased dollars 
coming over the next 10-year period so that they can be 
spending $2.5 billion on our highways and on our roads. So last 
year we added $30 million. This year we’re adding $20 million. 
And next year we’ll be able to add some more dollars. 
 
But again we have to do it in a balanced budget scenario 
because we still have to work at some tax reduction, some debt 
reduction which I’m sure you’d be familiar with. And I just 
want to mention where some of that fuel tax goes — is that we 
still spend $2 million a day on interest in this province. And you 
know, a month or two of that interest could certainly help out 
our Highways budget so . . . 
 
Now one of the things that we’ve also done with the increases 
in our dollars in our budget, and if we actually relayed it back to 
fuel tax revenues. I mean, like I’ve said, we’ve been trying to 
increase the dollars there but we still have an interest cost to 
pay. 
 
Now one other thing is that we certainly also would like to see 
some partnering on the federal level to put dollars into a 
national highways program. Also dollars into a rural 
infrastructure program in order to build the transportation 
system in this province because we are certainly affected by 
some of the federal policies. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
certainly don’t have any disagreement with you that the federal 
government should be putting some money in. But you’re 
responsible — you’re the Minister of Highways in 
Saskatchewan. Nobody else has responsibility for highways in 
Saskatchewan — you do. 
 
The federal . . . there’s no federal Minister of Highways — a 
Minister of Transportation, but his portfolio is not to deal with 
highways in Saskatchewan. You can certainly try and convince 
him to put money in, and I hope you succeed. But it’s your 
responsibility, no one else’s, Madam Minister. 
 
You talk about where the money is going, why you can’t put the 
money that you’re collecting for highways into highways. Well 
I guess it’s a question of priorities, Madam Minister. You had 
30-some million dollars to spend in Guyana. You lost $16 
million on NST, about $30 million for your Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement to favour unions, $1.4 
million lost at Saturn, over $2 million lost at SaskPower 
Commercial. 
 
You certainly have money for those areas, Madam Minister. 
You know if you added all those dollars up, you could have 
made your $250 million commitment to highways this year. 
 
(1645) 
 
It’s your priorities, Madam Minister. It’s your decision and 
nobody else’s. It’s up to you to see to it that the highways of 
this province meet the requirements of the people. And because 



April 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

those highways are not being met . . . the requirements are not 
being met, we’re seeing a loss of industry in this province. 
We’re seeing people having to spend more money to maintain 
their equipment, that isn’t coming back to increase the economy 
of this province because the highway infrastructure is not in 
place. 
 
You talked about the number of claims you’ve had against the 
department because of damages to vehicles along their roads. 
You’ve settled a hundred of those you said in the last fiscal year 
out of a series of 3 to 400 complaints that were filed against 
you. How many of those claims are still ongoing from the last 
fiscal year, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Well I think there’s two or three things 
here that I’d like to answer. First of all, on the specific question, 
we don’t have the numbers here and we can certainly check on 
that. We think it’s a very low number but we can try to check 
that out. 
 
But the one that I would like to respond to also on your 
comments is very definitely I do know my responsibility as the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation. And so has this 
government understood its responsibility and it certainly has set 
this as one of the major priorities. 
 
And when you say Highways and Transportation are affecting 
the economy, well the economy of this province is doing very 
well. And it is one of the things I think that we can be very 
proud of. And some of the stress that we actually see on our 
highways and roads is because we actually have a very 
flourishing economy in the gas and oil industry, in some of the 
manufacturing sectors, and some of the other resource sectors. 
And even though we have increased trucking, and some of 
those kinds of pressures, we definitely need to work with those 
industries in every way we possibly can to make sure that we do 
have a transportation system that not only meets today’s needs, 
but meets the needs of the 21st century. 
 
But when you make a comment also, that it seems to me you’re 
trying to let the federal government off, that they don’t have 
any responsibility, I believe they really do have responsibility. 
And I see in every other national country or federal country that 
there’s federal support for their highways; Canada does seem to 
be the exception. 
 
But as I speak to not only industry, CAA (Canadian Automobile 
Association), the trucking association, all of the provinces, there 
is not a group that doesn’t believe that the national federal 
government does have a responsibility for putting dollars into a 
highways and a transportation system, which we will not give 
up on. 
 
Now the other comment that I just want to make on those, is 
that we not only recognize the importance of increased dollars, 
we also recognize the importance of doing stronger and better 
planning for the future of transportation, and to have 
communities, have industry all be a part of that consultation and 
in partnerships. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well your 
long-term planning seems to be simply just shuffle it down the 
road and hope to heck somebody else will deal with it later on, 

because you’re not meeting your commitment. 
 
Your commitment was $250 million a year for 10 years — 2.5 
billion. The Premier has stood up, I don’t know how many 
times, and bragged, $2.5 billion on highways. Well you keep 
shuffling it off and you keep shuffling it off, and it’s like the old 
Russian five-year plan. They never work. All you do is create a 
new five-year plan. And that’s what you’re doing, Madam 
Minister — your five-year plan; your so-called ten-year plan. 
You keep passing the buck down the line and you’re not putting 
the money into it. 
 
You’re concerned about the federal responsibilities while you 
keep dumping your responsibility off on the federal 
government. I’d like to see where it says the federal government 
is responsible for Saskatchewan highways. They don’t have that 
responsibility. They may assume some of those costs and I 
would hope that they certainly would accept that responsibility. 
But I don’t know where it says they have that. So if you have it 
I would love to see it, and please point that out. 
 
So, Madam Minister, because then we can talk to the other 
party in here why they’re not pressing their colleagues to get 
some of that money. But, Madam Minister, I don’t see any 
place where it says that the federal government has the 
responsibility for highways in Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . not my buddies. Not my buddies. 
 
Perhaps the Deputy Premier has supported the federal 
government in the past. He certainly wanted to go down and 
visit with them in 1991 when he won election because they 
were going to be the great saviours for agriculture. We haven’t 
seen a nickel come from the federal government on agriculture 
so his trip to Ottawa was certainly a failure. Just as we have not 
seen money coming from the federal government whenever the 
current minister talks about the federal responsibility. I don’t 
even know if she’s gone to talk to the federal government about 
having some input into money in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’ll give you the opportunity, Madam Minister, to respond to 
where the federal government responsibility lies. What part of 
the constitution? What agreements do you have that the federal 
government is responsible for highways in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — I really am very glad to be able to have a 
chance to respond to this. First of all on the $2.5 billion, I just 
want you to know that we’ve made the commitment. When you 
make a commitment it averages out to maybe then $250 million 
per year. You divide it by 10. And right now we added 30 
million last year. We added 20 million, and maybe next year we 
add some more. And at the end of the 10 years you add it up, 
you divide it by 10, and it will say $250 million. That’s how an 
average works. That’s how an average works. I just thought I’d 
let you know on that. 
 
Okay. Now I’d also just like to comment. It seems very 
interesting with our so-called Saskatchewan Party over there, 
it’s interesting that the Tories, that here they are now and we’re 
wondering who’s kicking who over there defending the federal 
Liberal government, which is a very interesting scenario. 
 
Now when you talk about who believes that there ever should 
be a national policy, a national highways program, probably 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1998 

everybody in this province believes in it. Every other country 
believes in it. And actually federally there had been 
commitments at different times to national highways. 
 
But at this time . . . and the federal government at this time is 
not making that commitment. And never before have the 
policies of a federal government ever affected western Canada. 
And you should know this as a rural member. And in 
Saskatchewan the changes in the CTA (Canada Transport Act), 
the loss of the Crow benefit, the kind of impact, the kind of 
impact that this is having on rural Saskatchewan, branch-line 
abandonment. And you say that the federal government has no 
obligation. Well there is a moral obligation, whether it’s in a 
constitution. 
 
We built a country based on transportation. They put that 
golden spike in. That was building a country on transportation. 
And you’re saying now the federal government has no 
obligation to a national highways program, no obligation to 
rural Saskatchewan to put dollars in to help build up their 
infrastructure as they’re abandoning rail lines across this 
province. 
 
I don’t think . . . I do not believe there’s a person in 
Saskatchewan that believes the federal government doesn’t 
have an obligation to put dollars into highways and roads and 
transportation in our province, and right across this nation. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence for Members 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I believe with leave I 
would move, seconded by the member from Regina Northeast, 
by leave of the Assembly, this is a very standard motion and I’ll 
just read it to you and see if you agree to it: 
 

That a leave of absence be granted to the member from 
Last Mountain-Touchwood from Tuesday, May 5, 1998 to 
Friday, May 22, 1998 inclusive, to attend the 
Commonwealth parliamentary visit at Westminster on 
behalf of all of the members of the Assembly. 
 

I would so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in a similar vein I 
move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Fairview, by 
leave of the Assembly; 
 

That we would grant to the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland from Thursday, May 21, 1998 to Thursday, 
May 28, 1998 inclusive, to attend the 10th Commonwealth 
parliamentary seminar in Charlottetown, Prince Edward 
Island, on behalf of all members of the Assembly. 
 

I so move. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................869 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................869 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................869 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................869 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................869 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................869 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................869 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................869 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................869 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................870 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................870 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................870 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................870 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................870 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................870 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................870 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................870 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Health Care Cuts 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................871 
 World Wildlife Federation 
  Koenker .....................................................................................................................................................................................871 
 Current State of Health Care 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................871 
 Saskatchewan Abilities Council Ability Bowl 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................871 
 Farewell to Cafeteria Manager 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................871 
 SaskEnergy Scholarship Program 
  Murrell.......................................................................................................................................................................................872 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................872 
 Outstanding Students in Pelican Narrows 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................872 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................873 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................873 
 SaskPower’s Proposed Investment in Guyana 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................873 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................874 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................874 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................874 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................875 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................875 
 Rural Road Maintenance 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................876 
  Teichrob.....................................................................................................................................................................................876 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................876 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................876 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................877 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 37  The Noxious Weeds Amendment Act, 1998 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................877 
 



 

 Bill No. 38 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................877 
 Bill No. 39 — The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................877 
 Bill No. 40 — The SaskTel Pension Implementation Act 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................877 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 33 — The Provincial Court Act, 1998 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................877 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................878 
 Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions Act/Loi sur les conventions sur l’exécution de jugements 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................879 
 Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Amendment Act, 1998...........................................................880 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 5  The Animal Products Amendment Act, 1998 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................880 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................880 
 Bill No. 6 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................881 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................881 
 Bill No. 8 — The Stray Animals Amendment Act, 1998 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................883 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................883 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................887 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 5 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 1998 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................888 
 Bill No. 6  The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................888 
 Bill No. 8 — The Stray Animals Amendment Act, 1998 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................888 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 
  Bradley.......................................................................................................................................................................................889 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................889 
MOTIONS 
 Leave of Absence for Members 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................894 
 
 
 


