





























































Hansard: April 17, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 639 
 April 17, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a presentation on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from the 
community of Gainsborough. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may 
continue. 
 

These petitions come from the Redvers, Gainsborough, 
Wakaw, Stockholm areas of the province, Manor, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 

 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with petitions as well to present to 
this Assembly and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions here are signed by individuals 
from the Redvers, Antler, Wakaw, Storthoaks, Carievale area of 
the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding Channel Lake’s fiasco. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The community involved with the petition, Mr. Speaker, the 
community of Melfort. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I too rise to present a petition and 
I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake’s fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these come from people in Porcupine Plain and Carragana. 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the Melfort 
area. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today from the people of Spalding. 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have a 
petition to present to the Assembly this morning surrounding 
the issue of Jack Messer and the Channel Lake situation. I am 
pleased to present on behalf of the residents of Prince Albert 
this petition comes from. And I so submit. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition regarding the Plains hospital. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the city 
of Weyburn. Of course, that’s where I will be next week, Mr. 
Speaker. 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1998 

The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member of course, will 
want to avoid debating while presenting petitions. And I’ll 
recognize the next petitioner. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again to 
present a petition, and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that signed this particular petition 
are primarily from the community of Big Beaver, and I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition are from the communities of 
Swift Current, Gravelbourg, Regina, and a number from 
Assiniboia. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a petition 
on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan with respect to 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people who signed this petition are from Estevan, 
Benson, and Lampman. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today and the people of Saskatchewan in their 
efforts in stopping the closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 

continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 
Aneroid in my constituency. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These all come from the community of Cabri, Saskatchewan, 
and I’m happy to present them on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; saving the Plains Health Centre; and calling an 
independent inquiry into the Channel Lake issue. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you I 
would like to introduce to you and to the House a visitor who is 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, who has come to view the 
proceedings of this legislature and is visiting here from 
Cloppenburg, Germany. 
 
Bernd Tabeling is here to attend the 50th wedding anniversary 
of some relatives, Peter and Ella Thacyk, who are residents in 
my constituency. This is not the first time that Bernd has been 
in Saskatchewan. This is the third time. He enjoys coming to 
Canada and particularly coming to visit in Saskatchewan. I have 
had the pleasure to meet him. 
 
He is seated in your gallery with another relative who’s going to 
be — not my relative — but who’s going to this anniversary, 
the cabinet secretary, Lois Thacyk. And I would like to ask 
members of the House to join me in extending to Bernd 
Tabeling, Willkommen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, two 
people who are here in the gallery today. The first is my 
brother, Dr. Ralph Nilson, who is the dean of physical activity 
studies at the University of Regina, and we heard about him 
yesterday as the editor of the “Discover Saskatchewan” book A 



April 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

Guide to Historic Sites and markers of Saskatchewan. 
 
But today he’s here with Juan Carlos Limon Lopez of the 
University Autonoma de Campeche in Mexico; he’s from 
Campeche, Mexico, and Juan Carlos is a student in a program 
that has been organized by the University of Regina, the 
department of physical activity studies, that’s a program for 
North American mobility in higher education with a 
specialization in ecotourism especially for those people who 
live in . . . out in marginal areas of North America. 
 
And the other universities involved in this program are Arizona 
State University, Washington State University, University of 
Manitoba, Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, and then the 
University of Regina is the lead institution. Representatives 
from all of these schools will be in Regina May 21 to 25 talking 
about this program. 
 
I’m especially pleased to welcome Juan Carlos here. Juan 
Carlos’s grandfather was the governor of the state of Campeche 
from 1949 to 1954, and he has a special interest in politics and 
in political science as well as the ecotourism that he is studying. 
 
Also I think we should all wish him well; he’s returning to 
Mexico next week because he’s going to be married on the first 
weekend in May. So welcome to Juan Carlos. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leadership 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, by the 
time this House reconvenes on Monday afternoon the 
Saskatchewan Party will have a new leader — the next premier 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — The Saskatchewan Party has now received 
over 3,300 mail-in leadership ballots — the largest number of 
people ever to vote in a leadership in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the Deputy Premier is pretty bitter these 
days as he watches his hopes of sitting in the Premier’s chair 
sink into Channel Lake. And the other day he made some 
disparaging remarks about the number of people at our 
leadership convention. What he hasn’t figured out yet is that we 
actually had over 3,300 people at our leadership convention. 
That’s because our convention is taking place in every corner of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
People attended leadership forums in their area, they listened to 
the candidate speeches on TV, and they were given the 
opportunity to cast their votes by mail — no matter where they 
live in the province. It’s just another way the Saskatchewan 
Party is doing politics differently — taking our leadership 
convention to our members instead of making our members 
come to the convention. 
 
Over 3,300 ballots have come in so far, and this clearly shows 
that Saskatchewan people like our new approach. 

So, Mr. Speaker, Monday is going to be an even more exciting 
day when all these ballots are counted and the Saskatchewan 
Party announces our new leader and the next premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News Headlines 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me share, for the 
record, five good news headlines from Saskatchewan’s weekly 
newspapers: 
 
1. “Hwy #9 Wrecking open for business,” Carlyle Observer, 
March 30, ’98. 
 
2. “Texas closing means Melville jobs at B&W," Melville 
Advance, March 25, 1998. 
 
3. “Council ‘hog wild’ about pork barns,” Langenburg 
Four-Town Journal, March 25, ’98. 
 
4. “New shop opens in Stoughton,” Carlyle Observer, March 
30, ’98. 
 
5. “District hog projects are right on schedule,” Kindersley 
Clarion, March 25, ’98. 
 
These headlines have two things in common. They each 
introduce a story of economic development outside the major 
cities and they each occur in an opposition member’s 
constituency. 
 
It seems, Mr. Speaker, that opposition members are not aware 
of the economic success stories in their own constituencies. On 
behalf of the government, I am delighted to share with them and 
to recognize the hard work and the successful work of many 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Hospital Bed Reductions in Swift Current 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday in this House the Liberal opposition revealed that the 
number of beds at the Swift Current Regional Hospital may be 
slashed from 134 down to 80. 
 
The CEO (chief executive officer) of the district confirmed that 
at least on preliminary planning briefs submitted to the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government, suggests the number of 
acute care beds could be reduced to 80. 
 
However, the reaction from the Minister of Health was almost 
as disturbing as that news itself. The minister told the media 
that it wasn’t his concern. The possibility that 54 beds being 
slashed at a regional hospital is not his concern. The possibility 
of this facility losing its status as a regional hospital is not his 
concern. 
 
If the Minister of Health is not concerned about a serious health 
care issue, who in government is? Obviously it’s not the 
member from Swift Current. 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, this government’s response to a serious health 
concern is typical. First it’s deny, deny, deny that there’s a 
problem. And then there is, they try to duck their responsibility. 
People are looking for leadership; it’s time they saw it from the 
Premier and his government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in following up on the member’s statement 
from Regina about what’s showing in local town papers, here I 
have the Indian Head Town Crier: “Nurses speak out against 
health care.” The Wolseley Bulletin: “Nurses concerned about 
health care.” 
 
You bet you better start looking in the paper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

1998 SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 13, 
1998 the Minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 
was proud to represent the province at the opening ceremonies 
of the 1998 Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games. These games 
brought together some 2,500 first nations youth from around the 
province. 
 
On Tuesday evening the first ever 1998 SaskTel Aboriginal 
Youth Awards of Excellence was held in Regina. As part of the 
Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games, awards night celebrated 
the outstanding achievements and contributions made by 
Saskatchewan’s aboriginal youth. 
 
I was honoured to present one of the awards on behalf of the 
province. There were 42 nominees competing for six awards. 
 
The awards presented and the winners in each of the categories 
were: education, Carmen Lewis, 17 years of age, from Island 
Lake First Nation; sports, Chico Peepeetch, 14 years of age, 
from Saskatoon; recreation, Standing Buffalo junior girls 
volleyball team; community, Rachel Jobb, 15 years of age, from 
Southend Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation; culture, Welland Ratt, 
13 years of age, from Lac La Ronge Indian Band; innovation, 
Christopher Ross, 17 years of age, from Red Earth First Nation. 
 
All nominees were exceptional, with a long list of 
accomplishments. Congratulations to all the nominees and the 
six winners of the awards. Indeed, with their outstanding 
backgrounds, they are all winners, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Balcarres Welding 50th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to 
allow me to congratulate a small business in my community. 
It’s Balcarres Welding. It celebrated its 50th anniversary 
recently. Charlie Lucyk, who is the owner of Balcarres 
Welding, opened the doors after the war on August 16, 1947 
under the name of Tymoschuk & Lucyk. Three years later they 
dissolved that partnership; however, during that time, 
established a welding and blacksmithing operation which has 
prevailed throughout the years, through thick and thin. 
 
As times changed and new machinery was introduced, Mr. 

Lucyk had to enlarge his shop three times to accommodate the 
overflow of business. He now has a building operating out of a 
4,000 square foot shop with space, parts room and offices. 
 
Balcarres Welding has built V-shaped snowploughs, 
self-emptying grain hoppers, bulldozer blades for farm tractors, 
truck hoists, cattle liners, and grain boxes, the demands of a 
very innovative gentleman. It was the first rural shop to own a 
plate metal shear in rural Saskatchewan. This shear will cut a 
10-foot wide sheet of plate metal. 
 
In ’79 Balcarres Welding became a family business when 
Dennis joined his father. And today Balcarres Welding is 
thriving in that community, offers many services. And close to 
300 people turned out for an event to congratulate and thank 
Charlie Lucyk and his family for contributing greatly to that 
small community of Balcarres in rural Saskatchewan. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Champions 
 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is getting 
to be almost automatic for me at this time of the year. I am 
happy to report to the Assembly that the Weyburn Red Wings, 
as of last Friday, are once again the winners of the Hanbidge 
Cup, the champions of the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey 
League. 
 
This is the second year in a row the Red Wings have won the 
title and the fourth time in five seasons. That’s a record any 
team can be proud of. And at the same time that I’m boasting, I 
must extend my sympathy to the members from Carrot River 
Valley, Indian Head-Milestone, and Estevan. It was their teams 
that the Red Wings skated through on their way to the cup. In 
particular, I congratulate the Nipawin Hawks, who won the 
northern division championship. But now once again, the Red 
Wings advance to the Anavet Cup beginning this Saturday night 
in Weyburn, against Winkler, Manitoba. And I’ve got my game 
tickets here and I’m going to be at the game. 
 
After that series is over, we go to the Royal Bank Cup National 
Tier Two Championships in Nanaimo, B.C. beginning on May 
5th. I understand that Nanaimo is lovely in May. 
 
I congratulate the Red Wing organization, the coach, Dwight 
McMillan; general manager, Ron Rumball; and of course the 
players, who have made Weyburn synonymous with junior 
hockey. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Displayco’s 20th Anniversary 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had the 
pleasure of speaking at Displayco’s 20th anniversary on behalf 
of the Premier and the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Displayco, the trade show professionals, is a Regina-based 
company with offices in five major centres including 



April 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

Edmonton, Calgary, and Kelowna. Displayco is involved in 
planning trade shows, display construction and fabrication, 
design and graphics, rentals, exhibitor training, and installation 
and dismantling services. 
 
On April 1st, Douglas Critchley, president of Displayco 
Canada, sent a letter to the Premier informing him of 
Displayco’s upcoming 20th anniversary. I would like to quote 
briefly from it. It says: 
 

Twenty years have passed since Displayco first opened its 
doors. We are proud to have Saskatchewan as our home. 
Our success is a direct result of the business climate that 
has been created by you and your colleagues in the 
provincial government. All too often government is not 
given the credit it is due for helping businesses such as 
ours be successful. 

 
The Government of Saskatchewan is delighted to see the 
success that Displayco has achieved and we congratulate them. 
The company’s performance is proof that Saskatchewan-based 
companies can compete, grow, and succeed in markets across 
the country. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Rural Road Traffic Accidents 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Madam Minister, information from SGI’s (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) traffic accident information system says 
fatalities from vehicle accidents on rural roads in Saskatchewan 
are up 37 per cent over the past three years. Even worse, the 
TAIS (traffic accident information system) information shows 
the number of people killed in accidents on rural roads 
increased by a whopping 76 per cent in ’97 over 1996. 
 
Madam Minister, that is some very tragic and bloody evidence 
of your government’s failure to fund road maintenance in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) has been telling you for months that rural 
municipalities need at least 56 million this year just to maintain 
rural roads. But the NDP came up with less than half of that 
amount. It’s no wonder people are dying on our grid roads. 
 
Madam Minister, your NDP government’s policy of 
consistently underfunding rural road maintenance is killing 
people in Saskatchewan. Will you finally pull your head out of 
the pothole it seems . . . appears to be stuck in and take action 
on SARM’s funding demands? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
hon. member opposite for my first opportunity this session to 
answer a question in the House, Mr. Speaker. 

When fatalities happen on any of our roads, it’s always a 
tragedy, for whatever reason. But traffic information safety 
reports, that those figures are drawn from, show that excessive 
speed and alcohol are still, and the not wearing seat-belts, are 
still the major causes. 
 
And I’d like to quote from the Norquay North Star, April 9, 
1998. Headline, “Road repair plea made.” 

 
“Alberta roads are in desperate need of repair,” said the 
president of the Alberta Association of Municipal Districts 
and Counties. “Right now our ratepayers are telling us that 
our road infrastructure is crumbling.” Heinen said rural 
roads have been deteriorating since government cut 
provincial road grants by 20 per cent to reduce the deficit. 
 

So it’s the lack of federal contributions to our road system and 
the reckless abandonment of rail lines that’s putting the pressure 
on all the roads in western Canada. So we think you should 
direct your questions to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess what the 
minister is saying, because the roads are crumbling in Alberta 
it’s okay for our roads to crumble and they’re not going to do 
anything about it. 
 
Madam Minister, it’s non-answers like that one that have the 
people across this province up in arms. Your NDP government 
has absolutely failed to respond to the rural road crisis. 
 
SGI accident statistics make one thing perfectly clear. Your 
government is ignoring the critical need for more funding to 
maintain our rural roads and it’s killing people. 
 
The statistics also say that one of the leading causes for 
fatalities on rural roads is driving too fast for road conditions. 
Madam Minister, given the pathetic state of our rural roads, any 
time you take your truck out of park you’re driving too fast for 
road conditions. 
 
Madam Minister, your lack of funding for rural roads is killing 
people. Will you make a commitment today to increase funding 
for rural road maintenance so that people can be confident that 
these roads are safe to drive on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, we are already ahead of 
the member opposite. Because if he was listening, in the budget 
on March 9 we already have a substantial increase in this year’s 
budget for highways and a 14 per cent increase in the funding 
for rural roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all the time that I haven’t had any questions to 
answer this session, I’ve been sitting here and contemplating 
across the aisle. And I’ve seen the . . . It’s like a fairy tale, Mr. 
Speaker. Across here I see the Conservative Party — the Rip 
Van Winkle party who put themselves to sleep. And then they 
woke up a little bit and turned themselves into the Hansel and 
Gretel party and dropped crumbs behind them, saying follow 
me to the Saskatchewan Party. 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1998 

And then over there we have the seven dwarfs, the seven 
dwarfs, and I don’t know all of their names. There’s only six of 
them because the Doc is grumpy because he doesn’t have a seat. 
 
And then in the end we have the three bears, wondering, you 
know, who’s been sitting in their chair. So nobody can say, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is not a fun place to be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Proposed Investment in Guyana 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. All hon. members I’m 
sure will want . . . Order. I’m sure all hon. members will want 
to allow question period to consider in an . . . to continue in an 
orderly manner. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for SaskPower. Mr. Minister, on 
November 6, 1997 the SaskPower board directed SaskPower 
Commercial to conclude the capitalization transaction to the 
purchase of Guyana electrical corporation. That sounds like 
SaskPower Commercial was on the verge of completing the 
Guyana deal back as far as November 6. 
 
Mr. Minister, what action did SaskPower Commercial take as a 
result of this direction from the board? Did SaskPower 
Commercial sign any documents that committed SaskPower or 
SaskPower Commercial to any type of financial obligation with 
respect to Guyanese electrical corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it has been indicated 
on a number of occasions there was a letter of intent signed 
between SaskPower Commercial and the Guyanese electric 
company for the purchase of 50 per cent of the Guyanese 
electrical company. 
 
And there was a long, arduous process of due diligence. People 
went to Guyana to do the inventory, to do the inventory of the 
company. Legal documents were explored. And at the end of 
the discussion and debate it was decided, after looking at the 
due diligence, that the deal would not be concluded. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that he is probably well 
aware of all of the machinations, discussions that took place. 
We’ve reported to the House in great detail and also in Crown 
Corporations Committee. When the appropriate time comes 
you’ll be able to ask any and all details, and the answers will 
certainly be given. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, one thing we learned from 
Channel Lake is that Jack Messer can move pretty fast when he 
wants to do a deal. The SaskPower board gave approval in 
principle to the Channel Lake deal on March 13, ’97 and by 
March 27 the deal was done. That’s why this board minute is so 
frightening. On November 6, SaskPower Commercial was 

directed to conclude the capitalization agreement. That sounds 
to me like they’re on the verge of cutting a deal for $31 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, what action did SaskPower Commercial take as a 
result of this clear board decision? Did they sign any further 
agreements with respect to the GEC (Guyana Electricity 
Company) deal? Are Saskatchewan taxpayers on the hook for 
any money that you’re not telling us about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite if he would listen — and I guess this is one of the 
things he will learn if he becomes the leader of the Conservative 
Party this weekend, you’re going to have to learn to listen. The 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, it’s the Saskatchewan Party, 
they . . . the turncoat from the north-east part of the province 
hollers from his seat. He corrects me, it’s not the Conservative 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now the . . . Order, 
order. Order! Order. The hon. member, the minister, will 
recognize that the term he just used to describe the member is 
not parliamentary and I’ll ask him to withdraw that remark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I do withdraw the 
term “turncoat.” I meant to say the members who left the 
Liberal Party . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now the . . . Order. 
Order. The . . . Order! — I will ask all hon. members, including 
the minister, to come to order. And when I ask the minister to 
withdraw the remark, I ask the minister to do it in an 
unqualified manner, to withdraw the remark and then briefly 
conclude his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the 
comment that I used unequivocally. But I want to make clear 
that, that when it comes to Guyana and the member opposite 
asking the question, who is now running for the leadership of 
the Conservative Party, having sat as a Liberal, that he has to 
worry about listening to people. This is what I meant to say, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to make it very clear that there was a letter of intent 
signed between SaskPower Commercial and the Guyanese 
government. And then the process is: that recommendation has 
to go to the Power board, to the CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) board, to cabinet. 
 
And although there may have been a recommendation from the 
SaskPower Commercial, it had to go through a number of other 
steps before it was approved. And at the end of the day it was 
not approved. 
 
So when you keep saying, Mr. Member from Melfort, next 
leader of the Conservative Party, that there was a deal made, 
there was never a deal made. We rejected the deal because it 
wasn’t economic. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Hospital Bed Closures 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 



April 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

question is for the Minister of Health or his designate. 
 
Mr. Minister, even in your own constituency now there is a 
health crisis. The East Central Health District is three and a half 
million dollars in debt, and the only way to deal with the debt is 
more cuts to services in the Yorkton hospital. 
 
On April 23 the board will be meeting to discuss the cuts it will 
be forced to make. Eunice Off, a registered nurse at the Yorkton 
hospital, has told us they are considering the closure of eight of 
sixteen pediatric beds in Yorkton hospital, as well as the closure 
of some intensive care beds. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you going to do to deal with the crisis in 
your own backyard. Will you give us the assurance today there 
will be no further bed closures in the Yorkton hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of 
Health, I will give these assurances. The Minister of Health and 
the Department of Health and this government will continue to 
work with that health district and every health district in the 
province to provide the best and most appropriate level of care 
to the people of our province. 
 
I would remind that member this morning that in the most 
recent budget of this government, health care spending was 
increased by $88 million — $88 million. That represents an 
increase in funding to every health district in Saskatchewan. 
That brings the funding to health care in Saskatchewan to over 
$1.7 billion, the largest expenditure of public funds on health 
care in this province’s history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
your health system is breaking down at every level. First you 
close 52 rural hospitals, so more patients have to go to regional 
centres like Yorkton and Swift Current. Then you close beds at 
the regional centres so more patients have to go to Saskatoon 
and Regina. And then you close the Plains hospital so patients 
have to go to the Howard Johnson. 
 
It doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Minister, and you keep bragging 
about that you’re spending more than ever on health care. Then 
why are we getting less and less services? 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you going to do to address the crisis in 
regional centres like Yorkton? How can you allow bed closures 
in Yorkton when that hospital is now busier than it ever has 
been. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I don’t think I need to 
remind anyone in this House, but I will. When members 
opposite look to this side of the House, this political party, this 
political movement, they know that this is the movement in 
Canada that pioneered medicare. We pioneered it right here in 
Saskatchewan. It’s been our gift to Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what’s happened with health care in 
Saskatchewan since 1991. Even in the most desperate 
circumstances which that party left this province in, in the most 
desperate circumstances which that party left us in, this 
government did not cut funding to health care, Mr. Speaker. 

Each and every year we have provided new funding to health 
care. In the interim, Mr. Speaker, this government has designed 
with the communities of Saskatchewan a health care delivery 
model that fits us well for the 21st century. 
 
He talks about loss of service. Just the opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
We have new services across this province. We have new 
services in emergency care; we have new technologies available 
— never before available in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
tell you this, we’re completing more surgeries on a daily basis 
today in Saskatchewan than ever before. That’s what’s 
happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Emergency Services 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I see when I 
look across to that House and to that member, I see Rip Van 
Winkle. That government has been asleep for the last seven 
years. Day after day, Mr. Speaker, in this House we raise issues 
that show us there is a bed crisis in the city of Regina. They 
don't seem to understand. 
 
An audit of emergency rooms in Regina concludes that 43 per 
cent of emergency room patients at the Plains are seen during 
the evening and the night-time hours. However, for some reason 
that same audit recommends reducing the night-time operating 
hours of the Plains hospital emergency room. 
 
Mr. Minister, surely you’re not planning on following that 
recommendation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to borrow from the 
Minister of Municipal Government, I tell you, I’ve never seen a 
dwarf so large in all my life. And I’ve never known one to be 
called two-tier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, day after day I listen to the 
Liberal caucus get up and question the Minister of Health. I 
wonder sometimes, Mr. Speaker, if that Liberal caucus has a 
mirror. I remind this Liberal caucus, today in British Columbia 
we have doctors withdrawing services. Today we’re told in the 
province of Alberta we may have doctors withdrawing services. 
I see a picture yesterday from the hospital corridors and Alberta 
people laid out in the corridors. In Ontario, Mr. Speaker, a 
recent poll says that health care is the number one concern of 
Ontario people. In Liberal Maritimes, Mr. Speaker, health care 
— the number one concern of the Maritimes. 
 
Now I ask myself and I ask the members, why would that be? 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the answer. It’s because the federal 
Liberal government has given up their commitment to publicly 
funding medicare in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s interesting 
that they want to blame the federal Liberals. And I’d like to 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1998 

quote from a newspaper article by Lewis Draper. Now Lewis 
Draper we all know is a former NDP MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), a former NDP supporter. And he says, 
what I hate about the provincial budget is the hypocrisy of 
blaming the federal Liberal government for all the things that 
are unpalatable, and that’s exactly what they’re doing. 
 
It goes on to say that: 
 

This is a case of the provincial kettle calling the federal 
kettle black. It is reminiscent of the biblical parable of the 
man who was forgiven his debt of 10,000 talents to the 
king but who jailed the man who owed him 100 denarii 
until the debt was paid. (And this is taken from Matthew 
18, verses 23 to 35). 
 

So the provincial government should quit blaming everyone 
else. They should take on the responsibility of health care that 
they were elected to do. Mr. Minister, will you stop the cuts to 
health beds in Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Arm 
River says that we should ought to quit blaming. I’d say to the 
member from Arm River, if the shoe fits you wear it. Mr. 
Speaker, he wants to quote this morning, my good friend, Dr. 
Lewis Draper. He wants to quote. Well I want to quote one of 
his good friends. I’m just going to quote one of his good 
friends, who said, quote: 
 

I will not stand here and tell you that the cuts in transfer 
payments we made were insignificant. They were not, for I 
will tell you they have . . . I will not tell you they would 
not have an impact. They have had an impact. 
 

Do you know who said that, Mr. Speaker? The Hon. Allan 
Rock, the federal minister, the federal Liberal Minister of 
Health. Now the member there is quite anxious to quote people 
today. I’ll quote another Liberal, quote: 
 

If there are people who are prepared to pay, then I think we 
have to let them pay. 

 
Now that sounds to me very suspiciously, Mr. Speaker, as an 
Americanized model of health care, a two-tiered system of 
health care. Who said that? The current member from Arm 
River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Because the member opposite, the former 
minister of Health who was part of the degrading health care 
reform system in this province has taken health care to where 
it’s at, he is great at paraphrasing out of context. Those are the 
people of Saskatchewan saying in response to the closure of a 
hospital in Central Butte or a closure of a hospital in Canora, 
that’s their response. They are so desperate they need help. 
They want to do anything, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To continue to quote from Lewis Draper, he also says in 
response to the budget and the welfare reform: 
 

After witnessing the disasters of health care reform in rural 
Saskatchewan, I shudder to think what they’re going to do 
with the social services program. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP plans on closing the Plains hospital on 
October 31. That’s not soon enough for most of these guys. 
They’d like to have it happen tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Premier, can you tell this House that you will not allow 
emergency room service to be cut back at the Plains any 
further? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from the 
front page of the Moose Jaw Times-Herald last night, last night, 
in response to the kind of fear tactics that the Liberal caucus and 
others are spreading around the province. This is in regard to 
emergency services in Regina and the move of the medical 
family in the Plains hospital into the expanded facilities at the 
General and Pasqua. 
 
The director of emergency services in Moose Jaw says, and I 
quote: 
 

It won’t really affect us one way or another. At the trauma 
centre’s new home, patients will receive the same level of 
care they have come to expect at the Plains. 

 
Mr. Speaker, now that’s from someone who truly does know 
health care in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the member, when he first stood to his feet, he said that I 
was quoting him out of context. Well this is a surprising thing 
for him to say because the quote came straight off the 6 o’clock 
news, BBS (Baton Broadcasting System). There he was live in 
front of the cameras saying it. I’ll read more of it — this is what 
was said live on television: 
 

The Liberals agree, saying the government could cut 
waiting-lists for medical procedures by allowing private 
medical clinics for profit in Saskatchewan. 
 

Harvey McLane. If the people are prepared to pay, then I think 
we have to let them pay, Mr. Speaker. We’re not interested, 
we’re not interested in Liberal two-tier, Americanized 
medicine. 
 

Northern Power Rates 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the last three 
years, I’ve stood up in this Assembly and spoke about the 
contributions that northern Saskatchewan have made to the 
province of Saskatchewan in general. 
 
And once again we look at the three northern hydro generating 
stations — the one in Cumberland House, the one in Sandy 
Bay, and the one of course near Camsell Portage in the far 
North. These three dams bring government coffers a total of 
$325 million annually and that accounts for almost 44 per cent 
of SaskPower’s hydro generation capacity. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have obtained a list of the average monthly 



April 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

power rates paid by the people who reside in Canoe Lake, and, 
Mr. Speaker, these people in Canoe Lake and in the entire 
northern part of Saskatchewan have to pay the highest power 
rates, in my opinion, in North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of these totals include $459, $718, and $837. 
Does the minister in charge of SaskPower feel that these 
SaskPower bills are extremely excessive to say the least? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I will ask all hon. members to 
come to order. I know the minister has not begun his answer, 
but I also know that I could not hear him if he had. And I will 
ask all hon. members to allow the answer to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in regards to the hydro — 
for example he mentioned the case in Cumberland House — 
actually there was a $23 million settlement in regards to 
Cumberland and the agreement will be finished. The last 
statement was made of 3.8 million this year. 
 
As well when you look at historical development, Mr. Speaker, 
and in regards to the jobs, over 50 per cent of the jobs in regards 
to the . . . one of the offshoots of that development was the 
building of the famous Cumberland bridge. And over 50 per 
cent of the people, you know, were employed in regards to the 
building of that bridge. And I must say that was a great success 
story. 
 
And I might even add, Mr. Speaker, when we look at 
development in the North, the Sask enterprise fund, which is in 
regards . . . right in the middle of his own constituency — his 
own riding — has been providing approximately a million 
dollars a year in regards to economic development in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the history of hydro and the 
recent development of hydro, we have indeed have been 
partnering with northern Saskatchewan and making it not only 
beneficial in regards to services, but also with jobs and 
economic development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again Quiet 
Owl has not spoken. The key point I want to make, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the northern senior citizens, people on fixed 
income, families, and the business communities are extremely 
frustrated with the high power rates of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I will share with the Minister of CIC and the Minister of 
Northern Affairs, a list of some of the bills from some of the 
residents of Canoe Lake that are paying such a tremendous high 
cost for power. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would challenge the minister, I will 
challenge the minister today, would you at the very least make 
an effort to travel to northern Saskatchewan to talk to people 
specifically — specifically the business community, the senior 
citizens, the people that pay high power rates — and sit down 
and work out a solution with them to bring these levels down? 
 

They have ideas, they have concepts. They have things like 
co-generation power plants, homestead boilers, solar panels. 
They even have expanded natural gas to the North. Mr. 
Minister, will you make that commitment today, that you’ll go 
there and you’ll come up and work up with solutions alongside 
of northern people to bring these power rates down? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, again those Liberals are 
forgetting exactly what they are doing in regards to the, to the 
power rates. In many, in many cases, Mr. Speaker, we put in 
money for about 80 houses last year in regards to northern 
Saskatchewan. But how much are the Liberals putting in, in 
regards to houses? Zero. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nothing. Zero. Nothing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Zero, Mr. Speaker. If that member was 
doing his job properly he’d be visiting Ralph Goodale and the 
federal Liberals to make sure that the money was there in 
regards to northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re trying to get money from the feds in regards 
to economic development. We now have over a thousand 
people working at the mines. We’re trying to get . . . We have 5 
million increased in our budget on economic development this 
year. We want to get some money from the feds, Mr. Speaker. I 
hope that the member sits with me and says yes, we need the 5 
million from the federal level to be able to do economic 
development in the North. 
 
And I think that will help out in regards to northern 
Saskatchewan. As far as the power rates, Mr. Speaker, they are 
the best in Canada. I think when you’re looking at our rates, 
anywhere in the Crowns we have the best rates anywhere in 
Canada. Maybe he wants to look in privatized areas in where 
Liberals are, Mr. Speaker, but not here in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce in the west gallery, Mr. Bob Ivanochko, who is a 
constituent, and his father, who greatly enjoys the activities in 
the legislature. And Bob is a very active community volunteer, 
working in all areas. And I just want you to help me welcome 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce another guest who has joined us. 
 
Leave granted. 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have literally thousands 
of people who serve the people of Saskatchewan through the 
Department of Social Services. One of them today has joined us 
in the gallery. I would like to introduce to all members, Ms. 
Lori Currie, who works within the Department of Social 
Services and is taking a particular interest in government these 
days. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to present the 
answer to question no. 29, and in the interest of open, 
accessible, and responsible government, with the leave of the 
House, I would also like to provide answers to questions 30, 31, 
32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, and 38. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 29 is provided, and 
with leave, simultaneously, the answer to questions 30 through 
38. Is leave granted? Leave is granted and the answers for 
questions 30 to 38 are also tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Election Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Election Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
The Office of the Chief Electoral Officer has by long tradition 
in this province operated as an independent office performing 
the important functions of the Chief Electoral Officer under the 
election process. Certainly all members of this legislature would 
agree that it is imperative that this operational independence 
continue to ensure the ongoing integrity of the democratic 
process in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will formally institutionalize this 
traditional independence by making the Chief Electoral Officer 
an officer of this Assembly. As such, the Chief Electoral 
Officer will answer directly to you, and through you, to the 
members of this House. This government is taking this 
important procedural step to ensure that the Office of the Chief 
Electoral Officer remains separate from the political fray in 
conducting the functions of the office under The Election Act, 
1996. 
 
In addition to formally establishing the Chief Electoral Officer 
as an officer of the Assembly, the Bill also sets out a new 
process for the appointment, remuneration, and if necessary, the 
removal or suspension of the Chief Electoral Officer. The Chief 
Electoral Officer will be appointed by resolution of the 
Assembly itself. While this House is in session it also falls to 
the Assembly to consider the removal or suspension of a Chief 
Electoral Officer, where necessary, for misconduct and the 
appointment of an Acting Chief Electoral Officer if the Chief 

Electoral Officer is unable to perform the duties of the office 
due to a suspension or illness or other inability to act. 
 
While this Assembly is not sitting, the Board of Internal 
Economy, as a joint committee of this Assembly, will be 
responsible for considering suspension issues and for the 
appointment of an Acting Chief Electoral Officer if and when 
that proves necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Board of Internal Economy will also bear the 
responsibility of setting the remuneration and expenses of the 
Chief Electoral Officer in conducting the duties of this position. 
 
Once appointed, it will then fall to the Chief Electoral Officer to 
in turn appoint an assistant chief electoral officer who will 
assist with day-to-day functions and serve in the place of the 
Chief Electoral Officer where necessary. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, as an aspect of the statutory independence 
of the Chief Electoral Officer as an officer of the Assembly, the 
election report of the Chief Electoral Officer will now be 
provided directly to the Speaker of the Assembly for tabling 
purposes. Similarly, the Chief Electoral Officer will provide an 
annual report to the Assembly through the Speaker to report on 
the ongoing functions of the office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has long recognized the need for 
the Office of the Chief Electoral Officer to operate without 
influence from the executive branch of government. With this 
important procedural step we will be formalizing this 
long-established practice in a way which will demonstrate to 
Saskatchewan people that their electoral rights are in all ways 
properly protected. 
 
Before taking my seat, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the 
consultations that have taken place with the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Leader of the Third Party with respect to 
this legislation. And I want to thank them for their positive 
approach to those consultations and the various concepts that 
are contained in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Election Act, 1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a Bill that I think has some value in it. It’s certainly 
important that the processes of this legislature and the electoral 
Act been done in a non-partisan manner. And the selection of a 
returning officer, Chief Electoral Officer for the province, to be 
a member of this legislature in the sense of an officer of the 
legislature, I think is a valuable addition to the services 
provided to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
However, we do have some questions related to this, Mr. 
Speaker, particularly on how the new process will work. Some 
form of selection or gathering of names for people to be a part 
of this process to be ultimately selected to be the Chief 
Electoral Officer has to be part of what is happening. 
 



April 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

How that process will work is going to be very important. What 
names are put forward, who puts them forward, who narrows 
the list down to a selected group of candidates, and finally, who 
makes the recommendation to this Assembly as to who the 
potential Chief Electoral Officer is going to be is going to be 
extremely important. And we need to find out from the minister 
in charge just how that will be done. Those are some of the 
considerations that need to be discussed in this Assembly before 
the decision is finally made. 
 
One of the areas though, Mr. Speaker, in the discussion of 
removing politics from the selection of the Chief Electoral 
Officer, if that’s the goal, if that’s the goal of this piece of 
legislation, to remove the politics from it, then we have to ask 
why does the selection of the returning officers at the 
constituency level, why does the selection of the deputy 
returning officers at the constituency level not also fall under 
this type of legislation; that those selections will be made in a 
non-partisan manner, Mr. Speaker, so that they’re no longer the 
political rewards handed out to the workers at the constituency 
level by the governing party — because that’s traditionally what 
those roles have been. 
 
The returning officers and the deputy returning officers, the poll 
clerks, have been political rewards in the past for partisan 
politics at the constituency level. If it’s the government’s 
intention to remove politics from the selection of the Chief 
Electoral Officer, which we support, then it should go down the 
line also, Mr. Speaker, and take in those other positions that do 
affect, the same as the Chief Electoral Officer does . . . and 
those are the returning officers, the deputy returning officers 
and the poll clerks at election times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting though to note, Mr. Speaker, that this particular 
Bill is coming forward dealing with The Elections Act when 
last year we had an Election Act amendment also, and that Act 
has not been entirely proclaimed at this time. I guess we have to 
ask the government why has the government not proclaimed 
last year’s Bill before bringing forward another Bill? 
 
Those are some of the areas, Mr. Speaker, that we wish to delve 
into further. We’ll be discussing this more in this Assembly so 
at the present time I would like to move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill amends The 
Meewasin Valley Authority Act. It implements the budget 
decision to maintain the 1998-99 statutory funding for the 
Meewasin Valley Authority at the same level as last year. This 
is the fifth year that the province has maintained funding at this 
level, permitting the Authority to continue an excellent level of 
service in developing, conserving, and enhancing the river 
valley in the Saskatoon area. 
 
This Bill establishes the statutory funding contributions from 
the city of Saskatoon, the University of Saskatchewan, and the 
province. For 1998-99, this funding will be $1,870,869 in total. 
This amendment replaces the assessment-based funding 
formula with a fixed funding level and provides for a review of 

this funding at least every five years. The shares of funding 
among the city, the university, and the province remain the 
same. 
 
In addition to the funding provisions, the Bill contains a number 
of administrative amendments that have been requested by the 
Authority. It contains provisions to streamline the development 
of field process and to correct a number of land descriptions in 
the Authority’s boundaries. 
 
I take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to commend the Authority 
on a worthwhile year, and look forward to its continued 
stewardship of the Saskatchewan River valley in the Saskatoon 
area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Meewasin Valley Authority Act. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Flavel: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to the 
member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have in the west gallery some visitors here 
from Regina that have moved down from Saskatoon, and some 
visitors from Martensville that are in on Easter week to visit 
them. They’re seated at the very top so you can barely see them 
up there. 
 
We have Adele, Nolan, and Curtis, which are relatives or 
Flavels. And then their visitors from Martensville: Paulette, 
Darnel, Morgan, and Courtney, who are around today. They’re 
doing some visiting around the city and toured the Legislative 
Building and are heading for the museum, watching some 
action in the chambers. 
 
And I would ask the members to join with me in welcoming 
them to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few comments in 
regards to the minister’s introduction of the second reading of 
the Bill 28, Meewasin Valley Authority Act. 
 
While I understand this is a fairly simple piece of legislation 
that makes some minor changes, there is one interesting note to 
. . . or change to take note of. And the minister alluded to the 
fact that currently the Authority, funding formula of the 
Authority, is based on the city mill rate. 
 
And the government minister had indicated that they will 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1998 

continue a dollar value rather than a mill rate value. And 
they’ve continued this funding for, I believe the last five years, 
which I think in one case certainly gives an indication to 
Meewasin Valley Authority that they will have sufficient funds 
to continue to function, operate, and to have a steady source of 
funds so that they know what their funds are going to be. 
 
However, when you look at the mill rate . . . removing that from 
the mill rate structure, I’m not exactly sure how this directly 
affects them, other than most businesses and most individuals in 
the province, when you look at mill rates and that where the 
new assessment that has just taken place, I think a lot of people 
would like to be put on a straight dollar value versus following 
the mill rate structure. 
 
But it’s . . . The piece of legislation in a lot of respects doesn’t 
change a lot. It certainly maintains a flow and a guaranteed flow 
of funding and of contributions so that Meewasin Valley 
Authority can continue to function and provide a beautiful 
atmosphere and a park setting for the people of Saskatoon and 
surrounding area — or anyone who happens to be visiting the 
city — to go out and enjoy a lot of the natural settings of the 
Saskatchewan River going through the city. And I think that’s 
certainly appropriate. We certainly want to preserve a lot of our 
natural heritage and natural value. 
 
And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, in this case I don’t know if 
there’s much purpose in holding up any further review as far as 
second readings. I’m more than prepared to — I shouldn’t say I 
— I think our caucus is more than prepared to allow this piece 
of legislation to move into committee where we can deal a little 
more specifically with areas of concern, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Parks Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my 
remarks, I will be moving second reading of The Parks 
Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
The purpose of these amendments is to add lands to the 
provincial parks system to better protect and represent 
important ecosystems within the province. The amendments 
also make minor changes of a housekeeping nature to meet 
local needs and provide more effective and efficient 
administration. 
 
The Macdowall bog located south-west of Prince Albert will be 
designated as a protected area. This area is approximately 57 
hectares or 140 acres in size. It contains a number of rare plant 
species including several species of orchids. 
 
Public consultation has shown that there is strong support for 
the designation of this unique area. The protected area 
designation will allow this area to be preserved for the benefit 
and enjoyment of present and future generations. 
 
Also an additional 1,300 hectares or 3,200 acres of Crown land 
will be added to Douglas Provincial Park. Public consultation 
has shown that there is support for this addition of land to the 

park. This native grassland supports a variety of prairie nesting 
birds, including the endangered burrowing owl. As well the 
shoreline contains one of the largest nesting concentrations of 
the endangered piping plovers in Saskatchewan. 
 
These lands will also provide a more effective and easily 
administered boundary because it will then follow the existing 
Grainland community pasture fence line. 
 
Several housekeeping provisions are included in this Bill. 
Errors exist in the legal description for Candle Lake, Douglas, 
and Meadow Lake provincial parks. The legal description of 
Lac La Ronge Provincial Park requires amending to remove a 
small area of land to provide the northern hamlet of Missinipe 
with additional space for expansion. Correcting errors in legal 
descriptions and readjusting boundaries provides for more 
effective and efficient park management. 
 
These amendments ensure that Saskatchewan’s provincial parks 
provide a better representation of our natural ecosystems and 
they support this government’s commitment to an enhanced 
park system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is now my pleasure to move second reading of 
The Parks Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in making 
a few comments to this piece of legislation, one would say with 
the number of pieces of legislation on the Table that we have in 
front of us to date that there really isn’t a lot of substantive 
matter to a number of pieces of legislation. But this, Mr. 
Speaker, I think does hold some substantive matter in it, 
especially when you’re talking about the thousands of acres that 
are going to be absorbed into more provincial . . . or into 
provincial parks like Douglas Provincial Park. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while we’re not opposed to areas . . . or 
preserving of wildlife or areas of preservation, land 
preservation, park preservation, for the sake of the people of 
this province, there are some concerns we may have, and I think 
we can deal with the number of the issues of concern. 
 
In regards especially to the Douglas Provincial Park where 
we’re talking of a large section, chunk of farm land in 10 
sections, and we would like to know how many stakeholders 
were consulted, whether the land’s being expropriated or how 
the government is going about that process, and how much is it 
costing. And some of those questions we can certainly get to 
and deal with more specifically in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve listened to the minister as well, I note that 
the piece of legislation does deal with more accurately 
addressing land descriptions and how the land descriptions are 
laid out; so that there is, I would gather, a greater clarification 
of what the boundaries are so that the people and the parks’ 
officials themselves have a better understanding of the park area 
that we’re talking of. 
 
I guess one would ask, will be able to ask and certainly research 
a little more in depth in committee, as to what the cost was of 
acquiring the bog that were being talked about for . . . or the 



April 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

Macdowall bog that’s being talked about in this protected area. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the piece of legislation before us, 
while I’ve mentioned earlier there are substantive areas of, of 
being acquired in the fact that we’re talking of land base, the 
realities are this piece of legislation in many ways just has some 
minor changes that bring a lot of better clarification in regards 
to the parks that are talked about in the piece of legislation. And 
the areas of concern we certainly feel we can address more 
appropriately in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1115) 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Public Service Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased today to rise to move second reading of The Public 
Service Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act will replace The Public Service Act, 1947 
which has served government in Saskatchewan well for more 
than 50 years. During that time, Mr. Speaker, of course the 
workplace has changed dramatically. We must now modernize 
our processes, procedures, and systems for human resource 
management if we are to keep pace. While there’ve been some 
amendments to the Act over these years, few of those 
amendments were of significance. 
 
I’m pleased to inform you, Mr. Speaker, and all members of the 
House today, that the amended Act will preserve the 
independence of the Public Service Commission and clarifies 
the role of commissioners in representing the public’s interest. 
It defines the purposes of The Public Service Act. It provides 
for the orderly delegation of responsibility to departments, and 
it significantly simplifies the provisions regarding recruitment, 
selection, and appointment. 
 
Several sections have been added to the Act. The first of these 
sets out broad goals and objectives of the Act, reinforces the 
continuing independence of the public service, and ensures that 
appointments to the classified public service will continue to be 
made on the basis of merit. 
 
Another section clarifies the responsibilities of the Public 
Service Commission and provides for an orderly process of 
delegation of responsibilities to departments. This will allow for 
far more effective and timely human resource services. At the 
same time, the amendments insure that delegated 
responsibilities will be carried out in accordance with policies 
and principles established and monitored by the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Finally the provisions governing recruitment, selection, and 
appointment outlined in the Act have been simplified by 
retaining the important statements of principles, but removing 
administrative process details that can be covered in regulation 
or policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in developing The Public Service Act, 1998 we 
undertook significant consultation, including the current public 

service commissioners representing the public interests, 
Canadian Union of Public Employees Local 600, The 
Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union, deputy 
ministers of all departments, and human resource directors and 
human resource branch staff from all departments. All of the 
individuals and organizations, Mr. Speaker, who were 
consulted, were supportive of the general thrust of the proposed 
changes. 
 
The public service unions, in particular, were pleased with the 
clarification of section 4(3), that the Act only applies to their 
members to the extent that their collective agreements do not 
cover that particular matter. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, the purpose of The Public Service 
Act, 1998 is to maintain an independent and professional public 
service, to facilitate providing quality service to the public in 
response to changing public requirements, and to recruit 
employees to the public service and to develop a qualified 
public service in a manner that fulfils the purposes of this Act; 
to develop a public service that represents the diversity of the 
people of Saskatchewan; and to promote harmonious relations 
between the government of Saskatchewan, its employees in the 
public service, and the trade unions that represent those 
employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Public Service Act, 1998 will also make other 
minor changes of a housekeeping nature. These changes will 
not constitute any change in policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that members of the opposition will 
want time to review the Act, likely consult in the community 
about the Act, but I am hopeful that after we have had a good 
debate and discussion that in fact this Act might receive the 
unanimous approval of all members as it seeks to build a Public 
Service Commission for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that, I am very pleased to move second 
reading of The Public Service Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few comments, 
Mr. Speaker, with regards to The Public Service Act, 1998. The 
minister talks about the importance of the Act going back to 
1947 and the fact that it really hasn’t had a major update since 
that time other than some minor amendments through the years. 
And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, we certainly can 
understand the fact it was time for an overhaul of the Act. 
 
The minister talks about the Act certainly recognizing the 
independence of the Public Service Commission. I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at The Public Service 
Act and the Public Service Commission in this province, that it 
is far from an independent agency. And that’s an area that we’ll 
all have, may have, minor disagreements over time. 
 
But it’s an area that needs to be debated, and if the 
government’s talking about turning this into a truly independent 
agency, that’s an issue I think we’d want to look at a little more 
carefully and certainly discuss a little more fully and see if there 
is a way of really changing the Public Service Commission and 
making, making it really an independent body or an 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1998 

independent agency. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, from what we have seen through the years, 
this has been an agency that has been used by all political 
parties, and certainly the current government is not immune 
from the fact that we look at people appointed to different 
positions. And this is an area where appointments certainly can 
take place in large numbers and people can be moved and more 
on the basis of politics versus the abilities to do the job — not 
taking away from people who are currently involved or people 
who have had long-time standing in the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
But as the minister indicated, this is certainly a substantive Bill. 
There’s a number of issues to be raised and to be looked at, and 
we don’t feel at this time that it would be appropriate to move 
quickly through the Bill. But it would be rather important for us 
to look at it very carefully, to decipher it a little more closely, 
and to take the time to review it in depth to make sure that we 
are indeed doing due diligence as we review this piece of 
legislation and the changes that are being brought forward. 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 4 — The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 1998 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Bill No. 4, The Saskatchewan Evidence Act, 
has to do with our justice system and I think anything that 
involves our justice system at this time in history in 
Saskatchewan is considered important and worth noting. 
 
The ability to accurately record the testimony of all pertinent 
witnesses in a legal proceeding is vital if our system is to work 
and if it is to work well. And I think people are always 
concerned about that, to make sure the testimony that is there 
and is on record is accurate. 
 
For many in our province, Mr. Speaker, the thought of giving 
testimony oral in a court room is an unnerving experience. 
Unnerving because the court room situation is unique and 
strange to many people because they haven’t been in there very 
often, and then to give that particular testimony under the 
structure that’s there is, as I said, a somewhat unnerving 
experience. For others, Mr. Speaker, it’s simply impossible. It is 
even worse for those who suffer from a form of physical or 
mental disability. 
 
To simply exclude these people from our legal process or to 
make them take part under circumstances that cause them 
extreme duress and discomfort is wrong. It is wrong because of 
the discomfort it causes them. It is also wrong because it may 
well affect the accuracy of testimony that is given. 

It appears to me, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill goes some way in 
addressing many of the needs of those individuals. I think as a 
society we must be ever cognizant of the different needs of all 
the people in our province. In the last couple of decades we’ve 
come a long way in becoming a society that goes out of its way 
to recognize the challenges that are facing the disabled. And 
this is a good thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand these amendments are formulated by 
a steering committee made up of representatives of community 
agencies as well as of department officials. This committee, 
according to the minister, consulted extensively with people 
throughout Saskatchewan before bringing their 
recommendations forward to the provincial government. 
 
I’ll have some questions about this committee and its work in 
committee. However, a preliminary study of this legislation that 
we now have before us, it appears the committee did some very 
good work in coming up with proposals that not only deal with 
the special needs of the physically or mentally disabled, but all 
other adults who may be considered vulnerable in giving 
testimony in the usual open courtroom situation. 
 
Special consideration has been given to those under the age of 
14 years for quite some time in our province. And it appears 
this Bill simply extends the same rights and privileges to adults 
who for whatever reason are unable to give their testimony in 
the courtroom. In effect many of the changes proposed by Bill 4 
simply give to adults some of the same considerations that have 
been given to many children under the age of 14. 
 
With the changes proposed in this legislation, vulnerable adults, 
as the minister refers to them, will not be forced to appear in the 
courtroom in certain circumstances. Where it’s necessary, they 
will be allowed to testify outside the courtroom or take a place 
behind a screen or barrier of some sort. The thinking behind this 
move appears to be that if the witnesses have increased comfort 
level they will be able to give a stronger testimony, making 
them better witnesses in general. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this allows these people to give more reliable 
testimony, then I think everyone is in favour of it. We are for 
anything that appears to make our justice system move more 
effectively. 
 
For many, appearing directly in the courtroom may be so 
difficult that the testimony they give may not be as 
understandable or succinct as it could be or as it should be. As a 
result, otherwise pertinent testimony may not be given the 
weight by the judge or the jury that it perhaps should be given. 
Of course this would be wrong and in fact a miscarriage of 
justice. All people, Mr. Speaker, must be allowed to be part of 
the system if the justice system is to be fair for all. 
 
These changes of course do not just go for those with a physical 
and mental handicap, but also those adults who feel vulnerable 
for other reasons. They may fear the fear of reprisal because of 
their testimony or they may be victims of certain types of abuse. 
All of these, Mr. Speaker, create hesitancy for them to testify 
and to testify as accurately and correctly and completely as they 
could and probably would want to. 
 
I think we can all imagine, Mr. Speaker, how well we’d do on 



April 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

the witness stand if we feared for our safety because of the 
testimony we were asked to give. How willing would any of us 
be to testify in those particular circumstances? Of course, 
allowing them to testify behind a screen or outside the 
courtroom via closed-circuit television won’t remove all of 
these concerns but it does take the pressure off the immediate 
situation. It is true only a part . . . it is truly only a part of the 
solution, but I think it’s an important part and I believe we’re 
willing to go along with it. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, in certain circumstances some adults in 
some cases may be allowed to give testimony via videotape. 
Once again, I believe it’s already done in certain cases with 
reference to children. 
 
Of course, when one speaks about videotaped testimony, the 
first concern that comes to mind is tampering with the tape or 
the witness in what is not a live proceeding. However, I’m 
fairly confident that enough safeguards will be built into the 
system that this will not, or should not, occur. We’ll question 
the Minister of Justice about that when we get to the committee 
stage later in this session. 
 
The use of videotape, as I understand it, will extend to those 
adults who for whatever reason have faulty memories. Again, 
we'll want to question the minister about that particular 
provision. I would have to think a faulty memory is a major 
drawback for a witness in a trial or a legal proceeding when 
accuracy is essential. And so that needs to be looked at very 
carefully to make sure that things are done decently and in 
order. 
 
I will be asking the minister to clarify the exact procedure that 
is used with these witnesses whose memories may be affected 
by a mental disability or an illness. How do we know when the 
testimony from these particular people is accurate and when it 
isn’t accurate? Obviously, if these individuals are pertinent 
witnesses, we have to do everything we can, Mr. Speaker, to 
ensure that they can testify under the best possible 
circumstances. 
 
So we are supportive of the changes put forward. However, I’m 
assuming that a system has worked through these issues. Once 
again, the minister can clarify that for us in the Committee of 
the Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, amendments I’ve spoken about 
here are pretty much an extension to adults for provisions that 
have been in place for children for some time. 
 
However, there are also some changes here for youth that on the 
surface appear fairly reasonable. For kids who, under 14, may 
unfortunately have some difficulty communicating because of a 
disability, in certain circumstances a family member or a friend 
will be allowed to sit near them when they are testifying. This 
will be allowed when the court deems it necessary to get the 
best possible testimony from that child. 
 
I think this is important not only because we’re doing 
something to give these children a measure of comfort, because 
also it is up to the court’s discretion when that situation is there. 

I think in all these matters it’s important that they be decided on 
a case-by-case basis by the judge, and I believe this amendment 
is acceptable as long as it doesn’t hinder or influence the legal 
process. I suspect that the rules governing this support person’s 
presence would dictate that there is little or no verbal 
communication at all between the child and the support person, 
and that there’s absolutely no coaching. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the whole, I support in principle the changes 
that are proposed in the Bill. 
 
As Justice critic for the official opposition, I’m often critical of 
our justice system and the legal processes that are entailed in it. 
I’m not alone, Mr. Speaker, in criticizing the system. Over the 
course of the last number of years, we’ve seen many flaws in 
the system that have come to light. At the same time, we’ve 
seen very little done to fix these flaws. And while the changes 
we see in this Bill do nothing to address the major concerns in 
our justice system and our judicial process, that doesn’t mean 
they are not positive amendments. 
 
(1130) 
 
As the official opposition and soon the Government of 
Saskatchewan, our party will continue to bring forth all the 
problems that exist in our justice system. However, when some 
positive changes are made, changes that appear to make sense, 
we will not only support those changes, we will also applaud 
them. 
 
Once again, I am going to need some clarification from the 
minister regarding certain aspects of these changes now before 
us, but for the most part they do appear to be positive. In a day 
when many in our province and throughout our country have 
lost faith in our justice system and our judicial process, these 
changes I think do make sense. And that’s all the people of 
Saskatchewan are asking from their system — that it make 
sense, a system like that. 
 
I’m hopeful that soon the government will begin moving on 
many other problems we currently have in the justice system in 
this province. This Bill we have before us is an attempt to make 
the system work better for some, and I hope that our system will 
soon work better for all. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 11 — The Trustee 
Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this particular 
Bill our caucus is opposed to this legislation. In our view this 
Bill misses the point of trust and puts into jeopardy a substantial 
segment of our economy and our society. 
 
As the minister reviewed in his speech, this Bill will two main 
things. First, it allows trustees to invest trust property in any 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1998 

form of security in which a reasonable, prudent investor would 
invest. The minister himself gave the obvious example of 
mutual funds. 
 
Second, this Bill allows trustees to delegate investment 
decisions to outside sources such as a broker or financial 
planner. 
 
As it stands now, trustees are restricted to a list of investments 
which yield lower returns but which are also low risk. 
 
Further, as the minister reviewed, trust law places in doubt . . . 
some doubt on whether a trustee can delegate decisions unless 
the trust instrument specifically allows it. 
 
What I would contend, Mr. Speaker, is that both of these 
features are included in current trust law for very good reason. 
We would be seriously damaging a solid tradition of trust law 
built by past legislatures if we allowed this Bill to pass. 
 
First, on the matter of restricting the list of investments. I would 
observe that trusts are intended to be long-term institutions that 
have been able to float above the changes that happen from time 
to time in the market-place. 
 
It is for this reason that trusts were originally designed to be the 
most conservative of financial entities. And it is good that they 
are. If you want an entity to be around for 30, 50, or 100 years 
then you need to avoid risk as much as possible. As the member 
from Cannington pointed out, Bre-X might have looked a good 
investment at one time. There are any number of mutual funds 
and even pension funds that were burned in that deal. 
 
Over the course of the decades that a trust will exist these sorts 
of temptations will crop up in the market from time to time. I 
don’t think that we are doing anyone any favours by giving 
trusts this kind of freedom. 
 
I realize that there are probably trustees out there who are 
frustrated by the fact that they are sitting on a big pile of cash 
that is only making 3 or 4 per cent while everyone else seems to 
be pulling in single-digit returns. But I don’t think we should be 
basing our decisions on long-term entities such as trusts on the 
passing whims or frustrations of this generation of trustees. 
 
In particular, I recall the minister noted that the restrictive list 
prevents trustees from investing in mutual funds. In today’s 
economy they’re among the most popular investment vehicles 
for the non-expert investor. 
 
Again, I want to repeat and re-emphasize that the popularity of 
investments is not and never has been and should not be the 
standard by which trust investments should be gauged. 
Likewise the restriction on this Bill of prudent and reasonable 
investor standard is really just a paper tiger. 
 
The list of qualities given in the Bill for reasonable investor 
includes everything from considering the rate of return to 
general estimation of risk to inflation to the general state of the 
economy. Far from requiring the trustee to balance all of these 
factors, it just gives him a longer list of excuses. 
 
If a trust goes belly-up, he can say just say he was trying to get 

a better return and that he judged the risk to be reasonable. So 
suddenly the profound responsibility involved in being a trustee 
becomes a game of juggling other people’s money. At the end 
of the day, no one may be held responsible if mistakes are 
made. 
 
It reminds me a little bit of SaskPower’s attitude toward the 
Channel Lake sale. Society has only allowed changes to trust 
legislation slowly and carefully so as not to endanger the funds 
that are supposed to last for generations. Allowing the funds to 
sway on the winds of the market fads and popular trends do not 
uphold that duty of protecting those trusts. 
 
The second aspect of the Bill is likewise offensive although for 
different reasons. Allowing trustees to delegate their financial 
duties to others sounds like a good idea on the surface. After all, 
who couldn’t use a little expert advice. 
 
Well first, this part of the Bill is necessary only if you allow the 
first. Obviously if trustees can only put their money into a list of 
very conservative, few investments, there is no need for them to 
consult a broker. So you see how making one change to the 
basic concept of trust law brings a number of complications that 
you have to deal with. 
 
Second, with all respect to the financial planning industry, just 
how expert are many of these planners and who decides who 
the expert is? It seems to me that right now the market is 
flooded with planners. Financial planning has become a little 
real estate in the sense that it is the profession of last resort for 
many people. In any case, it is a line of work that has a very 
high turnover rate, and for that particular reason, the 
qualification nets made there as experts is a very shaky kind of 
a qualification. 
 
Again the industry is full of numerous financial planners who 
are very smart people and who do very well for their clients. 
Still, we have no guarantee that the trustees will pick good 
advisers. So there is a concern about who will be responsible if 
a trust was mismanaged. Would the trustee be able to throw his 
hands in the air and say, well that’s what my broker told me to 
do; don’t blame me. The possibility of this kind of thing 
happening, I think cheapens and demeans the role of trust in 
society and we should avoid it. 
 
Finally I think that this part of the Bill begs a very important 
question. If the trustees are making the financial decisions on 
the trust, just exactly what are they doing? What is their role if 
not to make investment decisions on behalf of the trust. You 
might just as well make the broker or financial planner the 
trustee. 
 
The parts of the current trust law that make the trustee solely 
responsible were put in there for very good reasons. Someone 
must ultimately be responsible for how trusts are managed. 
That’s why they are called trusts. You trust someone to make 
the decision about these funds. That trust does not extend to 
third parties who may not be familiar with the intent or the 
history of the trust. 
 
Before I conclude my remarks on this Bill, I want to point out a 
few things. I want to point out that we are not just talking about 
fancy, private trust funds or even just charitable bequests. 



April 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

Under the definitions of this Bill, it extends to cooperatives, 
municipal boards, medical and hospital benefit associations, and 
park agencies. That represents a significant part of 
Saskatchewan society, Mr. Speaker. Those are all agencies that 
are involved in the public life of our province. We must 
consider very carefully if what we are considering today is 
putting those agencies at risk. 
 
The next time there’s a stock market crash or a Bre-X scandal 
or a downturn in the mutual fund industry, what will it mean? 
Will the local co-op have to close? Will small-town hospitals 
see their funds from bequests disappear? Will even municipal 
governments who have already been hard hit from NDP cuts 
see their funding further evaporate as international markets go 
through a correction? 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, I think we are introducing an unacceptable 
level of risk to a segment of society that is supposed to put itself 
beyond risk. This is a bad and ill-considered piece of 
legislation. If it happens to make the committee stage, our 
caucus promises to give it a rough ride at that time. However, I 
think it would be far better that we just avoided that by 
defeating this Bill on second reading, and I urge all members to 
vote against this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 14 — The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few more 
comments in regards to some of the comments I made the other 
day in relation to The Adoption Amendment Act. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, as I indicated, it’s important to recognize the family 
whether it’s a natural or an adoptive family. It’s paramount that 
we all recognize a family as a family unit. And the piece of 
legislation we have before us today certainly does recognize a 
number of those components. 
 
While adoptions have changed much over the last few years, 
not so long ago we saw, as I indicated the other day, that 
adoptions were something that you kept secret, where a child as 
they were growing up and into adulthood will often on many 
occasions would think back, well I wonder how my natural 
parents are doing — whether it’s the mother or the father. 
 
And we’ve seen in the past where young people, or even 
individuals of adult age who are adopted as children, have 
looked back and they’ve had to go through a long, tedious 
process of locating their birth parents. And in many cases when 
they finally had arrived and gone through that process and had 
the privilege of meeting the birth parents, we’ve found that 
there have been some warm relationships that have been 
renewed. 
 
And I think most people nowadays certainly want to have a lot 
of knowledge about their birth parents and the situations that 
were faced. And recognizing the fact that while a birth parent 
may give up a child for adoption, they’re not necessarily giving 

up that child for adoption because they didn’t really want the 
child or that they really didn’t feel an obligation to the child, but 
the fact that there were other circumstances that may dictate the 
reasons for that adoption. And the legislation before us certainly 
simplifies a lot of that process. 
 
And we’ve seen a number of changes. The fact that this piece of 
legislation recognizes the birth father as well as the birth 
mother. And I think in the past we’ve certainly given more 
recognition to the birth mother and have failed to recognize that 
the birth father has some rights as well. And this piece of 
legislation acknowledges that and brings that to the forefront 
and recognizes the fact that both birth parents have . . . do have 
a responsibility, and also in many cases have had a relationship, 
loving relationship that they want to extend and will want to 
keep some contact with an adopted child. 
 
The other fact, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that this piece of 
legislation certainly sets out in . . . uses the language set out in 
The Hague Convention On International Adoption. And we’ve 
seen more and more over the past number of years of 
international adoptions. 
 
And while on one hand international adoptions have not taken 
place . . . or have been utilized in a manner that we would see 
acceptable, the fact that some abuses of international adoptions 
have taken place where people have gone to other countries and 
almost, basically, you could almost use the term entered into 
basically a slave market by buying and monetarily have taken 
advantage of adoptions. 
 
And I think it’s important that in this province as well, we 
recognize the fact we want adoptions to take place on the basis 
of children having the privilege of knowing that they’re being 
adopted by parents who want to extend hands of love and care 
and bringing that child up in a loving and caring home. 
 
And recognizing the language of The Hague Convention I think 
is certainly important as we look beyond the borders of our 
province and our country in regards to extending a hand to 
individuals who do not have the privilege or may not have the 
opportunity of being raised in a loving and caring home. 
 
So that, Mr. Speaker, I think is certainly, certainly appropriate 
and I’m pleased to see that this piece of legislation adopts that 
as well. 
 
(1145) 
 
And the other concern we did have, and I believe the minister 
alluded to, is the fact that the changes to the legislation do not 
go beyond allowing biological access or even communication in 
a situation when a child has been adopted by another family. 
And what I mean by that, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that we don’t 
have . . . or the piece of legislation before us does not extend 
privileges beyond the fact of having an opportunity down the 
road to communicate with an adoptive child to find out how 
they’re doing. 
 
And what we have seen in the past, and I know I think what we 
are seeing as a result of more openness in adoptions is where 
birth parents may want to have more of an ongoing 
communication and access with the adopted child. And I think 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1998 

that, Mr. Speaker, could certainly become disruptive, and 
adoptive parents may find it more difficult to raise the child as a 
responsible young person if the birth parents were totally 
involved from the time the adoption took place till later on in 
life. 
 
So I think that’s important that this piece of legislation 
recognizes that, recognizes the importance of the adoptive 
parents to be able to raise that child as if that child was their 
own. Because, Mr. Speaker, we find many people who are 
adopting are adopting on the basis of the fact that either for 
some reason or other they were unable to have children and yet 
they had a loving relationship, a warm home environment, and 
wanted to pass that on to a child. 
 
And in passing that on to a child, it is the responsibility of the 
parents is to train up children and to raise children so that they 
will become young and responsible adults. And if they . . . if 
there was, if you will, ongoing interference by birth parents, 
that may make that very difficult to do. 
 
And so I think that’s a piece of this legislation that’s important 
to recognize the fact that adoptive parents have a responsibility 
and have a right as well to raise that child based on how they 
would like to give that child the opportunity to become that 
responsible adult through the training process, and they don’t 
need interferences from outside. It’s just like natural parents 
don’t need interferences from outside. 
 
I think we all may go through that. In fact, Mr. Speaker, while I 
can certainly see in my situation and the situation that our 
family has faced, I think many times I’ve run into parents where 
they feel that maybe the grandparents interfere a little too much 
and makes it a little more difficult. I think as well this could 
certainly be a situation here. 
 
But in general I believe most people feel that they seek, would 
seek advice from elderly parents as to how to train and raise a 
child. But they also want to feel that they have that real 
opportunity and real privilege, and I think adoptive parents 
certainly want to feel that as well. 
 
So in general, as I look to the piece of legislation we have 
before us, while we may have some more questions and a few 
questions just for clarification in Committee of the Whole, I 
don’t feel as Social Services critic for the official opposition nor 
do my colleagues feel that this is a piece of legislation that 
needs to be held up or should be held up, but that we can 
certainly deal with a number of any concerns we may have 
although I see it as a very positive piece of legislation in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
With that, I want to thank the minister for his opening 
comments and for the suggestions and the reasons behind the 
piece of legislation we have before us. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
The Chair: — I’d ask the minister to introduce his officials, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairperson. I should explain that I’m the Provincial Secretary. 
My estimates are kind of a subset of Intergovernmental Affairs 
and I think we are dealing with four, five, somewhere around 
there, subvotes of this department. 
 
That having been said, I am honoured today to be joined by the 
assistant deputy minister, Paul Osborne, who sits to my right. 
To his right is Melinda Gorrill, who is the director of 
administration. Behind me is Michael Jackson, the chief of 
protocol. And to his right is Terina Abrahamson, the last name 
notwithstanding, she’s the director of the office of French 
language coordination. 
 
The Chair: — The Chair of Committee needs leave to move 
over administration, accommodation, and go to Provincial 
Secretary subvote (IA14). Will the committee give leave? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Subvote (IA14) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Good morning, and good morning to your 
entourage. It’s rather interesting that you have one person for 
every line that we’re dealing with. And I guess that gets us into 
the first question, because this is on the verge of almost being 
embarrassing that we’re spending time to go through this. And 
we’ve pulled out, I believe you were correct when you said five 
lines. 
 
And I believe one of the lines would be Government House, so 
we have one house that we’re taking care of. We have a 
government web site, so we have one computer web site we’re 
taking care of. Protocol and special events, so we have one 
dinner planner. Office of French language coordination, so 
we’re translating some documents. And Lieutenant Governor’s 
office, who’s an office we’re taking care of. And we’ve sort of 
created an entity to deal with this, and I’m not sure that that is 
really the way to go around it. Maybe we should have left it all 
were it was originally. 
 
We don’t have a whole lot of questions for you because 
obviously on five lines how many questions can we have. My 
first question though is on the procedure that brought us here 
this morning. It appears to me that the department that we’re 
looking at today really isn’t even a department at all because as 
we just went through jumping over a number of issues to get 
here. This is actually a subvote that we’re going to study in 
great detail — maybe an exaggeration — but a subvote that will 
deal with in some detail. 
 
It’s a subvote of the Department of Intergovernmental and 
Aboriginal Affairs. And I guess I’m wondering if you could tell 
us briefly what the thinking was to bring this forward in 
estimates separately from the Department of Intergovernmental 
Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes perhaps an explanation is in 



April 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

order to the members and to the public who are listening. About 
a year ago I had an operation on my spinal cord. I go for 
rehabilitation every day. This is a light portfolio which was 
designed to accommodate my medical needs. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you for giving the government’s 
reasoning behind this. In fact, I believe it’s only a couple of 
years ago when the department known as the Provincial 
Secretary was renamed as Intergovernmental Affairs. Is that 
correct? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — There has been department of 
Provincial Secretary for a very long period of time. If you go 
back to the earliest cabinet, there were four ministers in the 
cabinet besides the premier, one of which was the Provincial 
Secretary. This is a very old portfolio. 
 
Over the years it has varied in its importance. During the 
Blakeney years it was a separate portfolio. During, I think, the 
Devine years it was combined with others. For a period of time 
this was a separate department. Actually when another one of 
my colleagues was ill and needed a lighter portfolio, it was a 
separate portfolio at that time. 
 
So it’s varied between being a separate, stand-alone department 
and combined with others. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. It’s a little difficult to sort of 
attack that situation when you’re sort of saying these are 
situations that are created when someone for medical reasons 
can’t quite handle the job and so you create a job so that there 
still is a job there. And maybe if at some time in . . . or times 
past in Saskatchewan history that hasn’t been a position, maybe 
that should have been reconsidered. 
 
I believe, in fact, several of the subvotes that were once listed 
separately under the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs 
have simply been rolled up into a single subvote. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I’m sorry, I did not follow the 
member’s question. Can you restate it. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I believe that several of the subvotes that 
were once listed under . . . were once listed separately under the 
Department of Intergovernmental Affairs have simply been 
rolled up into a single subvote for this situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member is partially correct and 
partially not correct. Some of these have been . . . some of them 
are new. The government web site, for instance, is a new 
subvote recognizing the growing importance of this as a 
communication tool. 
 
Some of them have been separate. When the Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Aboriginal Affairs Department was put together, 
these were items which were felt to be somewhat separate and 
apart from the Intergovernmental Affairs. And in some cases 
they were separated, they were given to me for personal 
reasons. Office of French language affairs, I am, after a fashion, 
bilingual and so it was given to me. So it’s a mixture. 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. You just mentioned the new item 
that was in there and that’s a computer web site. And I do have 
a specific question dealing with the finances on that one. I 
believe the information given says that $150,000 was the 
amount allotted to that. Is most of that start-up costs or is this 
considered to be what will probably be an ongoing amount 
through the years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, there’s very little start-up costs. I 
think the member can look forward to sums of this sort in the 
ongoing, in the ongoing years. I’d also say I think that our 
expenditures are among the most modest of any of the 
governments in Canada. And so I think these are . . . we 
consider these to be minimal expenditures for this particular 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, I guess the key part of that 
question you did answer is whether this was in large part 
start-up costs or ongoing costs — so they’re ongoing costs. I 
think when you say that what we have on the web site is not 
very grandiose, you’re correct; it’s a fairly basic web site for 
those people that have checked it out. 
 
Back to a topic we were on just a little earlier. You gave the 
reason that yourself and one other individual have been given 
this particular position — sort of a fill-in position for medical 
reasons. Is this position going to be gone once those kinds of 
occurrences and situations don’t exist and put back in where it 
used to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I think that’s probably a reasonable 
assumption. That question would be more correctly, I think, 
addressed to the Premier in his estimates in Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — We listed at the start, the five items that 
you’re in charge of, which is the Lieutenant Governor’s office, 
French language coordination, protocol and special events, 
government web site, and Government House. Which one of 
those takes the most of your time? I mean, I’m looking at those 
and saying, what do you do in all those areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The two on which I’ve spent a good 
deal of time are, the office of French language coordination — 
this has responsibility for the francophone community in the 
province — the other one of which we’ve spent a fair amount of 
time are protocol and special events. But all of them, with the 
exception of the Lieutenant Governor’s office — that doesn’t 
consume a lot of my time — but apart from that one, I spend 
time on them all, but if you wanted the two I spent the most 
time on, I think it would be office of French language 
coordination, and protocol and special events. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The one new line that we talked about is the 
government web site which accounts for $150,000 dollars. But 
even if we take that one off of the estimate, there’s still a major 
increase from last year and I wonder if you could sort of give 
some justification why the increases are there and why they’re 
as large as they are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Let me go through this item by item 
then for the benefit of the member. There is an increase in 
funding, in $50,000, from $167,000 to $217,000, in the office 
of French language coordination. This represents a recognition 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1998 

that the francophone community in this province is struggling 
with a very high rate of assimilation. We have a very small 
francophone population in the province of around 25,000 
people; only a third still use the language. 
 
I think the membership in this House reflects that. I think we 
have five francophones, none of whom are able to use the 
French language, unless you have someone by the name of 
Shillington who’s the minister of this portfolio. In addition I 
think it’s fair to say that in the wake of the Calgary Declaration, 
all of the provinces have re-examined their relationship with 
their own francophone communities. 
 
If the English provinces, if I may so refer to them, are to be 
credible when they assure Québécois that their language and 
their culture is safe within Confederation, if we’re going to be 
credible in that subject, it is important that we perhaps err on 
the side of generosity when dealing with our own francophone 
communities in our province. Charity begins at home, I guess, 
is one way of phrasing this. 
 
In addition, in the wake of the Calgary Declaration, I think all 
provinces, as I said, all provinces have re-examined this and 
determined to ensure that this is not a weakness in our approach 
to this all-important issue. 
 
I think a generic question about them all — that which I just 
dealt with is one increase —is going to increase funding of 
335,000 in protocol and special events. This is by far the 
largest, as you will appreciate. 
 
We’re beginning to gear up for two celebrations: the 
millennium celebration in the year 2000, although the primary 
responsibility for that is the federal government — the federal 
government is taking leadership on that and we will really 
support their efforts in many ways — the province’s centennial 
is in 2005. We’re beginning to gear up for that as well, and that 
will obviously be a major celebration in this province. 
 
There is increased funding of $38,000 to address operating 
pressures relating to Government House. This is part of a much 
larger budget and I think a broader use of this important facility 
in Regina. 
 
Finally, round this section out with: there’s increased funding of 
$9,000. This funds miscellaneous operating pressures within the 
Provincial Secretary’s subvote. They’re really quite diverse, and 
if the member wants details, I think I’d send them over in 
writing actually. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And with 
the indulgence of the member from Rosthern, with leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Speaker, to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce guests I have visiting this afternoon. They’re seated in 

the Speaker’s gallery. It’s a very new group of friends but very 
cherished friends. We have Susan, her daughter Shelby and 
daughter Jillian. I’m going to meet with them and enjoy a bit of 
lunch and a tour. 
 
And I’d ask all members of the Assembly to give them a warm 
welcome today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (IA14) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Back to the line that you 
discussed in some length, the French language coordination. I 
think it’s obviously something that most people in 
Saskatchewan would support when you say that we’re trying to 
make sure that when we came in strongly in favour of the 
Calgary Declaration, that we’re putting something there that’s 
tangible and saying, yes we support it and here’s some of the 
evidence of it. 
 
You also raised another interesting thing that goes side by side 
with that, and that was the fact that assimilation is definitely a 
problem and you relate it to this particular House where you 
have someone called Shillington as the person in charge of the 
French language. 
 
And so I guess the question that I have following through with 
that, what kind of directions or time lines do you have in 
looking at this assimilation? Like at some point, if that problem 
continues, you will have a department with no one there that 
they’re really working for. Do you have any consideration of 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — We are concerned about the rate of 
assimilation and we’ve had long discussions with the 
Francophone community and their new president, Lorraine 
Archambault. We are at pains to emphasize the responsibility 
for stemming the rate of assimilation. The responsibility is that 
of the community. 
 
We’ll work with the community, we’ll support them, but it is 
the responsibility of the Francophone community to deal with 
that rate of assimilation and they have got to encourage the 
young people in their community to use and preserve their 
maternal language, which is French. 
 
It is their responsibility. We will support them, but it’s the 
responsibility of the Francophone community to deal with it. 
That is very much I think, the approach of the president. And 
we’re in fact meeting with her next week . . . in a couple of 
weeks to pursue that. 
 
In addition, our agreement with the federal government, about 
three-quarters of our expenditures in this whole area are 
reimbursed by the federal government. We’re meeting, we’re 
now beginning the process of negotiating that with the federal 



April 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

government. And the basis of our negotiations with the federal 
government will be the views of the Francophone community as 
to what they need. 
 
The Francophone community has done a lengthy analysis of 
their needs, their challenges. We are now in the process of 
meeting with them, absorbing that analysis, and their view as to 
what their community needs, will I think form the foundation of 
our negotiations with the federal government which are just 
now commencing for a new agreement for reimbursement. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think you’d find a lot of 
support for one of the statements that you made, and that is that 
it’s basically the responsibility of whatever group you’re talking 
about to maintain their own language and their own culture. 
And I think people across Saskatchewan would underline that 
one with a lot of support. And I think as long as we keep in 
mind that we don’t at some point find ourselves putting money 
where there is no one really using it, I think that’s important as 
well. 
 
Back to the web site that we discussed to some extent a little 
earlier on. What is the public’s reaction to that web site and 
how do you gauge how effective it is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I think to be perfectly candid with the 
member, many of the public have suggested that our web site 
needs to be improved and perhaps modernized. The web site 
was, for a lengthy period of time, maintained by the — I was 
going to say the Provincial Library. I think it was actually the 
Legislative Library. It gradually . . . I think that they did an 
excellent job for which I think we owe them a vote of thanks, 
but it was sort of done in spare time by them. They didn’t have 
the resources to do it and eventually it was thought wise to set it 
up as a separate, standalone responsibility. We’re now just in 
the process of doing that. 
 
But I think the reaction of many members of the public, from 
whom I hear, is that this web site needs to be improved and 
modernized. It is not all that it could be and I’m not sure that it 
compares favourably to web sites used by some other 
provinces. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I will have to admit at this point that I 
haven’t checked our provincial web site so this next question 
comes out of a need for information and probably for also a lot 
of people that are watching. What government departments are 
basically included in that web site and are Crown corporations 
part of that particular web site? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — All of the departments have 
something on; some are much more effective than others. But 
the Crown corporations are not part of the government web site. 
I think most of them, at least some of them, have web sites. 
Some of them are quite good; but they’re done separately by the 
Crown corporations, really quite independently of our efforts. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Question on Government House. 
There’s a statement given here that there’s some minor 
renovations, this sort of thing, going on. I’m wondering if you 
could comment on that particular line itself and what our status 
is on that one — Government House. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Okay, thank you. There are no 
renovations of any substance being done. 
 
The additional funding is for the creation of an assistant 
manager position. We want to develop and expand the mandate 
and activities of Government House and make much more use 
of it. It is a very fine building which . . . and particularly on the 
exterior really a very beautiful building. 
 
And we are of the view that we should be making much more 
use of this. Having put as much money into it as we have, we 
should be making much better use of it than we are. And so the 
funding in part creates the position of an assistant manager 
position to develop and expand the mandate. 
 
Secondly, we’re providing a grant of $10,000 to the 
Government House Historical Society. And we are partnering 
with them and hoping that they can assist us in expanding the 
use of it and getting more people to use it. 
 
Finally, we have 3,000 for communications. We don’t have a 
pamphlet that we can hand out to explain to people what 
Government House is, what its history is, what its use is, and 
what they are seeing. So we want to develop a pamphlet. That 
will absorb a part of the $3,000 in communications. It’s a pretty 
modest sum. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The Government House, I guess all of us that 
have visited it and have taken friends of ours from out of 
province there. I think we’re all very proud of it because it’s a 
unique building in history. And its age and the information and 
the events that it carries with it are exciting. 
 
And I’m just wondering, are we at least keeping up with the 
deterioration or are we falling behind? Because it is a beautiful 
structure and we’d hate to see the thing start to crumble. 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, I think we believe that we are 
maintaining the building, where it’s not deteriorating. Extensive 
renovations were done. This building came close to completely 
disappearing in the ’70s. And I was the minister at the time; I 
think it was about 1980 or so. I was the minister in charge; I’m 
just not sure of the time. But I think about 1980, we spent an 
enormous sum of money renovating it. And since then I think 
we’ve . . . I think it’s fair to say we have maintained it. We 
haven’t added to it, but we have maintained it. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — As I said at the start, this is a fairly short 
document that we had to deal with, and I’d like to thank you 
and your officials for giving us this time to get those questions 
on those five lines answered. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (IA14) agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move we rise, report progress, and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
Mr. Chair. Could I just take a moment to thank the officials, 
who were not here for long. That’s true, they did wait actually 
for about an hour on us to get started and they put a fair amount 
of time in getting ready for these estimates, so I’d like to thank 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1998 

these officials for their work today. And also for the ongoing, I 
think very fine service which the province gets from these 
officials and from others like them. So I thank them for what 
they’ve done today and what they’ve done throughout the year. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — That’s carried, and with that may I wish all 
hon. members an enjoyable weekend at home and a particular 
enjoyable weekend to the Sergeant-at-Arms, who is celebrating 
his 50th birthday this weekend. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Could I just take a moment to add 
government good wishes to the Sergeant-at-Arms. Also like to 
extend the best wishes to those people of Ukrainian faith, the 
Catholic Orthodox, right, Ukrainian Orthodox who are 
celebrating Good Friday today. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
well I’d like to extend, on behalf of the official opposition, our 
best wishes to our Sergeant-at-Arms celebrating his birthday. 
And as the minister has indicated, for those colleagues who are 
celebrating Easter this weekend, and for all the people in 
Saskatchewan who celebrate the Orthodox religion and faith 
and have Easter this weekend, our traditional Chrystos 
Voskres. 
 
The Speaker: — And I join with the hon. members in 
extending those best wishes to any member celebrating the 
Orthodox Easter this weekend. Having said that, this House 
stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:21 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................639 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................639 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................639 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................639 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................639 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................639 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................639 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................639 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................639 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................640 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................640 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................640 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................640 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................640 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................640 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Tchorzewski ..............................................................................................................................................................................640 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................640 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................647 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................648 
  Flavel..........................................................................................................................................................................................649 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................658 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Party Leadership 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................641 
 Good News Headlines 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................641 
 Hospital Bed Reductions in Swift Current 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................641 
 1998 SaskTel Aboriginal Youth Awards of Excellence 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................642 
 Balcarres Welding 50th Anniversary 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................642 
 Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Champions 
  Bradley.......................................................................................................................................................................................642 
 Displayco’s 20th Anniversary 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................642 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Rural Road Traffic Accidents 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................643 
  Teichrob.....................................................................................................................................................................................643 
 SaskPower Proposed Investment in Guyana 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................644 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................644 
 Yorkton Hospital Bed Closures 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................644 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................645 
 Regina Emergency Services 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................645 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................645 
 Northern Power Rates 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................646 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................647 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................648 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 20 — The Election Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................648 



 

  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................648 
 Bill No. 28 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................649 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................649 
 Bill No. 9 — The Parks Amendment Act, 1998 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................650 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................650 
 Bill No. 27 — The Public Service Act, 1998 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................651 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................651 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 4 — The Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 1998 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................652 
 Bill No. 11 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 1998 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................653 
 Bill No. 14 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................655 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs — Vote 30 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................656 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................656 
 
 


