





























































Hansard: June 04, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1623 
 June 4, 1998 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 29  The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I was answering questions from the 
minister . . . or from the member from Saskatoon-Greystone, 
and my understanding was that she had completed her 
questioning and I my answering. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just a couple 
of questions because something in the area I want to deal with 
. . . we probably can get more into it in Labour. But in the Bill 
before us, we’re talking about . . . you’re talking about a benefit 
of doubt clause. And as I understand it, that the 
benefit-of-the-doubt I believe is between the employee and the 
employer. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The benefit-of-the-doubt applies to a 
valid claim or not a valid claim. Whether the board will pay 
compensation or not pay compensation. And the idea is when 
the evidence is evenly divided; the board will pay the 
compensation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you’re saying then is actually the benefit 
of doubt comes into play right with the board itself. And if 
there’s information that you’re weighing back and forth and it 
appears that it — I think you used the words — evenly divided 
then the benefit will go to the injured worker. That’s what 
you’re saying. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, it seems to me, from what I’ve been saying 
and certainly the claims that have been coming to me . . . and 
my colleague from Kindersley raised a couple of questions 
earlier this afternoon in regards to how a lot of people perceive 
the board and the fact that in many cases — and you had a bit of 
debate at that time with my colleague — in regards to how the 
board views medical evidence that may come, whether it’s from 
the general practitioner or the family physician. 
 
And when the family physician has referred an individual to a 
specialist that they are quite comfortable with to deal with a 
certain issue — that information seems to just get all 
sidetracked as the board would then refer to a specialist that 
they may have, they have more confidence in. And a letter I 
received — and unfortunately I misplaced it, Mr. Minister — 
was sent to my attention, came from actually a minister who 
had accompanied a parishioner to one of these visits. And the 
letter just expressed complete disgust in the way the physician 
handled . . . how the individual was treated. It was like there 
was just a total lack of respect for the worker and the problems 
he was facing. 
 
And it seems to me, Mr. Minister, we need a different 
mechanism of addressing this. And whether or not it can be 
handled through legislation, I think, Mr. Minister, when it 
comes to Workers’ Compensation or any other agency, I think 
we need to find another mechanism of appeal. And what I mean 
by that is I think we need an appeal process that has individuals 
who are not directly tied to business or even workers — 

specifically not directly put in place by a group like the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
As I understand it, the board has an appeal process but that 
mechanism is basically internal and so many people come to me 
and they’re saying at the end of the day, well I just felt I didn’t 
really get a hearing at all. And here I am, I’m told now that I’m 
50 per cent; I can go . . . In fact, I just had, during the supper 
recess, a gentleman come to me who was basically told he can 
now do 50 per cent or part-time work. Well where do you find 
work, part-time work with an employer? Which employer is 
going to give you four hours a day and pay you for that four 
hours, knowing that they’re going to have to hire somebody 
else? So, Mr. Minister, I guess my question to you is: is there 
another way of setting up an appeal mechanism — and would it 
need to be done through legislation — that would really create 
an impartial group of individuals that could review a claim? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — It is possible and it in fact has been tried 
in other jurisdictions. We have always rejected the idea. It’s 
often been considered over many years. And the reason why we 
rejected it is that to create this appeal body that’s independent 
of the board, you are really setting up quite an expensive 
mechanism. You are setting up a mechanism where lawyers 
gravitate, representing claimants and the board and the 
employer. 
 
They tried it in Ontario and it turned out to be a very, very 
expensive thing. It couldn’t handle all the . . . you know it got 
the backlog, and there were delays. And the lawyers — I say 
this as a lawyer — really had a field day. And the mechanism 
just didn’t work but it did give people an appeal mechanism 
outside the board. 
 
We have been searching to my knowledge for 25 years for a 
better appeal mechanism than the one we have, because it 
would appear to be more fair. But we’re not able to think of it; 
we’re not able to come up with it. 
 
Right now we have at least the advantage of the board itself, the 
three-member board, being the court of last resort. And they are 
not the administrators of the Act — one is a worker 
representative, one’s an employer representative, and then the 
Chair who is neutral. And they turn around a lot of cases; they 
allow a lot of appeals. But I know the public perception is that 
they are part of the board mechanism, so it’s not really fair. We 
don’t want to go to an Ontario kind of situation where it just 
becomes a very bureaucratic, expensive, much-delayed process. 
 
But it’s a good question and one that I think we mustn’t stop 
thinking about. Somewhere there’s a model of appeal that 
would appear to be more fair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, thank you. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, just one further comment because I know other 
members want to raise some questions as well. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, you mention Ontario. I agree with you; 
we don’t want to build another layer that just becomes another 
administrative body that injured workers become frustrated in 
dealing with. But I think we need to look, certainly sit down 
and see if we can find a mechanism that really is seen as more 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

impartial in really reviewing the matters, that isn’t directly 
linked to any one of the groups that may be involved, like your 
employers or the injured workers. I know that’s going to be 
very difficult because pretty well everything you’re involved in, 
you’re going to be tied in in some fashion or another. 
 
But I think it’s important because at the end of the day, whether 
Ontario’s . . . the legal profession finds it . . . has found it to be 
a heyday for them, I think the only other recourse in this 
province as well is, after appeal, is possibly to go to court. 
Which becomes very expensive for an injured worker to try and 
to justify . . . and the process and the paperwork involved. 
 
So it doesn’t matter how you cut it, the legal profession still 
ends up having to deal with a number of cases, and arguing it. 
And for the injured worker it’s another delay in trying to have 
their claim assessed. 
 
So with that in mind, I wanted to raise a couple of questions 
here knowing we can deal with it even a little further in Labour 
estimates, and I thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
and officials of your department. May I ask, when was the last 
time the maximum wage rate was increased for WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) benefits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I’m advised that the maximum is 
$48,000 and that it was set in 1985-86. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, 1985 seems to be some time 
ago now. Is there a need to review that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 
committee of review looked at this question and recommended 
that it be reviewed. We discussed the matter with the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and they felt that the level was still 
appropriate, strange as it may seem, and encompasses the vast 
majority of claims. 
 
And there is very little, if any pressure to raise that limit. So 
apparently it’s still a valid operating figure. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I understand the amount of benefits paid out to 
injured workers have actually decreased since 1995. I wonder if 
that’s correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I believe that’s correct. We don’t have 
those numbers with us; I should explain why we don’t. The 
board itself reports to the Crown Corporations Committee, and 
indeed in some respects, to the Public Accounts Committee. So 
that’s normally where they provide this information, and we 
don’t have it with us tonight. But I will say to the member that I 
understand that the total amount of benefits has decreased. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I also understand, Mr. Minister, that the cost to 
the administration of the WCB has risen rather dramatically 
since 1991. In fact it’s doubled since 1991, and I wonder if you 
would advise whether or not that information is correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I have to say, Mr. Chair, that I don’t 
know whether that figure is correct, but I know it has increased. 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Well if it is in fact correct that the cost of 
administration has gone from 50 million to 29 million at a time 
when benefits to injured workers have not increased, in fact 
maybe even have declined. I wonder if you can provide any 
insight as to why that would be the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I can undertake to provide that 
information to the member, Mr. Chair, when I’ve had an 
opportunity to consult with the board. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Can the minister advise if there are any 
ongoing plans to get costs of administration in WCB under 
control, and does the minister think that this is a problem area? 
 
We all know that for the last several years we have lived under 
regime of severe fiscal restraint when we are told that there isn’t 
money for this, that, and the other need in the province. A 
doubling of the cost of administration of WCB seems out of line 
with what’s going on in all other sectors. So unless there are 
some special circumstances of which I’m not aware, this seems 
to be seriously out of sync with what’s happening in say 
Education and Health and roads. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I can understand the 
member’s concern. I will undertake to provide as much 
information as I can on that score. And I’m afraid that’s about 
all I can say tonight. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I understand, Mr. Deputy Chair, that the 
British Columbia Court of Appeal has recently expressed the 
opinion that it is illogical to provide medical practitioners with 
immunity from lawsuit under the WCB. 
 
And I want to ask you first of all, what do you see as the 
justification for depriving injured workers of the normal rights 
that any other patient has, and whether this is under review? I 
think you’re aware that it’s been recommended that there is no 
reason for WCB patients to have less rights than any other 
patients. And yet we don’t see this in the legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I said earlier this afternoon to my 
friend, the member from Kindersley, that we are not totally 
comfortable with that, we have been reviewing it. It’s my 
advice that the matter is before the courts, probably in review of 
the decision that you’re referring to although I haven’t seen the 
documentation. And we’re not finished with that issue yet. We 
weren’t in a position to deal with it in this particular set of 
amendments. 
 
The board’s rationale appears to be that the doctors are 
employers also and are entitled to the benefit of the Act. 
 
I have some trouble with that. I haven’t read the British 
Columbia Court of Appeal decision that you refer to but I’d be 
pleased if you’d give me the citation later on and it’ll assist us 
in our review. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I wonder if the minister could . . . I know the 
member for Kindersley also raised this. I wonder if you could 
discuss at more length the situation where an injury may have 
more than one cause — and I think it’s already been mentioned 
to you — say lung problems which may have some 
work-related causes and some non-work-related causes. What’s 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

the situation with those people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I’m advised that the board is 
alive to the issue of complicating factors. The example that we 
used this afternoon was a smoker who worked in a grain 
elevator, and that’s a pretty good example. I don’t know . . . I’m 
not speaking now of a specific case because I don’t have 
knowledge of a specific case but let’s just hypothetically 
discuss that situation. 
 
The board may find that the condition of the worker was partly 
caused by the grain dust and partly caused by smoke, by 
inhalation. And the board may well take that into account, have 
the jurisdiction to take that into account, and in fact do take 
similar analogous situations into account. And they reduce the 
level of compensation by an amount that reflects its judgement 
as to the degree of fault or the degree of causation from the two 
sources. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Now I understand our Supreme Court has 
expressed the view that mental disabilities and mental illness 
ought not to be placed on any different footing than physical 
disabilities and physical injuries. And I wonder what your 
comment is on that and what your view is on that in regards to 
the legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — In order for any condition to be 
compensable, it is necessary for the board to find that it is an 
injury within the meaning of the Act, and if the particular 
mental disability that you referred to falls within that definition, 
then it is compensable. If it is a result of or if it arises in the 
course of or in connection with the employment of an 
employee, then it is compensable. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — So, for example, you were saying if the stress 
can be related to the workplace as opposed to non-workplace, 
there would be no discrimination. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — That’s right. If your mental condition is 
as a result of work-related stress, the board will compensate. If 
it’s partly a result of stress, the board will compensate partly. 
And they have been doing that, they tell me, for . . . they began 
doing that more than 20 years ago. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I’ll do that in a moment, but 
first I’d like to thank my officials for the considerable amount 
of advice that they gave me in the consideration of this Bill. 
And I will move that we report the Bill without amendment and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Chairman, we would want to, on behalf of 
the opposition, thank the minister and his officials for being 
able to provide answers this afternoon and this evening to the 
piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Both myself and the member for Thunder 
Creek, the same applies to our caucus. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 —The Jury Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 sur le jury 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Wildlife Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2)/ 

Loi n° 2 de 1998 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des 

jeux de hasard 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2)/ 

Loi n° 2 de 1998 modifiant le Code de la route de 1996 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Adoption Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

Labour 
Vote 20 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I will remind members that the Minister 
of Labour was last before this committee on April 23. I’ll invite 
the minister to reintroduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
tonight to assist the committee Cheryl Hanson, who is the 
assistant deputy minister; Sharon Little, the manager of budget 
and operations seated behind Cheryl; John Boyd, the director of 
planning and policy seated behind me. 
 
And at the back of the room, Eric Greene, who is the assistant 
director of labour standards; Fayek Kelada who is the director 
of health and safety services; Doug Forseth, a labour relations 
analyst; and Dawn McGibben, the director of human resources 
and administration. 
 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials this evening. There are two, basically 
two areas of interest to us that we want to discuss with you and 
your department: the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement) and the Workers’ Comp Board. 
 
The CCTA, as you know, has been a contentious issue right 
from its inception here in Saskatchewan. Your government is of 
the view that — I really don’t know what view you have — that 
it should be there I suppose. No one can figure out why, but it is 
there. And people on the other side of it, people wanting fair 
tendering in Saskatchewan are of the view that we should have 
contractors of union . . . or non-union should have opportunity 
to bid on government projects. 
 
At this point, there doesn’t seem to be any view that you’re 
going to change that position, although I hear some cracks are 
starting to develop and there’s a few ministers that are starting 
to make some . . . say a few things to some of the business 
community. One would expect, in anticipation of a general 
election next spring, you’re trying to bring back a little bit of 
that lost support in that business community. 
 
It appears that some of your ministers right up to and including 
the Premier’s seat mate is starting to call on businesses and 
asking them what would be helpful in terms of re-election. And 
we understand that this area, the CCTA, is under review now 
and is something that you may be considering giving up in . . . 
one would assume, re-election decisions. Or is there some other 
overriding reason or have you and your government finally 
come to their senses with respect to tendering here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I fail to understand the logic of why 
you would want to restrict tendering on government-related 
projects. Surely in this day and age a government has to 
demonstrate and be fair to all — in terms of opportunities to be 
a part of tendering on government projects. 
 
The NDP (New Democratic Party) have always prided 
themselves on being the saviours in terms of free opportunity 
and all of those kinds of things, putting themselves up on this 
pedestal and suggesting to everyone that they’re going to level 
the playing field out — whether it’s in economics, whether it’s 

in health, whether it’s in education, whether it’s in agriculture, 
or what have you. 
 
But in this area, when it comes to an area that the government 
has some control over — and most of those other areas in terms 
of the economy you have very little control over — and we 
recognize that, and it’s probably a good thing. The fact of the 
matter is in an area where you do have control; you seem to not 
want to assume the responsibility of levelling the playing field. 
And levelling the playing field — what I’m talking about is 
allowing opportunity for all to tender on a government project. 
 
Now we realize that there has to be standards in terms of these 
kinds of things — that the people who tender on these projects 
have to be capable of doing the work and all of those kinds of 
things. But those are achieved; those kinds of concerns can be 
addressed by the tendering process, which is very, very open in 
all areas. 
 
It's become a pretty standard practice in the business 
community, a fair tendering program. And I don’t hear, other 
than the CCTA, I don’t hear concerns in other areas in the 
business community about tendering on projects. Everyone 
realizes you put your bid in — you put your best foot forward in 
terms of offering the service or the goods on the project — you 
do all of those kinds of things using the best available products, 
the best of everything the project calls for. There’s always those 
kinds of standards in terms of what materials are going to be 
used, what kind of project time frames — all of those things are 
very, very standard in the business community now. 
 
And yet we see in an area of this — a significant area of 
construction in Saskatchewan — the Crown construction 
tendering process still in place in spite of overwhelming 
opposition from people across this province. It is one area that 
you universally, no matter where I’ve gone in Saskatchewan, 
when you explain the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement to an individual, they have this immediate sense that 
something is unfair about this. And I would like, Mr. Minister, 
if you would share with us and the people of Saskatchewan 
what kind of twisted logic you developed to come up with this 
scheme. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I want to tell the member 
that I’m pleased that he’s raised the subject of the CCTA 
tonight, and I’ll tell you why. It hasn’t always been my 
favourite subject over the nearly two years that I’ve been in this 
position, but it’s a story that is winding its way towards a 
conclusion. 
 
The construction industry situation in this province has always 
been complicated for one reason or another, but during the late 
1980s and the 1990s it has been especially complicated by three 
factors. The first factor is that the bargaining structure, 
particularly on the employer’s side, is a real mess. Under The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Act, we have a 
situation where the union contractors are bargaining in respect 
of all of the union contractors. And that hasn’t worked because 
they have excluded from membership anyone who runs a 
spin-off company. 
 
So you may have a situation like you have with many of the big 
contractors where they have a union company and a spin-off 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

company which is not unionized, and it’s caused huge stresses 
within the employer community.  
 
It has . . . In some trades it has become virtually impossible for 
them to conclude a collective agreement at all because the pure 
union contractors negotiated through the Construction Labour 
Relations Association, but the people who are entitled to bid on 
it are people who are not pure contractors. Everybody gets the 
right to bid on it, or to vote on it I should say, to vote on it. And 
they come in and vote the settlement down, send the people 
back to the table, and they bargain again. And it is not working 
and everybody knows it’s not working. So that’s one problem. 
 
The second problem of much longer standing is the idea of the 
spin-off companies. I won’t take the time of the House tonight 
to talk about spin-off companies, but let me . . . because I’ve 
done that before. Let me summarize it by saying it’s an 
absolutely abhorrent idea, completely inconsistent with the 
principles of collective bargaining that have been in effect all 
across this country since at least the Second World War. The 
idea that an employer can create another corporation and simply 
decide that no longer will he operate with the union, 
irrespective of the history and the law, is a nonsensical idea and 
has to be done away with. So that’s the second problem. 
 
And the third problem was the CCTA. And the CCTA was 
reluctantly brought into effect, negotiated and brought into 
effect, in order to throw a lifeline to the construction unions in 
this province, because they were rapidly going down the drain. 
And for a number of very sound reasons, we did not want the 
building trades’ unions to disappear from the scene in this 
province; they’re too important. 
 
One reason they’re important is their participation in the 
apprenticeship program. And without their participation in the 
apprenticeship program, we’d be pretty hard-pressed in this 
province to produce apprentices and journeypersons in a 
number of trades. So that was an important factor that weighed 
upon our consideration of the subject. 
 
We also believe that collective bargaining is a very satisfactory 
— probably the best way of determining wages and working 
conditions in any industry — and especially in the construction 
industry where the building trades in this country, on this 
continent, have been active for a very long time. And we did 
not want Saskatchewan to stand out as “the” place where 
construction unions were trampled into the ground to the point 
where they became extinct, and we were on the way to that 
happening. 
 
Now the member looks doubtful, but I tell you that the concept 
of a spin-off company was just wiping out unions, was just 
absolutely depriving them of work. And the CCTA was 
intended to be a bit of a lifeline to them, so that some 
government-type construction would be done using union 
labour. 
 
We believed in that; we wanted that; and it was a lifeline that by 
and large worked. There was never a very large amount of 
money involved, but it did keep the unions going until at least 
the work situation improved. And that is the case now. The 
work situation has improved. A number of the union contractors 
have done very well and have kept the business going. 

Now what to do about all that I ask myself? And about a year 
ago now I met with the Saskatchewan Construction Association 
and I put it to them in these terms: if you can solve the structure 
problem on the employer side of the table, that is between the 
Saskatchewan Construction Association and its counsel and the 
Construction Labour Relations Association, and come up with a 
structure that works there, if you do that . . . You have to do it 
yourself. If we can be of any help tell us and we will, but that’s 
your decision. 
 
Secondly, if you can agree with the building trades on some 
way to resolve the spin-off company situation, then we will 
withdraw the CCTA. For the last year we have worked very 
intensely with the . . . particularly with the employer side, but 
also with the union side, in moving those ideas along. 
 
And I’m pleased to say tonight that we have reached the point 
where I think we have agreement from all sides that these things 
will happen; that the structure of employer bargaining will be 
reshaped in a way that’s satisfactory to all of the employers; 
that the spin-off situation will be reviewed together with a view 
to bringing that under some kind of logical regime. And then 
we will set aside the CCTA. 
 
And then we would have an industry like we have in other 
provinces — like we used to have in this province — that 
governs itself and its labour relations with some kind of 
common sense and logic. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s the first 
good news I’ve heard coming out of you in several years — that 
finally you’ve woken up to the fact that there is a cause and 
effect to what you do. 
 
When you do something there is always an effect on the other 
side. And there is always a situation where the people on the 
other side of the situation start looking at it and realize 
themselves that if they’re going to stay in business in this 
province, they have to make some changes, have to do some 
things that will make their business and continue to make their 
business profitable in the future. 
 
I take great concern when we hear a minister of a Crown in this 
province stand up and say that they wanted to throw a lifeline 
out to a certain sector. Because, Mr. Minister, that came at a 
cost. That came at a cost. That came at a cost to taxpayers here 
in this province. That came at a cost to . . . And I heard the 
Justice minister say what about farmers. 
 
Well the difference . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s what 
he said. And I’m sure the farm community would be very 
interested in those comments. And perhaps some time this 
evening we’d hope that he’d be perhaps willing to elaborate on 
those comments a little bit because I certainly feel that the farm 
community would have great concern about those kind of 
comments. 
 
The farm community that I know has never asked for anything 
from this government but to get out of the way — but to get out 
of the way, get of the way in terms of a whole range of things. 
Be a lot better off. And so would the contractors in this 
province, Mr. Minister, if you people would just get out of the 
way, I think generally speaking things work pretty well. 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement cost the 
taxpayers of this province money. It costs the people of this 
province tax dollars. There was really no other justification for 
it other than you felt that there was something you wanted to 
offer the unionized support base that you have electorally. 
There is very little other justification for it — very, very little 
other justification for it. 
 
And I’m not surprised that it’s a subject that you are happy to 
see come to a conclusion because I think you know that it was 
unfair. I think you know that it was biased in terms of the 
contractors that were unionized in Saskatchewan and I think 
you know that it was wrong. And I’m glad to see that you’re 
making some changes in this. 
 
I want to explore this a little bit more, Mr. Minister. Could you 
provide us with a list and give us the costs of all contracts 
awarded by Crown corporations pursuant to the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement in the last fiscal year? 
 
It would be interesting . . . It would be a very interesting 
experiment here in Saskatchewan if you just simply allowed 
non-unionized contractors to bid on those and see . . . I know 
it’s darn difficult to put a tab on it, to figure out the costs of it, 
but it would be very interesting if we ran a few of those 
contracts passed some non-unionized contractors here in this 
province to see what it indeed cost. 
 
We have all kinds of examples or all kinds of examples in other 
provinces of projects and the difference in costs and all of those 
kinds of things. There’s a different . . . various range of 
estimates here in Saskatchewan from a few million to tens of 
millions of dollars here in Saskatchewan. I don’t know where 
the range is. 
 
All I know is that this government should have never been 
involved in that kind of thing right from the very outset. I think 
we would have had a healthier construction association, 
construction companies here in Saskatchewan. We would have 
had a better climate for business development here in 
Saskatchewan. We would have had a construction community 
that had more confidence in your administration than they do 
presently, and we would have had probably more construction. 
We would have had a better climate. We would have had a 
better relationship with this government and everything, I think, 
would have worked out a lot better for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s cost a lot of money. It’s cost a lot of money and it should 
have been something you never, ever contemplated. 
 
It goes back to that old roots that you have of somehow or 
another thinking that the government always knows what’s 
better for the people of Saskatchewan than they know what’s 
good for themselves, or what’s good for contractors. I’m hoping 
at this point in time your administration will have grown to the 
point where they realize that maybe you don’t know everything. 
Maybe you don’t have all of the answers. 
 
If you’d have listened to the people in the industry right from 
the very outset, Mr. Minister, they told you it was wrong. They 
believed that you were headed in the wrong direction, and I 
couldn’t agree with them more. Have you that list of contracts 

from the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I don’t have that kind of 
information with me but it is information that we can obtain, 
and we will obtain it and send it to you. It may take several days 
or even weeks to get it together from all of the Crowns, but we 
will do so and provide it to you. 
 
I want to say that the idea of union-only contracting is not 
unique to this government since we were elected in 1991. You 
will know perfectly well that the construction of the NewGrade 
Upgrader — which was a multi-million, maybe 
multi-billion-dollar project — was declared to be a union job by 
the Devine government. And every piece of that construction 
project was done by union contractors employing union-only 
labour. So this is not something that we’ve just manufactured 
during the term of this government. It’s a long-standing idea in 
this province. 
 
And practically all of the large construction in this province 
since the time that the Diefenbaker dam was built back in 1960 
has been done by union contractors. During the Thatcher years, 
that was the case; it was the case during the Blakeney years; 
and it was the case during the Devine years. So this is not 
something that we just made up. 
 
The member is perfectly right, Mr. Chair, when he talks about 
cause and effect. And that’s the case in the construction 
industry in particular. And the cause of so much of this upset, 
the root cause, was the idea that was spawned in the early ’80s, 
that you could set up a spin-off company and escape the 
consequences of a certification by the Labour Relations Board 
and escape a collective agreement. 
 
And that was allowed, for some reason that I’ll never 
understand, it was allowed and nothing was done about it. And 
we took a crack at this in 1992 when we reintroduced the 
construction labour relations Act. But we didn’t do the job 
properly because we didn’t take care of all the spin-off 
companies that were then in existence. We caught any new ones 
that came along but we didn’t catch the old ones. And the old 
ones have continued to be there, continued to operate, and 
continued to be a major problem. 
 
Now as a result of that, you had the division on the employers’ 
side of the bargaining relationships — and I’ve already talked 
about that — and you had what we considered to be the 
necessity for an instrument like the CCTA to ensure that 
collective bargaining in the construction industry in this 
province didn’t completely collapse and disappear. We were not 
prepared to see that happen. Besides, there were many policy 
reasons why it made sense that the construction industries 
would continue in existence and continue to perform many of 
the functions that they have performed. 
 
There are hills and valleys in the construction industry, and one 
of its curses is that the parties take advantage of their position. 
If you’re in the power position and the other guy is in the 
valley, as it were, in a weak position, then they just pound the 
devil out of them. And when you reverse the position, then you 
pound back. So when the unions have got the strength, they 
bargain tough and get big wage increases and when the 
employer’s got the strength, then they take advantage of that 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1629 

opportunity as well. What we require so badly in this industry 
to achieve stability is to forget about the hills and valleys and 
treat each other fairly and with a long-term view in mind. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well I would agree very much, Mr. Chairman, 
and Mr. Minister, with that kind of assessment. There are peaks 
and valleys and I like to think that . . . you probably wouldn’t 
agree, but I think you’re headed for the valley in this area, 
politically speaking. We’ll leave it at that. 
 
I want to just . . . I had a whole range of questions on these 
because I for the life of me never expected that you would come 
around on this subject as soon as you have. But, Mr. Minister, I 
want you to give the official opposition and the contractors and 
everyone in Saskatchewan that’s concerned about the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement some kind of assurance and 
time frame as to when we are expecting an announcement that 
this thing is over with. Now you raise your hands like that, and 
that concerns me because you are one of the ministers in this 
administration that has a habit of dragging your feet in many, 
many areas — and workers’ compensation is a pretty prime 
example of that. 
 
And I know that there’s an expectation that you may not be 
running again in the next provincial election, but I think if I 
were you, I’d want to go out in a blaze of glory, and this would 
be a good opportunity to do it. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you provide us with a time frame as to when 
you’ll be making an announcement for the people of 
Saskatchewan with respect to the Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement? Not holding your hands up and saying 
maybe, soon, you know that kind of stuff, we want something a 
little more definite than that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, this kind of a presentation 
could make me run again I’ll tell you. So say that one more 
time. I want to say to the member that it is very likely to be 
sooner than you think, very likely to be sooner than you think. 
 
A lot of very dedicated people have been spending a lot of time 
on this issue. People on the employers’ side of the table in 
particular have been spending a lot of time with each other and 
with the department and representatives of the department in 
working through these issues. The building trades have been 
right there ready to participate and agreeing to the various steps 
that have been discussed on the employers’ side. 
 
I have a high degree of optimism, but it’s not up to me. All the 
pieces have to fall into place. They look like they’re about to 
fall into place. And if they do, it may happen sooner than you 
would expect. I mean like . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Could be days, could be days. I’ll tell 
you why it could be days. 
 
There is a court case that’s been adjourned till January 8. 
There’s a proceeding before the Labour Relations Board that is 
also returnable in — not January, June 8 — a proceeding before 
the Labour Relations Board that is returnable about the same 
time. And they want to get these things resolved before those 

dates come along. And we’re certainly doing all we can to help 
them make those agreements and come to those conclusions, at 
which time we pull our CCTA as well. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We would welcome 
the opportunity for you to enter the next election campaign. 
You’re always been a very formidable opponent, and we would 
miss your presence in a general election to say the least. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m pleased to hear that you’re moving in this 
direction and have been working in this direction. We will be 
there to say hallelujah when you do make the announcement. 
 
You’ll probably have to extend us the liberty of taking a few 
well-placed political shots because you deserve them on this 
subject, and we’re not going to restrict ourselves in that area. 
But we will be there to say congratulations on a job well done 
of finally getting rid of something you never should have 
started with in the first place. So I think we’ve probably 
concluded our questions on the CCTA, Mr. Minister, and we’ll 
move on to the other area of discussion that I wanted to raise 
with you this evening and that was with workers’ 
compensation. 
 
We discussed a little bit this afternoon the whole area of 
workers’ compensation and the concerns that people have 
brought forward to our attention on an all-too-frequent basis it 
seems. As I said earlier this afternoon that fully I think 50 per 
cent of the concerns that go through my office — and I expect 
many members find the same thing — are workers’ 
compensation related. And that should be of great concern to 
you, Mr. Minister, and to your department, that there are that 
many people that are unhappy with the operations of your 
department and the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
I can’t help but believe you must be tired, tired of having to 
listen to another workers’ compensation related concern 
brought to your attention because it’s ongoing. It’s continuous, 
and there seems to be no end in sight given the fact that your 
government is not willing to move on the issues that are before 
a lot of people, that are of concern to a lot of people in this area. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I said this afternoon, we’re not going to bring 
specific cases forward because I think that’s perhaps 
inappropriate in this Assembly when you’re dealing with 
something as personal, in many cases, as a workers’ 
compensation related situation. What I will say though, and 
what I’ve given people that have contacted us over the past 
number of months, is that we will endeavour to write our 
concerns to your office directly with respect to the workers’ 
compensation specific case situations. 
 
But I just want to say, Mr. Minister, that what we see on an 
ongoing basis now is long-standing complaints, some of them 
dating back decades that haven’t been addressed, and I’m sure 
you’ll get up and say, yes well what about you. Well, yes well, 
what about me? I wasn’t there, and you know darn well I wasn’t 
there, so let’s try and dispense, let’s try and . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well you can point your fingers all you like. I 
don’t recall the member from Moosomin ever sitting on 
treasury benches or being in a position that you occupy today, 
sir. So let’s not get into this tiresome game of wanting to point 
your finger over here because there was nobody over here that 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

sits in the same chair that you sit in. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are long-standing complaints, some dating 
back 30 years. I had a gentleman talk to me the other day about 
a 30-year-old complaint where he seems to not be able to get 
any kind of satisfaction. The Blue Rose Advocacy group held 
demonstrations down on the front lawn here. They were there 
for several days, talking about their concerns. I think you . . . I 
hope you did; I’m not sure you did. I think you addressed them. 
I believe you did. And again it was one of those same sorts of 
speeches that we’ve heard all too often from you, Mr. Minister. 
Well maybe, eventually, soon, some day — you know that kind 
of thing. 
 
And that’s what concerns them, Mr. Minister. At times I 
wonder whether you ever have given a direct answer to a 
question. It doesn’t seem like it. I’ve been here seven years now 
and I can’t recall . . . you have on occasion in question period 
got up and said yes or no; that is true. But mostly it was a very 
facetious response to a very good question, generally speaking. 
 
But anyway we won’t get into that right now. But, Mr. Minister, 
the concerns go back a long time. The concerns go back a long 
time in many cases. The Blue Rose Advocacy group has told us 
what they would like to see set up, and I think my colleague 
talked about it a little bit this evening, was an appeal 
mechanism. 
 
I don’t see a whole lot wrong with having some lay people . . . 
we don’t have to get into this bunch of lawyers kind of stuff that 
you’re too often wanting to allow as an excuse for yourself. I 
think there is opportunity to have some people from an 
organization like that, a representative from labour, a 
representative from the business community. It doesn’t have to 
be these wieldy bureaucracies that you guys always seem to 
want to say are going to result. 
 
(2000) 
 
Just an opportunity for people to have their say, an opportunity 
to go before an appeal mechanism and appeal on a very 
straightforward basis and say, I don’t think my case was 
handled appropriately. And I think that’s all they’re asking for 
is that opportunity to have their say before what they consider a 
fairly impartial group. I don’t think that’s too much to ask for. I 
don’t see the difficulty or the huge cost that would result from 
those kinds of situations. When you turn them down, if you’re 
going to turn them down at the end of the day, I think at least 
they would feel they’ve had a fair hearing. 
 
But I think Workers’ Comp related concerns . . . I think they’re 
a little bit tired of having to trot them through our office and 
then down to your office to try and get some sort of satisfaction. 
It isn’t working all that well. We’ve brought up concerns in 
health in terms of Ombudsman. We have the Ombudsman, we 
have child advocates, we have a Workers’ Advocate, although 
the Workers’ Advocate doesn’t have much power in this area.  
 
This might be a good opportunity again for you, Mr. Minister, 
in the twilight of your career, to do something for the workers 
of this province in terms of setting up something of this nature 
that could be seen as a last-ditch appeal mechanism that would 
provide them with at least some assurance that their concerns 

have been heard. As I said, at the end of the day, if you turn 
them down, I would be in support of a committee that had that 
kind of authority to say yes or no in terms of advancing their 
claim forward or denying their claim. And I think that’s what 
these people have been asking for — an independent 
committee. I invite your comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — This is a very difficult issue, Mr. Chair, 
and one that I discussed earlier this evening with the member 
from Moosomin. It is an idea that’s been around for a long time 
and I have been involved in discussions on this subject over and 
over again over the years, going back perhaps 23, 24 years that 
I have been involved in these questions in one way or another. 
 
I have visited Ontario and been briefed on the way in which 
their appeal mechanism operated, and saw a very unpleasant 
situation which I certainly don’t think we want to get involved 
in, where there was a bureaucracy and a formality to 
proceedings that would not accomplish what the member wants 
to accomplish at all. That’s one point I want to make. 
 
At the same time, I want to repeat, as I said to the member from 
Moosomin, that we’re open to ideas on this because there is a 
perception that the member has given voice to that the existing 
mechanism is not fair; it does not appear to be fair, and so it is a 
problem. 
 
We are not changing it in this legislation because frankly we 
don’t know what to change it to. We don’t know of a successful 
model on which we could pattern ourselves. 
 
We have, with the board as it is now structured, three people 
who are people of considerable reputation in their communities 
. . . employer representative, the worker representative are 
people of a very solid, very high reputation. And I couldn’t 
imagine that we could get fairer people to sit and listen to these 
cases. And the chair, Stan Cameron, is known to most of us, 
and known to be a fair, sensible, practical, common-sense kind 
of person. 
 
But the problem is, of course, that they are in a legal sense the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. They are the three members of 
that board and the whole structure of the board operates 
underneath them, and therefore claimants — people who have 
not been successful, and who come to your offices and my 
offices and those of all my colleagues — feel that that the 
appeal mechanism is not fair because it is just the board hearing 
appeals from itself. And I recognize that’s a problem, and it’s 
not one to which I know the answer. 
 
If you’re going to create, if you’re going to create a body like an 
appeal body, you are creating an administrative tribunal. You’re 
creating a tribunal that has to operate within the rules of natural 
justice and all the other rules that apply to administrative 
tribunals. You can’t have a body that has that kind of power that 
could escape being classified as an administrative tribunal. 
 
So it is a big deal no matter how you structure it. It is a body 
whose decisions will be subject to court review, just as the 
Workers’ Compensation Board is now subject to court review, 
that has to operate within its jurisdiction and operate according 
to the rules of natural justice or they will, you know, they . . . 
 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

So that throws on them the obligation to be relatively formal in 
their processes. And what we fear is that we create another level 
of bureaucracy. That is one, if Ontario is any example, is a 
playground for lawyers and a slow, much delayed process, that 
is the cause of as much dissatisfaction as the board itself. 
 
Now I don’t think that’s a very effective model. There may be 
other, better models around of which I’m not aware, and I’d like 
to know what they are. Because I do recognize that the member 
from Kindersley raises a point that’s raised again and again 
with us and that is that the perception is wrong, the perception 
is wrong. And as long as that’s the case, then the perception is, 
in many respects, the reality. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I agree, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair, that that is the 
perception. And I also agree that that needs to be addressed. It 
needs to be addressed so people feel that . . . people should feel 
that when there is justice that needs to be addressed, at the very 
least government should be the one setting the example rather 
than being the example in these areas. 
 
Mr. Minister, this as I said continues to be a concern for many 
people across this province; it continues to be a problem. 
 
I will certainly want to say that we’ll take you and your 
department at your word that you are working in this area to 
provide a mechanism to address those long-standing concerns 
and the concerns that continue to come forward with respect to 
the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
It appears to be one of those areas of your government that 
people don’t have a great deal of confidence in. One of those 
areas that — as our colleague from North Battleford has raised 
about the administrative costs — one of those kinds of things 
that come forward when they see less and less benefits being 
paid out and they see administrative costs doubling in a few 
short years. It causes them to really wonder about the operations 
of a government department like Workers’ Compensation. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we will endeavour to provide you with 
information that has come forward from people across this 
province on a specific case-by-case basis. I would ask you and 
your department to please provide us with as full an explanation 
as you and your department can as to why these claims have 
been denied. And perhaps it might be a good opportunity for 
you and your department to review these situations — these 
long-standing situations — and give some reflection on how we 
can address these situations better in the future. 
 
We mentioned . . . I certainly appreciate your comments with 
respect to these situations being open to court interpretation if 
you have some sort of an appeal mechanism put in place. But I 
think the opposition at least is certainly willing to help and 
assist in this area, to try and come up with a mechanism that 
will address these concerns. At a time of need — probably the 
highest need that you’ll ever experience, suffering a 
work-related incident — is a time when government should be 
there rather than not be there for the people of this province. 
 
So I would ask you, Mr. Minister, to undertake that. And we 
have some questions in one more area and I just want your 
response prior to that. 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We, as I indicated, are concerned about 
these things and they will remain under study by the 
Department of Labour and the Workers’ Compensation Board. I 
want to just say that this is a kind of a hobby-horse of sorts. 
That’s not the proper term, but a whipping boy. We used to do 
it in opposition. We’d say the volume of cases going through 
our office is higher than they’ve ever being. They said that back 
in the ’70s and I recall it very, very well. They’re saying it in 
the ’90s from across the . . . I said it in the ’80s because the 
volume in the ’80s was very, very high. 
 
But I want to say this though; the board is working and working 
well. Over 94 per cent, about 94 per cent of the claims, are 
processed and paid without any quarrel at all. The rehab is 
working better now than ever before. People are returning to 
work earlier than before because the board really tries to place 
them in employment, with their employer, with reduced duties 
as early as possible. And that is a matter that I discussed this 
afternoon. 
 
I think it’s a very successful program, and it’s popular pretty 
well all the way around — including the injured people who are 
able to get back to where they want to go, namely to their 
workplace, where they can rejoin their work mates and feel like 
they’re re-entering life rather than just sitting at home, waiting 
for some day to come when they’re pronounced fit to return to 
their original job. 
 
There are a lot of reasons why we should be proud of this 
board. But in any case there are 6 per cent whose claims are 
denied. And there are people who don’t feel they’ve been fairly 
treated. And they will go eventually to their MLA (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) now as they did in the ’80s, as they 
did in the ’70s, as they probably did in the ’60s and ’50s. And 
that’s just one of the functions we have to perform. 
 
But let’s not forget that this board, by and large over the years, 
has served this province very, very well. It is the most fiscally 
sound board in the whole of Canada. The Workers’ 
Compensation Board in Ontario has a debt, has a debt that 
exceeds that of the province of Saskatchewan, the Government 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, our board is not in a debt situation. It’s in a solid financial 
situation. And we should be very grateful for that and some of 
the other things that I mentioned. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We appreciate your 
comments in that area. Mr. Minister, the last issue, the last area 
of concern that I wanted to raise with you this evening was the 
whole concern that has come forward in the last while 
respecting disenfranchised widows and widowers here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As the minister knows, many disenfranchised widows who lost 
their husbands in work-related accidents and remarried prior to 
1985, have been cut off of all Workers’ Compensation pension 
benefits that they were receiving prior to remarriage. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve been looking at this for some period of 
time I understand. I’m wanting to see some —I think that they 
are, as well — wanting to see some progress in this area. We’ve 
had some promises of action. We’ve had you, on a number of 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

occasions in the House here, talking about some things near and 
approaching a decision time. 
 
What kind of a time frame are we looking at in terms of this 
decision, Mr. Minister, and do you expect that we are looking 
for something that will satisfy their needs in this area? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I don’t know, Mr. Chair, how to answer 
that last question. The problem here is the cost. There are 302 
people, we think, that we’re able to find files on that fall into 
the category that the member mentions. And they’re scattered 
across the country, as you’d expect. And the costs involved are 
huge, shocking, and that’s the reason why we’re having to take 
some time with respect to this decision. 
 
I just want to take a moment, Mr. Chair, to outline this, 
although I touched on it with the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone just before the dinner hour. But she has been 
pressing for retroactive payment to the date they were cut off, 
with interest. And we haven’t even bothered to calculate how 
much that is — that is just right off the map. 
 
But we have calculated, with the assistance of an actuary, the 
amount of money that would be involved in reinstating benefits 
to April 1, 1985, which is when the legislation was changed and 
removed the business about losing your entitlement if you 
remarried. And the cost of that to the board would be about $74 
million. You can imagine the figure just shocked me, but that is 
the actuarial analysis of how much that would cost — $74 
million. 
 
The board, of course, is very reluctant; doesn’t have that kind of 
money lying around loose and are very reluctant to lay off that 
cost on today’s employers. The government is not in a position 
to pay out $74 million in a situation like this. We have lots of 
demands on any loose money that the government has, as you 
know, because you make a lot of them. 
 
And we have also considered — and this is a shocking number 
too — what would happen if we simply reinstated the benefits 
now, without any retroactivity . . . just today. The cost of that is 
about $40 million. You fund those allowances, fund those 
benefits in accordance with the principles that the board has 
followed for decades — since ever — and for the life 
expectancy of the people who are receiving them. 
 
Now I was as shocked as I can see the member from 
Canora-Pelly is shocked at those numbers. But they’re not 
mine. They’re produced by the actuary and they are the reason 
why it is taking the government some time to decide what to do. 
There’s every reason to be sympathetic to the people who are 
involved. Many of them had very difficult lives; many of them 
are in need now and they deserve our sympathy. But the cost of 
doing what they would have us do, or the cost of doing just a 
fraction of what they would have us do, is very, very large. And 
that’s the reason why the government has been taking a while to 
deal with this decision and will take a while longer. I can’t 
predict how much longer. I’ve been saying two weeks for 
weeks and weeks now. So I’ll say it again if that’s of any use 
but I can’t promise that we will have a decision within two 
weeks. 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, we have received four calls already 
this evening from people that were watching your responses to 
the member from Greystone here earlier today, and they have a 
lot of trouble believing what you’re saying. The fact of the 
matter is, is they know of 45 people — not 302 people — they 
know of 45 people in the province of Saskatchewan. And if you 
have a list of those, they’d be very interested in seeing that list 
so that they can verify, I think, what you’re talking about 
because they have no knowledge of 302 people whatsoever. 
And it sounds like they’ve done a fair bit of investigation in this 
area to try and find people that are in similar circumstances. 
 
If we take your low number, $40 million, and divide it into the 
302 people, it’s a $130,000 apiece. Can you explain how you 
come up with that kind of number in terms of this sort of 
situation in the workers . . . I don’t understand how you’ve 
arrived at those figures because I suspect they’d be quite happy 
at 130,000 bucks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — These are actuary figures, Mr. Chair, 
that are based on the following principle. When the board sets 
up an allowance, and we’re talking here about a benefit that will 
be payable to the beneficiary for the normal life expectancy of 
that beneficiary, the board funds . . . the board sets aside funds 
to fund that allowance during that period of time. And the 
principles by which they do this are well-known among the 
actuaries and every board does it and must do it. 
 
And when I say $40 million, that is the cost of funding the 
pensions for the 302 people who are apparently involved for 
their normal life expectancy. And I agree it’s a shocking 
number. I’m sure that the people who phoned you were as 
shocked as I was when I heard it. I couldn’t believe it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They don’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well I’m sorry, but this is the analysis 
of actuaries whose business it is to make this kind of 
calculation. 
 
Now I don’t have a list of the 302 people and I don’t think it 
would be possible or appropriate for me to reveal the names of 
those people if I had the list, but I don’t have the list. But the 
board spent weeks, months searching old files, trying to identify 
people who are caught in this business of losing their pension 
because they remarried, and who are still alive. And the figure 
that they’ve come up with is 302. And I thought it would be a 
larger figure than that frankly but that’s what it was. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, would you be prepared to sit down 
with these people and share that kind of information, and have 
someone that has that kind of expertise to go over this with 
them to detail the kind of numbers that we are talking about, 
and share with them the list of 302 people? I’m not asking for 
it. I suspect they would have . . . could come up with a couple 
of representatives that we can trust their integrity in this area. 
These are people that are affected, directly affected. 
 
We’re not asking you to publicly broadcast this or anything of 
that nature but I think it would provide at least the opposition 
with some comfort that you were working with the right 
assumptions. If what they are telling us is that they know of 45 
people, and you are telling us that you know of 302, that’s a 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

considerable difference of a starting point to make the 
calculations. 
 
We don’t disagree that your actuaries are probably correct in 
their assumptions, calculations, but if you were providing them 
with the information that they believe is incorrect as a starting 
point then we have a big problem here. And I say if you take 45 
over 302 it substantially cuts down on the amount of 
compensation that would be available. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think what at the very least we could do for 
these people in the interim while you’re making your decision 
is to take the opportunity to sit down with them and share some 
of this information. If it shocked you it certainly has shocked us 
and from the calls that we are receiving they are flabbergasted 
at the kind of numbers that you are talking about here. 
 
Would you endeavour to take that opportunity, you and your 
department, to provide them with that information? As I said 
we’re not talking about broadcasting this or anything like that. 
We don’t want to get into any of those games that you used to 
get into. We don’t want to get into that kind of stuff, Mr. 
Minister, but what we want is some assurance that we’re 
working from the same starting point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I can say to the member that I know that 
the management of the Workers’ Compensation Board would 
be glad to sit down with this group and explain the funding 
principles and what the arithmetic is like. 
 
And I know that they would be prepared to share how they 
identified the 302 people. I am not able to say that the board can 
provide the 302 names. I don’t know what rules of 
confidentiality or policy affect that. I just have no knowledge of 
it at all. So I’m not able to give you an undertaking on that 
score. But as far as the calculations are concerned and how the 
actuaries put these figures together, I know that the board would 
be glad to do that. 
 
After all it was the board that read in the newspaper about the 
widows and their concerns and contacted them and invited them 
to come in and meet with the board and that’s how this whole 
process got started. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Good evening again, Mr. Minister, and your 
officials. I want to ask you about the situation in the meat 
packing industry and the meat processing industry. And I know 
the minister is aware of the situation with the lockout at the 
Maple Leaf plant in North Battleford; and concurrent with that, 
of course, there were labour problems right across Canada with 
Maple Leaf which resulted in a quite startling settlement at the 
Burlington plant. And also in the middle of the labour dispute 
there was an announcement of a major new plant for Brandon, 
Manitoba. 
 
I think that from the standpoint of North Battleford, we did 
have workers off the job due to a lockout for six months and the 
end result certainly seemed something less than satisfactory 
from their standpoint. And I wonder if the minister has any 
comments on that situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I do, Mr. Chair. This is a matter that 
I’ve had the opportunity to discuss with the member a number 

of times, he being from North Battleford and having 
constituents who are directly affected by that lockout. 
 
It was a difficult lockout to understand because it didn’t make 
sense considering the whole of the Maple Leaf bargaining 
pattern across the country — why did it zero in on North 
Battleford? But they did. And quite a number of people were 
out on the street for a long time. 
 
At the same time there was little or no bargaining taking place 
around that plant. People were just allowed to . . . they were just 
off work. And the bargaining that did take place and the contact 
between the union and the Maple Leaf company was happening 
in Ontario for the most part, and perhaps also in Winnipeg and 
Edmonton, but certainly none of it around the North Battleford 
area. 
 
The Burlington situation was a very interesting situation. I’ll 
just take a moment to put it on the record. I know the member 
knows the details of it. But what you had there was an employer 
that offered a relatively large — really a huge amount of cash 
— to individual employees if they would agree to the 
employer’s last offer. And by a margin of 56 per cent the 
employees agreed. And that collective agreement is now unlike 
any other meat packing collective agreement in the country. 
 
And of course then followed the negotiations in North 
Battleford where the union pretty much collapsed because of 
the Burlington situation. I think that’s a correct description of 
the situation. 
 
We’re now looking at the whole meat packing industry, 
wondering whether Burlington will be isolated, whether 
Burlington-North Battleford will be isolated, or whether this 
will spill over into other plants. 
 
The Fletcher negotiations in Alberta are in grave difficulty. The 
employer’s locking out, bringing in scabs and has an offer on 
the table that is pretty much identical to the Burlington offer, so 
it is an ongoing phenomenon. 
 
And the reason why I go into this detail is that this approach to 
bargaining, to in effect buy a cheap contract with cash money 
and come out of it with very, very substantially reduced wage 
rates that will apply to all future employees is quite a shock to 
the collective bargaining system and presents quite a significant 
threat to it. It’s hard for workers, particularly those with little 
attachment to the plant, to resist a big cash offer. People in 
Burlington were getting as much as — I’m not sure of these 
numbers, but let me use them anyway — as much as $20,000 
cash to vote for the contract, to vote for the offer. 
 
And they’d only been there for a month, six weeks. You know, 
they didn’t have any attachment to the plant at all, and that is a 
very, very dangerous situation and poses a great threat to what 
has been a pretty stable institution in this country, namely the 
collective bargaining system. And it bears watching, and it 
certainly was a . . . presented great difficulty to the men and 
women in North Battleford who were locked out for all that 
length of time. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I know there 
was considerable publicity, at the time of the North Battleford 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

lockout, of wage rates in the industry of 16 to $18 an hour, and 
of course that may have been true in some places, but it 
certainly was not true in North Battleford where the wage rates 
were under $10 an hour. But now while the North Battleford 
workers had hoped to come up somewhere near the national 
average, it seems as if in fact the opposite has occurred, and the 
bar has been lowered to where the North Battleford workers had 
been. 
 
I wonder if the minister could tell us if he is concerned that 
because of the Burlington and other settlements, that in effect 
the meat packing and meat processing industry has really 
ceased to be what you could call a career job and has now 
moved into the sort of job that one would expect itinerant 
workers come and go, as opposed to people who can build lives 
and support families and build communities with. 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I think that’s a very good 
point. It is . . . I have to acknowledge it’s a very good point. 
What’s at stake here is not . . . I mean, one of the things at stake 
as I’ve just described is the integrity of the collective bargaining 
system, but another thing that’s at stake is the meat packing 
industry itself. 
 
And if indeed it becomes a low wage industry that’s attractive 
only to itinerant workers, the skill levels will vanish. The 
attachments to the jobs will vanish or become very, very weak, 
and the whole industry will suffer as a result. 
 
And not just at the plant level, but backing up all the way to the 
producers. It will affect the industry all the way back and this 
should be of great concern to everybody if the meat packing 
industry should be de-skilled and reduced to in effect minimum 
wage employment. That would be a great set-back for the whole 
industry, so the employers who are so fascinated with the idea 
of ratcheting down the wage rates should look beyond the 
immediate bottom line to some of the long-term consequences 
that were implicit in the question of the member from North 
Battleford, and I agree with him. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and good 
evening to the minister and his officials. I guess I also find it 
disconcerting, some of the comments you just made concerning 
the meat packing industry and the prospects for employment in 
that industry and the type of employment that it may end up 
becoming as a result of what’s occurred there. 
 
I can’t help but think the government themselves are also guilty 
with respect to some of these sorts of things where . . . For 
example, I had raised an issue about a year ago now concerning 
call-out provisions with respect to home care workers in the 
province and the fact that the government was not really paying 
particular attention to their own labour standards in that regard. 
Where all we were talking about is paying some home care 
workers a minimum of three hours of minimum wages, I 
believe, when they were called out to work. 
 
And I’d just like the minister perhaps to give us an update as far 
as where that situation might be at this point in time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I apologize for taking a few 

moments to get updated on this important issue. The department 
continues to work on this problem. The member was quite right 
in bringing it to our attention. And the progress is being made. 
Of the 33 districts there are 9 where there’s still a problem, and 
the number of cases originally were about 700 and they’ve been 
reduced to about 200. 
 
And the difficulty that’s standing in the way of finally resolving 
all of the cases is the matter of records. The records are not in 
many cases adequate or complete, and we’re not able to finalize 
the number. But I’m told by my officials that there’s no 
problem in principle. The employers realize that they were not 
complying with the law. And the question is what it takes to 
comply with the law. The department continues to work on the 
settlement of these remaining cases. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair and to the Minister. Is it 
your intention to make this some sort of a blanket offer to these 
individuals; you’re telling us some 200-odd individuals now. 
And if so, what sort of a figure might that be? Is it at all 
reflective of the work that they may have put forward? Giving 
that these people were being called out to work for minimum 
wage we have to understand it’s not like it was a tremendous 
burden in that regard, and there are labour standards to be 
adhered to here. Would you be able to provide us with that 
information here this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, the individuals concerned 
were paid somewhere between 8 and $12 an hour for the hour 
that they were allowed under their collective agreements. And 
the Minimum Wage Board order would have required the 
payment of $16.80 — three hours at the minimum wage. And as 
I mentioned the records are spotty so they’re trying to settle 
these cases, find a formula that everybody can buy into to settle 
them and it’s a lot of work, but progress is happening. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, could the minister give us 
some idea of what sort of a range we’re looking at here in terms 
of these workers and what sort of back wages might be due to 
them? I know you’re saying you’re trying to reach some 
resolution, some common ground I suppose you could call it, 
but always, you know the middle ground or the averages don’t 
always necessarily reflect the burden on individuals. And I was 
wondering if you might be able to at least provide us with the 
high and the low range. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The arithmetic on it I’ve already stated. 
The law requires $16.80 on a call-out, and the collective 
agreement pays one hour’s wages, so the shortfall could be 5, 6, 
$7, depending upon the employee’s wage rate. The range that 
we’ve found so far is between a low of about $45 to a high of 
about $700 for entitlement. And the average is a little over 
$200, $210, $200 — in there somewhere. I think that’s about all 
I can tell the member. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you. Mr. Minister, 
I’d like to go back to some issues related to workers’ 
compensation and the Bill that was being discussed earlier 
today. And the mention of the benefit-of-the-doubt provision 
now that has been, I guess in your words I heard . . . embedded 
I think was one of the phrases or words I heard you use, 
embedded in the Act; of course, enshrined is another one we’ve 
heard, perhaps a better word. But I didn’t hear too much about 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

the benefit-of-the-doubt clause pertaining to the Act with 
reference to it being enforced by the Act. 
 
Because I think that’s where a lot of people perhaps . . . and I 
think you have to give them the benefit of the doubt in being 
just a little bit sceptical of the whole matter because let’s face it, 
it was policy prior to this to give workers the benefit of the 
doubt in these sorts of situations. And I think we’d all have to 
agree that perhaps in practice that didn’t actually occur. And 
we’ve ended up with some hardships that we’ve all heard of, 
and certainly I think that there’s something that could be done 
for these individuals. 
 
But why was there not more consideration given towards not 
only enshrining that benefit of the doubt in the particular Bill, 
but in fact the enforcement aspect of it? What prevented your 
department from addressing those concerns on behalf of 
workers in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well we as legislators sitting in this 
Assembly have the ability to pass laws, and we do. Sometimes 
those laws are applicable to the public in such a way that a 
breach of those laws attracts a fine or some penalty. But in most 
situations involving legislation like The Workers’ 
Compensation Act, we set up a statutory regime. In the case of 
the Workers’ Compensation Board it is a complex statutory 
regime. We make provision for a board to administer it and we 
lay down in statutory form the way in which this Act will be 
administered. And we expect that that will happen, that the 
organization involved will in fact follow the law, and of course 
in the normal case that happens, it happens in a matter of 
course. 
 
Your question is: what happens if they don’t obey the law? And 
in the case of the Workers’ Compensation Board the remedy 
would be to replace the board. We’d say this board doesn’t 
follow the law; we have to appoint a different board. 
 
But I think in those circumstances it would be inappropriate to 
start fining individuals, almost impossible to prove a case like 
that and impossible to prosecute. Far better to leave it to good 
administration to ensure that the laws passed by this legislature 
are in fact being administered according to their intent by the 
organization involved, whether it’s a department or whether it’s 
an independent board or what it is. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister. It’s my 
understanding that our province is probably one of the only 
ones, if not the only one, that doesn’t provide for instances of 
court appeal as far as decisions that are handed down by the 
Workers’ Compensation Board, or as in another alternative, like 
a wholly independent commission in that regard. 
 
In your opinion is that fair, that we be the only province that 
doesn’t provide that to our workers, that wholly independent 
view or a court appeal process? Just simply put, is it fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well I think that our Workers’ 
Compensation Board is subject to court review. I think it’s 
subject to court review in the same way that the Labour 
Relations Board is, or that a host of other organizations in 
society are subject to court review. They’re administrative 
tribunals. They have to operate within their jurisdiction; they 

have to operate in accordance with the principles of natural 
justice and so on. And our board is equally subject to that kind 
of court review as all the other boards in the province. 
 
If the member is talking about an appeal process in individual 
cases, we’ve had two discussions on that subject already 
tonight. And to make a long story as short as I possibly can, we 
are not satisfied with the models of appeal that now are being 
followed by some other jurisdictions in Canada. We think that 
they have a more down side than up side, but we are admitting 
that there is a perception that an appeal all entirely within the 
structure of the board has the perception of not being fair. 
 
So we have long looked for an option, an effective, low-cost 
option to resolve these cases. We do not think it lies in the court 
system. We do not think it appropriate that workers’ 
compensation appeals should be heard by the courts for very 
obvious reasons. But we are certainly open to ideas about an 
appropriate, effective, low-cost, high-speed appeal process. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister. With 
respect to support services and outreach programs that you 
might have planned in the next fiscal year or this fiscal year, 
and again with reference to the Bill that was up for discussion 
earlier this afternoon, and hearing from yourself that really at 
this point there isn’t even the start of a list as far as it relates to 
occupational disease, what component might we expect within 
support services? What sort of funds might we expect devoted 
towards that sort of a program of trying to establish at least the 
start of a list of occupational diseases in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Chair, and to the member, 
there are occupational diseases that are recognized by the board. 
They don’t limit themselves by saying, we recognize the 
following industrial diseases because the list does not . . . we 
haven’t reached the end of the list. The list is still open. 
 
And as more research is done and more diseases rise and our 
understanding of these things increases, the board’s treatment of 
cases changes in order to deal with these new situations. The 
board is constantly, constantly alert to developments — that is 
the latest literature, the latest research, decisions of other boards 
all across the country and in other countries as well — and try 
to keep themselves fully informed on the latest, best thinking 
about the subjects. The board, as you know, are very active in 
their public consultation process with the employer groups and 
with trade unions and others — anyone who’s interested. And 
these are often the source of ideas. A lot has been discussed 
recently about occupational disease panels, and the original 
drafts of this legislation had such an idea in it. It was abandoned 
because there was scarcely any support for it so the idea was 
abandoned. 
 
The university is interested in getting into occupational health 
questions in their department of medicine and that may be the 
source of important research in Saskatchewan, depending on 
how far they want to take it. Our initial reaction has supported 
the idea of the College of Medicine taking an interest in 
occupational medicine. But I think that’s down the road a bit 
and we’ll see where that takes us. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, if we were 
to see involvement by the universities into research related to 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

this, would we perhaps see a bit of rethinking — not just a bit of 
rethinking but perhaps some fairly significant rethinking of 
Workers’ Compensation Board policies related to stress on the 
job — which from what I heard earlier this afternoon, it seems 
to me there is a large number of claims related to what is 
stress-related workplace injury. 
 
And a lot of these are not getting resolved, from what I 
understood relative to what you also pointed out, was perhaps 
otherwise 96 per cent of the claims are resolved. So certainly 
this seems to be an area that there should be a lot of attentions 
focused on — where we remove some of the decisions away 
from the Workers’ Compensation Board and perhaps place 
them in . . . in terms of the policies that are established that 
perhaps aren’t as well researched from a health perspective and 
put them in the hands of professionals, people who actually 
research these fields. 
 
I guess what I’m saying is we need to recognize that there are 
hazards on the job, in the workplace, in this province that are 
leading to stress and stress-related injury. And it isn’t just 
simply acceptable any longer to be suggesting that any illness 
as a result of these sorts of stresses was due to some prior 
condition, some prior weakness on the part of individuals. I 
think if we are really and truly trying to be fair to our workers 
in this province, that we have to be a little bit more caring and 
compassionate in that regard. But in order to do that, perhaps 
we have to turn to some cold, hard medical research. I just 
welcome your comments in this regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I agree that more and harder 
research would be a very good thing, very desirable. And I 
think our understanding of these matters is at a very primitive 
stage. I think we have a lot to learn and we certainly are 
supportive of this kind of initiative. Our resources in this 
province are a bit limited but none the less there are very 
important things that we can do, and I think we should get about 
it. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the minister, would 
you be able to outline for us in terms of minimum wage in the 
province, where are we at. How far down the road do our 
workers in this province that have to endure working at a 
minimum wage level, how far down the road are we from 
seeing some sort of an increase for these individuals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I’m expecting a recommendation from 
the Minimum Wage Board just daily. I had expected one before 
now. As the Assembly will know, we appointed a new 
Minimum Wage Board and they have been working for some 
months now. They had a bit of an agenda carried over from the 
last board in terms of a couple of ideas that had to be 
researched, and I am anxiously waiting for a recommendation 
with respect to an increase in the minimum wage. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the minister, would 
you be able to provide us with any sort of an idea of what might 
be expected in the way of . . . I hear increase, and certainly I 
think an increase will be welcome. But people want to know if 
it’s going to be of significant amount. What difference will it 
make in their life? If we could hear on that. And also with 
respect to recommendations that might be provided to the 
government, is it something that is necessary that your 

government act upon it specifically? Are you obliged to follow 
it or are you in a position to overrule it if you don’t think the 
increase, you don’t think that the increase is sufficient to meet 
people’s needs? Or are you in a position, or would you be 
prepared to overrule their decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We have never done so. Successive 
governments have always accepted and followed the 
recommendations of the Minimum Wage Board as to the level 
of the minimum wage, and I don’t think there’s a case in our 
history where it’s been overruled. It’s been followed in every 
case. 
 
And the last thing I want to say on the point is, we do not give 
them any clues. I don’t give them any instructions. I haven’t 
even spoken to any member of that board since they were 
appointed on the subject. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, Mr. Minister, I know that those 
individuals who have to work for minimum wage levels in the 
province are finding it increasingly difficult to make ends meet. 
We all talk about cost of living in the province and how it’s 
calculated, and we all sometimes wonder how that’s calculated 
because it certainly seems like most people’s cost of living is 
rising much faster than the index that we hear so often referred 
to. So certainly if there’s an increase, we want to hear about it 
sooner than later. And we’re hoping that it will provide some 
significant benefit to workers and their families in this province. 
 
Aside from that I have no further questions for the minister this 
evening, and his officials. I’d just like to thank them for this 
opportunity to put a few questions to them, and look forward to 
a continued dialogue. Certainly there’s a lot of issues, and I 
think we’ve heard the minister admit there’s a lot of issues left 
to work out with respect to workers’ compensation issues. 
 
We’re not necessarily looking at the complete solution in The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act that we’ve discussed 
earlier. I think the door is always open to make improvements. 
We certainly hope from this side that you’ll be open to listening 
to our suggestions for improvements. We all want to be 
prudent, responsible in any suggestions we put forward. I take 
pride in our caucus and in the responsible suggestions that they 
do put forward to government, and I just hope that the dialogue 
can continue. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Just one question. But before that, I’ll just take 
this opportunity to thank the minister and his officials for the 
responses that they’ve given both in regards to The Workers’ 
Compensation Act that we moved forward just a few moments 
ago and as well, Labour. 
 
But coming back to one comment raised. And I came across 
that information I was talking about regarding the feeling of 
humiliation that people feel. And in one case here, an individual 
talked about having been a nurse for a number of years and 
referred to a specific specialist, was hollered at, felt that the 
person was rude and that . . . a daughter says, it felt like my 
mother was violated physically and emotionally. 
 
And in another case, and it just so happens to be the same 
specialist that another person was referred to — and this comes 
from his parish priest who accompanied him — and the same 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

type of comments were made. Basically even the priest felt 
really violated by the process. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question I would have to you: when 
individuals, after they’ve been referred to . . . first of all they’ve 
gone to their family physician who has dealt with them as 
compassionately as they can, then referred them to a specialist, 
and then all of a sudden Workers’ Comp says, but we want you 
to see this specialist. So you’re now on your third, possibly your 
third or maybe fourth visit, and all of a sudden if you’re faced 
with that, it just seems unbecoming of anyone in that 
profession. 
 
What avenue would individuals have if they feel that they’ve 
been addressed in this situation? And that’s why I guess I come 
to the point of the appeal mechanism outside of the board that 
may address this. But what avenues do you have today where 
individuals . . . who do they turn to when they feel that they’ve 
been treated rudely just in responding to a claim from Workers’ 
Comp or a request to see a specific specialist regarding a certain 
diagnosis? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I’m aware of the case that the member 
has raised, and I think it is just totally unacceptable that people 
are treated in such a fashion, and the doctor involved ought to 
be thoroughly ashamed that such a thing happened in . . . I’ll 
say his or her office but we know who the specialist was. 
 
I practised law for many years, and if I had behaved in such an 
unprofessional way, then the client involved would have cause 
to report me to the Law Society of Saskatchewan, and they 
would investigate. And I think in the end I would be at least 
required to apologize — at least. 
 
Presumably the medical profession has similar standards, and 
maybe that’s the solution. We have no statutory solution, but 
we certainly do not for one moment condone or accept that kind 
of conduct. People are entitled to be treated with respect and 
ought to be treated by respect in all these circumstances. 
 
Subvote (LA01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (LA02), (LA03), (LA05), (LA04), (LA07), (LA06), 
(LA08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On behalf of 
everyone in the Assembly, I’d like to thank the officials from 
the Department of Labour who came tonight and assisted the 
committee in its work. They do excellent work, and I’m happy 
to have this occasion to acknowledge it. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Whitmore): — I would ask the 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left 

is Janet Stamatinos from the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 
 
Subvote (SM01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Good 
evening, Madam Minister, and welcome to your officials 
tonight. I just have a couple of questions on the Municipal 
Board, and then we’ll have more when we get into the estimates 
part. 
 
I’d like to go just into the reassessment part again, Madam 
Minister, a little bit. And some of the concerns I believe my 
counterparts brought up the last session we had, but I would 
like to go into them a little bit again. As you know and are very 
well aware of, the town of Saltcoats and other communities still 
have big problems with what reassessment has done to their 
communities mainly because of when you add the education tax 
on it really distorts the picture. 
 
Also I’ve had calls from the community of Kamsack, and I’m 
sure there’s other communities of the same size that would be in 
the same boat, Madam Minster, to where one gentleman — and 
I guess there’s a number of them in the community of Kamsack 
— but where his taxes were two years ago at $2,900. And then 
a year ago it jumped about another thousand. Now this year it 
looks like they’re going to be around $5,200, Madam Minister. 
 
I think when reality hits us with that kind of figures out in small 
town Saskatchewan, I’m sure you’d have to agree with me that 
all of a sudden we’re going to see that absolutely no one will be 
building new homes in any of our communities out there. I 
mean common sense tells you you might as well move out of 
those communities and live in the big city and have all the 
benefits of living there. 
 
Also I think another concern that he brought to my attention 
was that the resale value on these homes now will be far less 
than it was before because in his case where his taxes look like 
they’re going to be $5,200, that’s in excess of $400 a month just 
in taxes. That’s not their mortgage on their house or anything. 
It’s just the tax bill. Their feeling is — and these are nice 
homes, Madam Minister; they’re not palaces by any means, but 
they’re very nice homes — nobody will even want to consider 
buying them for any kind of a substantial price that they should 
be worth and probably what reassessment valued them at. So 
we’re actually causing ourselves a problem by setting it at a 
certain rate. And with our tax structure the way it is, we’re 
defeating our own purpose, Madam Minister. 
 
I just wonder if you’ve had some of those same concerns 
brought to your attention from other communities. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite very eloquently puts the case on behalf of some of his 
constituents or people in the province who feel they’ve been 
adversely affected by the adjustments in the assessment as a 
result of 30-odd years of not bringing it up to date. 
 
But really the subject of the estimates for the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board are not really relevant to those concerns 
because the mandate of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board is 
confined to making sure that appeals to assessment are properly 
dealt with. Their mandate is to review, when appeals are 



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

brought to them, to ensure that the process at the local level was 
appropriate, and to render decisions on the appeals that are 
brought to them. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. We’ll 
ask the same question later on then, when we get into estimates 
then. We’re dealing strictly with the subject of the Municipal 
Board tonight. 
 
Do you have a feeling of the number of appeals that we’re 
going to have this year? I know in some of the communities 
I’ve talked to they’re down, but they’re still very high from the 
normal. And are you getting a feeling of what we’re going to 
see this spring now? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — While it’s difficult to make forecasts, 
I think that we didn’t receive as many appeals in 1997 as 
perhaps we thought, and likely that could be attributed to an 
unfamiliarity of appellants with the new system and so on. I 
believe — and this is simply conjecture — that we are 
expecting appeal numbers to be up slightly this year. As of 
about six weeks ago, there had been a total of 810 appeals to the 
provincial Municipal Board for 1997. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, I believe at this time the balance of my questions I would 
like to ask in estimates where they’d be more fitting probably. 
 
Subvote (SM01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank the 
staff members of the Municipal Board for the work they do and 
for standing by on several occasions, and thank the members 
opposite for their questions. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Government 

Vote 24 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I report to the committee that Municipal 
Government was last before this committee on April 24. Before 
I call Subvote (1), I invite the minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
On my left is Ken Pontikes, deputy minister of Municipal 
Government. Behind him is Brij Mathur, associate deputy 
minister of the municipal and community services division. 
Right directly behind me is Ron Styles who is the associate 
deputy minister for housing, protective services and facilities 
division. And on our far left is Larry Chaykowski who is the 
director of the finance and strategic support within the 
department, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Subvote (MG01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I’d like to go back to where I was when we were 
talking with the Municipal Board and was probably the wrong 
place to be asking the question. 
 
And I want to welcome your officials you have with you here 

tonight. 
 
The question that I was asking, Madam Minister, was where 
taxes have gone. From the case of the one situation that I was 
talking about but there are many more in many communities out 
there of $2,900 a year and within two years this gentleman’s 
home is up to $5,200. 
 
And I guess I’ll just reiterate some of the concerns I had but I’m 
sure you’re well aware of what I’m talking about. And I think 
my biggest worry of being representing people from 
communities the size of Kamsack, Esterhazy, Langenburg . . . 
these are not little, wee communities. They are fair-sized 
communities that are working out there to survive. 
 
And I’m afraid what we’re going to do if we keep going in the 
same direction we are with our taxation the way it is, with our 
education tax tied to the property, is we’re going to chase 
people and small business out of these communities, Madam 
Minister, and I would honestly believe underneath that you 
have to agree with me on that. 
 
When someone is paying 400 to $500 a month in taxes alone on 
their home — it was only a short time ago that $450 was a 
fairly good house payment — now on top of their mortgage, of 
whatever that may be — of $600 a month — we’re asking some 
of these people to pay another $500 in taxes. And what we’re 
going to do is they’re going to take their little business — 
they’re going to take whatever lumps they get from selling their 
business and selling their home — and run for the bigger cities. 
 
And I’m afraid the trend has already started out there. In small 
town rural Saskatchewan we’re chasing people towards the 
cities; we’re promoting what is happening. And I would surely 
hope that in the very near future we try and reverse that trend so 
we survive out there, Madam Minister. And I’d just like your 
comments on that same subject. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member 
opposite for his question, but I neglected when I introduced the 
officials to mention that the Minister for Northern Affairs is 
also present tonight, and is prepared to deal with any questions 
relating to northern affairs, northern housing, in the context of 
municipal affairs. 
 
With response to the comments that have been made by the 
member opposite, we know that there are some adjustments that 
have occurred as a result of the revamping of the assessment 
system, but really the responsibility for this function has been 
delegated, if you like, to the arm’s length agency, the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency. 
 
And we in municipal government are responsible for the 
framework of legislation under which they operate, and for 
defining the tax tools that are available for municipalities to use 
at the local level. Last year of course was the first year of 
operating in the assessment, in the new reassessment. 
 
Probably some municipalities — through a lack of 
understanding and unfamiliarity — have not availed themselves 
of the use of the full range of tax tools that are available to 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

them, and we are doing a review of the whole situation. We will 
no doubt be making some refinements as a result of the results 
of appeals, as a result of ratepayers’ comments, and 
administrators’ recommendations from rural and urban 
municipalities. 
 
So the most response I could give is really that we will be 
reviewing it, and that I’m sure that refinements will be made in 
the system as we move along and before the next reassessment 
which is to occur in 2000. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess, you 
know, I think you understand the concern I have being out 
there, being that you are a past reeve and you know very well 
what I’m talking about. But I honestly believe we’re tinkering 
with our way of life in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I don’t think I have to remind you, and I’m not sure if the 
numbers are exactly the same, but I think about 40 to 45 jobs 
out of every 100 jobs in this province are created by agriculture. 
And we need our little communities out there. We can’t survive 
by driving to Regina or Saskatoon or Prince Albert or Moose 
Jaw for everything we need. It just can’t happen, Madam 
Minister, and I’m sure you are very aware of that. 
 
I guess we come back once again. We’ve gone over this many 
times before, and I’m sure when you were a member of SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) or a 
delegate at SARM conventions, you’ve heard this before. But it 
always boils down and comes back to the education tax being 
tied to property tax. 
 
And I think maybe that issue is even becoming more and more 
important now because I think more people, when their taxes 
have sky-rocketed here, are paying a lot more attention now to 
what makes up their property tax. 
 
And at one point I honestly believe a good number of our 
people out there never really realized that education was part of 
our tax. Because I know in our municipal office, quite often if 
the education mill rate was jumped, the RM (rural municipality) 
administrator was the one that really took the brunt of that. And 
he would have to explain over and over again, well really we 
don’t have the . . . we don’t set the mill rate for education, 
someone else does; we collect it. 
 
I think in this day and age with the reassessment, has brought to 
light . . . many more people have woke up to the fact there is 
two different taxing authorities; they are being collected under 
one heading. 
 
And I know there’s no magic solution to the education tax. But 
I honestly feel, and I know in my own case, Madam Minister — 
I don’t know if you’re getting the same feedback I am — but 
I’ve had more complaints since reassessment about the 
education tax being tied in on property than ever before. And 
I’m wondering if your government is looking at this now and 
thinking, maybe if there’s something we could do to address 
this problem. 
 
I realize of course there’s trustees sitting out there tonight 
wishing I’d sit down and mind my business and not be talking 
like this, but I honestly feel at some point here we’ve got to 

start to address this problem. We’re hurting ourselves out there 
in the, you know, small towns and RMs. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, certainly there were 
adjustments as a result of the reassessment, but there were some 
fairly dramatic swings in the urban municipalities as well, 
including the large urban ones. 
 
And I think your assessment of the situation is correct in that, 
on the municipal side, the changes were really not that 
dramatic. Because at the end of the day I think most 
municipalities were able to demonstrate that, on the municipal 
side, reassessment was essentially revenue neutral in that the 
municipalities still needed the same amount of gross operating 
revenue. 
 
So if the assessment went up the mill rate went down and life 
went on. And certainly . . . I think approximately 60 per cent of 
urban communities took advantage of the provision which 
allows them to levy a minimum tax. A larger percentage 
actually than, than I would personally have projected. So I hope 
that the member will raise, Mr. Chairman, these issues in the 
context of the Education estimates. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Yes, thank you, Madam Minister, and I 
surely will. I’ll have to argue with my colleague probably over 
where our position will be on it, but I think you know where I 
stand. 
 
Madam Minister, we saw this year that SARM was asking for 
possibly 3 million . . . or they received $3 million more, and 
urban municipalities received nothing this year. And I see this 
weekend we’re having where the municipalities are meeting . . . 
I believe the Prime Minister is going to be there, and the 
Premier is going to speak to these people. Is it your feeling that 
there’s possibly a new infrastructure program in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is 
correct in that the Federation of Canadian Municipalities is 
having their national meeting here in Regina. I believe it’s 
already started; people are starting to gather. And I’m told by 
some of the urban associations and from other provinces that 
the matter of a renewal of the infrastructure — 
federal-provincial infrastructure program — will be raised. 
 
And certainly we have always, as a province, supported the 
extension of the first infrastructure program, and we strongly 
supported the allocation of that money to municipalities. And in 
fact our total provincial allocation in the extension was 
allocated to municipalities for their use. We will continue to 
support an extension of that program. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I’m glad to hear that, Madam Minister, 
because I know just for the time we spend in the city of Regina 
and if you’re in the city of Saskatoon or for that matter any 
town or city in the province, I think we can see what is 
happening to their streets, and that’s only one small part of the 
infrastructure that they have to look after. But I honestly believe 
we’re losing ground, and I think we need some federal money 
to be put into that, Madam Minister. And I think they have a big 
responsibility to do that, so I join with you, and I hope they’re 
willing to put some new money up. We need that program 
badly. 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

Madam Minister, I know we touched on the policing issue once 
or twice before, and I only have one more question on that. 
Some of the concerns and the groups that are . . . communities 
that have talked to me, I guess their problem with it right now is 
that the communities have always been paying for policing, and 
I think it comes down to they’re still not really happy about it 
being fair out there. And all I’m asking, Madam Minister, is I 
wonder are you doing anything to address their problem, and 
are you aware of what they’re saying and I’m sure you are. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, yes, and I will address 
the policing issue separately, but the member did make a couple 
of statements earlier with respect to an increase in the rural 
revenue-sharing pool, but he said nothing for urbans. And it’s 
true that the urban revenue-sharing pool was not increased, but 
the $4 million that will be allocated to the policing offset will 
go to urban municipalities and we also this year made provision 
for the first phase of the grants in lieu which, while a small part 
of it will go to rural municipalities, that also goes to urban 
municipalities. So while there may not be additional money in 
the revenue sharing pool, there certainly is additional money 
available to them. 
 
Now on the issue of the policing offset, as the member opposite 
knows, Mr. Chairman, the Department of Justice and SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), the Urban 
Municipalities Association, and the rural SARM representatives 
attended as observers throughout the development of the task 
force report on policing — the equalization of policing costs — 
and they identified a formula that they felt to be fair in terms of 
what per capita charge should be made for policing. 
 
And so that report . . . the analysis of that indicated that in order 
to reduce the level for those urban municipalities over 500 that 
are paying something that was within the parameters of that 
formula, it would take a contribution of about $15 per capita 
from those municipalities, urban and rural, that are not presently 
paying. And that would amount to just over $4 million. 
 
So we felt that, and we acknowledge that there have been 
revenue sharing cuts over the years, and that it was not an 
appropriate time to levy a new charge on those smaller and rural 
municipalities that had never paid before. So we did, starting 
January 1, 1999 — it won’t be in this calendar year but it will 
be in our fiscal year — the offset will be paid to reduce the 
costs of those urban municipalities. We’ll be picking up the 
share of the municipalities under 500 urbans and all the rurals. 
 
Now in the future, what we will be doing is we will be sending 
. . . they will receive a bill and then they will receive a cheque 
as an offset. And some of them will say, well this is additional 
administration. Well it is but we want to be careful to identify 
you know what it is that’s being paid on their behalf and that we 
have no commitment to pick up any increases in the future. So 
if in future contracts just say theoretically, the cost rises for 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) to say $17 per capita, 
then they will receive that additional bill. So at some point in 
time they will likely have to make a contribution to policing. 
 
And I really believe, and I have told some members of the 
municipal associations this, that it is I think for an urban 
municipality whose costs have been reduced to say — for 
policing — to say well we’re still not happy because our 

next-door neighbour still isn’t paying. I think in a community of 
a million people like Saskatchewan is where we lean on each 
other and help each other that that attitude is really not 
appropriate — that money is coming from the treasury to give 
those urbans some relief. And in the future, rurals and small 
communities will pick some up. But we think this is a great 
Saskatchewan compromise and we continue to support it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I agree 
with you. I think that situation was actually handled very well 
by the increase in money that you put in there. And I know 
myself and my neighbours, as rural taxpayers, were somewhat 
grateful that there wasn’t another load dumped on them that I 
don’t believe they could afford at this time. 
 
Having said that, I do sympathize with the towns that are over 
500. I understand where they’re coming from and I somewhat 
sympathize with them because I understand that they feel that 
maybe the game’s not really being played fairly here. So I guess 
it’s a very tough position to be in, but I think we all appreciate 
the $4 million that was thrown in there, and God forbid if I was 
to play politics, forget to mention that $4 million. 
 
Madam Minister, when we had Highway estimates the other 
day, the Minister of Highways, I had mentioned to her about a 
number of the highways I know in my area, and for that matter 
all over the province, where what is happening out there is the 
road services are so bad that traffic, heavy traffic especially, is 
being diverted one mile over, two miles over, into the RM’s. 
And I drove on one the other day when I was going home and 
it’s just pounding that road to nothing. It was never built for this 
in the first place. 
 
But the Minister of Highways said to me something that I really 
didn’t . . . I hadn’t heard before and I would like you to maybe 
touch on it. She said there is grants available for these roads if 
the traffic is diverting off highways and on to the rural roads, 
and that was the first that I heard about it. Could you comment 
on that and explain if there is such a program? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I would have to say 
that I don’t remember the name of the program, but the answer 
to the member’s question — and I think the reference that the 
Highways minister would have been making, although I wasn’t 
present to hear it — was that where there is that situation where 
rural roads, that are not designated in the highway system, are 
picking up a load that’s being diverted from a highway. And 
that there is a fund in the Department of Highways budget to 
deal with those situations and to help rural municipalities out. 
 
But I would say that every single . . . I’m tempted to say mile 
because of my age and orientation, but every kilometre of road 
in this province is an important part of the network. Because 
you know, being a farmer and I’m a farmer, that it doesn’t 
matter how many terminals you build and how many wonderful 
four-lane highways you have going past them, at the end of the 
day you still have to get the commodities that we export and 
move around, off the farm, from the factory. Even our short-line 
farm equipment businesses are in the Annaheims and St. 
Brieuxs and not along the highways. So all the miles are 
important. 
 
(2130) 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

But that’s why we’re urging municipalities and regions to get 
together through the transportation councils to identify these 
kind of changes in the traffic patterns and try to help us 
prioritize how to direct the funding. And as you know, it is a 
very difficult problem, with the changes to the Crow rate which 
took almost $400 million on an annual basis out of 
Saskatchewan’s economy, and then the abandonment of 
railways which is shifting traffic onto the roads. 
 
And it is absolutely unreasonable for the federal government to 
expect the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, a million people, to pick 
up you know those deficiencies that are being caused by actions 
at the federal level out of our taxpayers’ pockets. Particularly 
the rural taxpayers when it becomes a tax upon farm land to 
repair those roads that are being damaged by the freight that’s 
moving off abandoned rail lines. 
 
So we have to work together, and we have to continue to put 
pressure on the federal government, whether it’s for a national 
highways program, whether it’s for our renewed infrastructure 
program, because I don’t think in the future . . . Saskatchewan 
people are prepared, I think, that perhaps we can’t afford to 
maintain every kilometre of our road system in the whole 
province to the levels that we had in the past or to the level that 
we might wish. But we do need some help in coping with the 
new loads and the new configuration of our transportation 
system as the elevator system and the railways undergo the 
changes that are happening. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well I definitely agree with you, Madam 
Minister. I think the federal government has a big part to play in 
this. And I’ve never been able to understand how anyone could 
justify trucking a commodity from point A to point B, driving 
right along the side of a rail line and saying it’s as cheap or 
cheaper to go on a highway as it would be on the railroad. And I 
think the federal government is really passing the buck here by 
letting the branch lines go and disappear here. In fact I 
sometimes wonder if they aren’t promoting it and standing back 
and watching what the railways are doing to us out here. I think 
it’s time they had a wake-up call, and they certainly don’t seem 
to be getting it. 
 
Madam Minister, I want to touch on engineering, and 
engineering costs have been high in the past. But with the new 
formula and the new set-up you have for funding municipalities 
out there, rural municipalities, what roads now have to be 
engineered and which ones do not have to be engineered. Could 
you just run through that for me? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, those standards are in 
the Highways department, but they’re not, in a sense, as 
relevant as they once were because what we’ve done — in 
addition to increasing the rural revenue-sharing pool by $3 
million which represents about a 14 per cent increase — we 
have made most of the money, except for an allocation for 
bridges, an allocation for traffic counts, and a specific allocation 
for the heavy-haul roads, all the rest of the pool will be 
distributed unconditionally. Because you know, as it was 
before, it was allocated to certain classes of roads or it was 
allocated to a percentage of the reconstruction or construction 
costs based on the standard that was used. So there were a lot of 
forms to fill out. 
 

And actually, in the current context, it almost seemed as if there 
was an incentive to add to the network of roads that we’ve got 
because you had to construct in order to get money. And we 
heard loud and clear and we listened, from municipalities, that 
look, we don’t want to reconstruct or we certainly don’t want to 
construct new roads; we want to be able to use this money to 
repair the ones we have, to maintain the ones we have, to 
regravel them, to do a better job of grading, maybe to use salt 
stabilization — you know, that kind of thing. And so we 
responded to that by making most of the pool distribution 
unconditional. So the construction standards, if you like, in that 
respect are not quite so relevant as they once were. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I guess maybe, Madam Minister, that’s 
where my concern comes in then, with some of the roads where 
main farm access is not being funded any more. And I 
understand that the RMs can build them without having them 
engineered now. And it’s kind of a double-edged sword because 
I remember, as a RM reeve out there, the engineering costs 
were one of our biggest costs for building a road. Or I shouldn’t 
say biggest, but they were a very large part of our cost for 
building a road. But having said that, if we’re because of just 
straight dollars now, all of a sudden we’re saying well this road 
doesn’t have to be engineered and that road doesn’t have to be 
engineered, I would hope we’re not going to start to give up the 
safety factor out there. 
 
When I was a reeve, always when we talked 3:1, 4:1 slopes on a 
new road that we were building, I always felt that it was overall, 
you know, in the 20- or 30-year span, that that road was going 
to be there. It was money well spent to go to a 4:1 slope, the 
safety factor. And I always felt that the road stood up longer. I 
really do. I think when you go to the 3:1 slope for that matter 
. . . I guess what I’m getting to though is I think if we go away 
from any engineering at all on a lot of these roads that are still 
very well used, I’m kind of worried about what kind of calibre 
of roads we’re going to end up. One RM will have a contractor 
in that does a very good job and goes to what the old standards 
used to be and makes you a pretty good road. But to save a 
buck, others might — and if the councils are not right there and 
right on the ball — we might get some pretty shabby looking 
roads. 
 
And I wonder if we’re forgoing the safety factor out there and 
also the length of time that these roads would last. Maybe you 
could just comment on that, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
raises a good point, and we certainly did recognize this as a 
risk. But I guess at the end of the day you have to rely on the 
integrity and the conscientiousness of those locally elected 
people out there. 
 
You see when you say we’re not funding farm access roads any 
more, that was the case last year. With the limited amount of 
money we chose to eliminate a class of road. But you see that’s 
repaired by the unconditional funding, because they can then 
spend it on farm access if they wish. And in many 
municipalities their farm access standard or their roads . . . that 
constitutes the majority of their roads. 
 
As far as the engineering is concerned, it varies a great deal as 
you know based on the soil type and the construction conditions 



1642 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

and so on. But we certainly hope that municipalities will not — 
that local councils will not — compromise safety and quality by 
not building roads or maintaining to the proper standard. 
 
And there another feature to this unconditional distribution is 
that municipalities can save that money — I mean they get it 
this year, they don’t have to spend it this year, it’s not a you 
know a use it or loose it situation — so if they want to bank 
some of that money you know in order to do a better job, they 
can retain all or part of that allocation and add it to their next 
year’s allocation to make sure that they prioritize the money 
and do a good job and don’t compromise. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister, glad to hear 
that. The next question I have is for my colleague from 
Kelvington-Wadena, Madam Minister. And I’m not sure, we’re 
probably maybe not in the right estimates but why I’m asking 
you the question is I believe you have been sent a copy of this 
letter. And it’s from a gentleman in Prince Albert. And I just 
maybe will read it to you, and if you’d rather answer it 
somewhere else then I guess we could leave it for that. But she 
would have liked . . . what the gentlemen here is looking for 
confirmation and if, you know, maybe you’re familiar with this 
. . . but I’ll just read the start of it and it says, and I’m quoting 
here: 
 

Dear Ms. Draude: 
 
I’ve been authorized to represent my wife Aldina for our 
income tax purposes. She is currently appealing to the tax 
court of Canada . . . 
 

And so on. Are you familiar with this letter by any chance? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, from what the member 
has so far stated it doesn’t make me recollect anything. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister, then I think 
I’ll leave it and I will talk to you later or she can talk to you 
later about this issue. Because if you haven’t seen, it’s quite 
complex. So my colleague would like to ask some questions. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam Minister, 
a few quick questions. One question regarding housing, and I 
notice you have about $35 million in your budget to address 
housing. You’ve got a housing improvement program subsidy, 
home modification for the disabled, and Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation is the largest expense of 26. Madam Minister, I 
guess the question I would like is how many low-rental housing 
units is Municipal Government involved in with this year? And 
also are you continuing to look at moving units from one 
community, if there are empty units available? Or where are 
you with that program? Is that a program that you’ve looked at? 
 
I know you’ve done it in Kipling. I know you’ve moved 
low-rental units into Kipling from another community where 
they basically became vacant. I’m wondering how that program 
is, if it continues to operate or function? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, two things. I’ll answer 
the last question first, in that the relocation program of 
chronically vacant houses from communities has come to an 
end because there just simply aren’t any more chronic 

vacancies. 
 
On your other question, I need, Mr. Chairman, to have some 
clarification. When you say how many low-rental units are you 
speaking of? How many we have? Or whether we’re planning 
new ones? 
 
Mr. Toth: — How many in that budget? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the answer of for the 
total, and this comprises a variety of different kinds of projects, 
but it would be 32,373 units throughout the province. It actually 
constitutes almost 10 per cent of the housing stock in the 
province — which is quite amazing. This includes the number 
that have been devolved in the agreement, from the federal 
government, from CMHC (Canadian Housing and Mortgage 
Corporation), in the agreement that we entered into last year. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you, Madam Minister. I 
won’t pursue that much further because I know I could get into 
a lengthy discussion on housing units. And I’m also aware, I 
believe the member from Athabasca is interested in asking 
about housing starts for that area. So I’ll allow the member to 
make those requests or ask those questions. 
 
Madam Minster, I did send to your department a couple of 
requests most recently. And I’m not sure — I just quite quickly 
ran a look — I thought, I wasn’t sure if I’d had a response yet 
or not, regarding Pipestone Valley Agro Parts, and their issue 
regarding SAMA (Saskatchewan Management Assessment 
Agency) and assessment. And I’m wondering, Madam Minister, 
if you’ve had a chance to respond to that or if the response is on 
its way? 
 
And also, Madam Minister, a question that came in regarding a 
large rock on a road just outside of McLean from Cindy 
Goodman, and that question . . . the question I sent to your 
office was where does this person turn? There was major 
damage to their vehicle as a result of hitting this rock, and I’m 
wondering if you might have a response tonight, or if you still 
haven’t had a chance to really look at that in depth? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, as the member knows, 
we’ve been spending quite a long time in the House lately, and 
so if I’ve received that correspondence in my office I haven’t 
had an opportunity to look at it yet, but certainly when we do 
we’ll be glad to give a detailed response. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I thank you and I look forward to receiving that. 
Just for the sake of speeding up the process, and I believe the 
request from Ms. Goodman, if I’m not mistaken, I did ask her to 
send me a letter so that I’d have a letter to send to you. And you 
may have just — to be honest with you — you may just be 
receiving it or your department as well. 
 
But in the case of this situation where a large rock was in the 
middle of the road, almost like the . . . only this rock didn’t 
come through the windshield. The lady happened to drive over 
it causing major damage to her vehicle and she’s having a 
problem having the RM acknowledge even the fact that there 
was a rock on a grid road. What’s the process that she would 
follow to receive adequate compensation for the loss as a result 
of damage to her vehicle? 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1643 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I apologize to the 
member, but the same situation occurs there as that . . . I’m told 
that the letter has been received, but I personally haven’t seen it 
yet, so I’d prefer not to comment on it until I have actually read 
it. And I’ll certainly be glad to give you a detailed response. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you, Madam Minister. 
I’ll look forward to that response and if there are some 
questions we’ll certainly look forward to touching base with 
you and your office at the time. 
 
Just one more question, Madam Minister, and this comes in 
regards to assessments. The question that arises here comes out 
of a concern — that was in fact some indignation, I would have 
to say — from a constituent in regards to a number of cottages 
in a regional park. Some have an assessment and are taxed and 
some aren’t. And this gentleman here really feels that that isn’t 
fair. I think this person that raises the concern currently now 
resides in a community. His house in town is taxed plus his 
property or his cabin at the regional park is taxed. And his 
concern is if he was . . . a suggestion if he was still on the farm 
he wouldn’t have the property at the regional park taxed. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I’m wondering if you could respond and 
why is that? And also, after that response, I’ll just raise one 
suggestion that this gentleman’s come up with. And if you 
haven’t heard or seen anything of it, I’ll send you some 
information that maybe your department can go over and you 
could get back to me on as to what you think of the ideas. 
 
First of all, I’ll wait for that response. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Okay, thank you. Mr. Chairman, I 
think that what the . . . I’m not familiar with the letter but I 
believe what the member’s referring to is the provisions of 
331(1)(q), that if a farmer had a cottage in a regional park he 
would be entitled to have the assessment reduced by the amount 
of the farm land that he owned if it was in the same or an 
adjacent municipality. But of course if he’s left the farm and 
moved to a town, 331(1)(q) is not then . . . that offset is not 
available to property that’s in a town or hamlet or other than in 
a rural municipality. 
 
And I guess the other thing that would make your 
correspondent upset or indignant, as you put it, is that indeed 
cottages in regional parks were assessed in 1997 for the first 
time. The assessment replaced the previous lease fee. So it is 
the first time that the ad valorem system of taxation was used 
on those regional park cottages. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and thank you, Madam 
Minister. Madam Minister, you’re right. I remember the 
gentleman now in my conversations. I’ve had a number of them 
and I’ve tried to explain in some ways a bit of what I 
understand. And of course I can appreciate the fact that most 
people aren’t totally satisfied if they see on one hand their 
property at a regional park taxed and somebody else’s not. 
 
But, Madam Minister, this gentleman sent me some interesting 
information on his views as to how to assess property without 
running into the situation that my colleague the member from 

Saltcoats talked about, where individuals have seen property 
taxes going from 25 up to 5,900 or whatever the number may 
be. 
 
And he’s talking, he’s bringing forward an idea where you 
address property based on the square foot of that property and 
so many cents a square foot versus a value. The reason he 
suggests value is because value only has . . . there’s only real 
value in property if there’s a willing buyer. And for rural 
communities you can spend a fair bit of money in a smaller 
community. If your smaller community starts to die that, as the 
member from Saltcoats said, that house may not have that value 
you put into it. All of a sudden its value changes. Whereas, if 
you’re going by the square foot, you basically . . . that property 
then has, and if everyone’s treated equally, that property has 
that same value. 
 
Rather than getting into a lengthy discussion — which we could 
on this tonight, Madam Minister — I’m going to send you this 
information that I’ve received and ask if your department would 
go through it and then get back to me with what you think, or 
the department thinks, as they look through this. There’s a 
number of different examples. And maybe give me an idea of 
your impressions of the ideas put forward and whether or not 
there’s any value in it. And I’d appreciate that. I’ll send this 
over shortly and await your response. I thank you. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. We’d 
be happy to take a look at it. I think that the reason we put in, as 
I said to your colleague earlier, the provision for a minimum tax 
was for exactly that reason. Say you had a small village where 
basically a lot of the housing stock was older and depreciated, 
and there were say two newer, larger houses, using the ad 
valorem system, the tax load would shift basically onto those 
properties but it would go down on all the others. 
 
So over half of these small, urban municipalities in the province 
did avail themselves of that provision to use a minimum tax. 
But certainly while the tax and assessment system is in 
transition, which we have to say it is, then any progressive ideas 
that come forward, we’d be happy to take a look at them. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
good evening to your officials. First of all, on the regional park 
issue, I’ve had a number of persons contact me disturbed that 
although cabins in regional parks are now taxable they are still 
not allowed to participate in local elections. And this seems 
offensive to the most fundamental principles of democracy and 
of our system of government. And I’d like you to comment on 
that and tell me what plans you have in that regard. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve had my memory 
refreshed on this issue. We did have a committee to review and 
make recommendations and it included representation from the 
regional parks organization. And this is one of the issues on 
which they simply couldn’t come to a consensus because it’s 
too difficult to determine. What if the resident was from out of 
the province? They wouldn’t be allowed then, not having 
resident status, to vote in a RM election either. So we just didn’t 
get a consensus on the issue, so it’s true that they’re not able to 
vote in that rural municipality. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, some of the people who 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

have contacted me, that is their one and only residence so they 
can’t vote in another municipality. They are not non-residents 
of the province; they are residents of Saskatchewan. They are 
residents of that regional park. They own no other property. 
They are now fully taxable. They are shut out of participation in 
local elections. Do you not agree, Madam Minister, that that is 
offensive and distasteful in our system of government and ought 
to be corrected? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we certainly 
have these issues under review. We have an assessment review 
committee that we draw on. Both the resort community, 
PARCS — the acronym, Provincial Association of Resort 
Communities of Saskatchewan — and the regional parks 
association are taking part in this. And if a consensus can be 
reached on these issues where we can make some kind of a 
change where at least half of the people who are affected by it 
won’t be offside by the decision, then we would do it. We did 
make some changes last year with respect to non-residents of 
the province and spouses of owners . . . of burgesses being able 
to vote in resort communities and so on. 
 
But as long as there’s not a clear consensus and as long as it’s 
administratively not viable to determine how many times a 
person will vote or whether they’re eligible to vote or not by 
virtue of residence, then it makes it very difficult for us to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that in all 
local elections, there is no voters’ list. I simply come and 
declare myself a resident of the city of North Battleford and 
assuming nobody challenges me, I am now a local voter. Why 
cannot a resident of a regional park, the people I’m talking 
about who have no other residence, why can they not come 
forward and say this is my residence, it’s the only residence 
I’ve got. I claim the right therefore to participate in local 
elections? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, you know, I agree that 
there are some inequities in this, but on the other hand, these 
properties are leased. The improvements are assessed and taxed 
as of last year. But if you, for instance, own . . . if you lease a 
lot in a provincial park that’s located within a rural municipality 
for example, you don’t have a vote by virtue of that lease. And 
so it’s . . . regional parks are not being . . . the residents of 
regional parks are not being singled out by virtue of different 
kinds of property ownership. There are, from time to time, 
people that are disenfranchised by that, but it’s not limited to 
regional parks, and I guess there is no perfect system. 
 
But we’ll continue to listen to representations, and if there 
seems to be a solution that’s reasonable . . . of course it’s a goal 
to have everyone, as many people as possible, in a democracy 
enfranchised to vote. But there are some situations related to 
land tenure where it’s administratively not possible to make it 
fair, and so I guess if you have to have fairness on one side or 
the other, you’d rather err on the side of discretion than having 
people who are not entitled to vote — clearly not entitled to 
vote — vote. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, another issue I’d like to raise is 
I understand that in many cases the department feels it would be 
appropriate for some of our smallest villages to again 

re-amalgamate with their surrounding RMs and that that would 
be the most efficient way. 
 
And I understand that one of the things that is preventing rural 
municipalities from integrating their villages into them is the 
problem of underground tanks from long-defunct service 
stations. And I understand that none of these have actually 
caused any problems, but there is a potential legal liability 
which the communities are told could amount to a very, very 
sizeable bill — the sort of bill in the tens, if not even the 
hundreds of thousands of dollars, the sort of bill that no small 
village with little tax base left could ever possibly absorb. And 
of course no rural municipality wants to volunteer to assume 
that liability when they don’t even know what their liability 
might potentially be. 
 
So I want to ask, Madam Minister, if she agrees that this is the 
direction that some of our smallest villages will have to go and 
if she agrees that the buried tank issue is one that needs to be 
addressed to facilitate that. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, certainly this is an 
issue that we have identified some time ago. And of course 
we’re not actively encouraging villages to go into dissolution 
and to change their status, but certainly in the cases of some 
communities that have declining populations, it is their wish. So 
we have worked out . . . we’re working with SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management). 
Obviously as you know, this is the Environment and Resource 
Management department’s issue and their legislation. 
 
It’s not confined to buried gasoline tanks from long abandoned 
service stations. There could also be the situation of a lagoon 
for the village that might be suspected of leaking and, you 
know, other works like that. 
 
So we’re working with SERM on a protocol that would affect a 
transfer and limit the liability in these kind of cases. Because 
certainly if that’s the wish of the people in the area, to combine 
their administrations, we wouldn’t want that kind of regulation 
and that kind of liability to be in the way. So we’re not there 
yet, but we’re making progress on it. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — When do you think we could anticipate this 
protocol? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the ball right now, if 
you like, is really in SERM’s court, and I’m not sure. We’re 
told there is progress, but I would have to ask you to direct that 
question to them. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Madam Minister, when . . . went into 
reassessment last year, of course the plan was that there would 
be a three-year reassessment so that we wouldn’t get ourselves 
into the situation of a hopelessly outdated assessment ever 
again. Is the three-year reassessment still on track? Will we 
have a reassessment in the year 2000 and the continuing 
three-year rolling reassessment, or will that not be achievable? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, we certainly hope that 
that will be achievable. What it turns on is whether or not we 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

can have the finalized information to do the modelling, to set 
the percentages of value, and the other things that we have to do 
early enough, before the year 2000, to do that. And we would 
need to get not just the information from SAMA, but we would 
also need to get the information from each of the — currently 
six municipalities, perhaps soon to be seven — who do their 
own assessments. 
 
So we would need to have the information from all those 
sources. Because we don’t want to get ourselves into a position 
like we were last year where we were making, even at this time 
of year, into the end of May, retroactive legislation for the year 
that we were currently in, even after municipalities had set their 
mill rates. And certainly didn’t give the Education Department 
. . . with respect to their distribution formula for their 
foundation grant — they just didn’t have enough lead time to do 
that. 
 
Well we can do this in the context of Committee of the Whole I 
guess when we bring those Bills back. But what we’ve done is 
move some of the deadlines, the time frames, into regulation, so 
that if we find when the House for instance is not sitting, during 
that time of the year, that we’re not going to get the information 
soon enough and we’re going to be trapped like we were last 
year, making retroactive legislation and so on. We would then 
have the ability, the flexibility, to invoke those changes, but it’s 
not our wish. We wish to go ahead in 2000 and we still think 
that we will be able to, but we felt it necessary to provide an 
option for a plan B if needed. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — If I may turn to the provincial library system, 
Madam Minister, of course a bit over a year ago, a year and a 
half ago, we had a new provincial libraries Act, of one of the 
purposes of which was to make participation in a regional 
library mandatory for all municipalities. And I would like to ask 
you whether all municipalities have in fact signed agreements 
with their regions, and if not, how many are still out and what is 
being done in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, good progress is being 
made on the agreements, and I’m told that there are between 5 
and 10 per cent that as yet have not entered into an agreement. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And what about those who have entered into 
agreements but have not in fact paid their levies; are there a 
significant number of municipalities which fall in that category? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that there are 
. . . that most of them are paid. There are a handful, a very small 
number, that may not have paid to date. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And, Madam Minister, are grants being 
withheld from those municipalities which have not paid a 
library levy, or what other steps are being taken to ensure that 
all municipalities will in fact participate in the provincial library 
system? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, we do not have the 
ability to penalize, if you like, municipalities through offsets in 
revenue-sharing grants or other fund transfers. We still continue 
to believe — it’s still a relatively new regime; it’s only been in 
place for a short time — that cooperation and moral suasion are 
a preferable way to go. And since there are a very small number 

of issues still out there, we hope that they will be resolved in 
that way. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — How many applications do you have for 
changes of regional library boundaries and for changes from 
one region to another? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, to my knowledge there 
are only three and those three are in a group in a geographical 
location and they all wish to make the change from one library 
to another. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — How are those being handled, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the procedure that’s 
been set out in the Act is being followed. Notices . . . there’s a 
requirement for notices and so on and that is in the process. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I understand 
that the cities of Regina and Saskatoon, in addition to receiving 
their regular library grants, receive another grant over and 
above the regular grant in recognition of the fact that they are 
providing resource services to the province as a whole. 
 
And I’d like to know how much those grants are and whether 
there’s any consideration to expanding that to include other 
regional centres where the city library provides services not 
only to the residents of that city, but to a larger region the same 
as Regina and Saskatoon do. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry I don’t have 
that breakdown with me. What I do know is that in last year’s 
budget $170,000 was added to make an adjustment in 
recognition of the large number of interlibrary loans and the 
large number of non-residents in terms of, you know, university 
students and so on who come into Saskatoon or Regina to use 
the libraries. 
 
On the other issue, the regional libraries made, after some 
extensive consultations and meetings amongst themselves, a 
recommendation for a changed funding formula for regional 
libraries, which would take into account the factors that the 
member is mentioning. And I’m not sure if I have that number 
here right now, but we did increase the funding for libraries to 
make sure that no library . . . no regional library, would receive 
a decrease. And that would represent an increase. I don’t see it 
here, but it’s here somewhere — $4.5 million roughly to . . . 
(inaudible) . . . So that represents the increase. 
 
And it was based upon . . . The recommendation that they 
made, based on stable funding, would have taken money away 
from some libraries and transferred it to others. And we agreed 
with their rationale for the revised formula, but we didn’t know 
how it would be received if some libraries actually received a 
cut. So we put in enough to implement their formula and make 
sure that no one got reduced. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Madam Minister, I don’t have very many more 
questions because I understand the hon. member for Athabasca 
has a few questions for the Minister of Northern Affairs which 
are eagerly anticipated by the people who live north of 55. And 
I’m sure you’ll look forward to that as well, Madam Minister. 



1646 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

But before we get to the main event, if I could ask you again on 
libraries. I understand that the provincial library system has 
purchased a software program — printer, library loan — known 
as InterLEND, and distributed it among the regions. I see, 
Madam Minister, you’re nodding your head so I’ll just carry on 
if I may. 
 
And I’m further informed that, although this software package 
comes from Manitoba, that libraries in the province of 
Manitoba are giving up on it and that it has in fact not proven 
satisfactory. And I would ask you if the provincial library 
system is satisfied that the company involved will be able to 
provide back-up services for the InterLEND package, and 
whether or not it will be satisfactory for our needs? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not aware of any 
problems that the member refers to. It’s just a matter of weeks, 
not a long time — it would’ve been during the month of May 
— that I attended the library conference, which included 
participation from Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and the Dakotas. 
 
As far as I’m aware the InterLEND software has been well 
received, and no problems have been reported to me. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And do you think the necessary back-up 
services of the company in Manitoba are in place and that we 
can be assured that there shouldn’t be any problems in that 
regard? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly will make 
some inquiries from the Provincial Library based upon the 
member’s questions and if I do find out some information 
relative to the question, I’ll convey it to him. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And the last area in libraries I wanted to ask 
you about, I understand that the provincial system is no longer 
providing special services, special resources for the visually and 
hearing impaired. We had, earlier in this province, services in 
Braille, and talking books were normally provided through the 
provincial system. Now that is being abandoned and the regions 
are being thrown to their own devices to provide to the special 
needs of the visually and hearing impaired. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I’m certainly not 
aware of any cut-backs in services in those areas from the 
Provincial Library. Whether some individual library — 
municipal libraries or regional libraries — has made those 
decisions, I’m not aware, but the Provincial Library has not 
reduced its services. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if I could ask Madam 
Minister to check into that. Because my understanding is that 
the Provincial Library is cutting back on its services to 
special-needs clients. 
 
And the problem is that for the regions: (a) costs are high; and 
(b) the number of clients is very low. And they simply don’t 
have the resources to provide a lending library for the small 
number of people they would be dealing with. So it’s one of 
those cases where the only practical way to have a resource 
library is on a provincial basis so that clients in individual 
communities will have a library of sufficient numbers. If the 
regions purchase, they simply will not have much selection and 

there will be very few titles. So I would ask you to check on 
what resources are being provided by the Provincial Library for 
special needs clients. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly will make 
some inquiries and check into that. But it would seem that it 
would be contrary to the services that we’ve attempted to put in 
place where there’s, if you like, a seamless catalogue of all the 
resources that are available in the province. But I will attend 
specifically to the point that the member raises and 
communicate with him when I inform myself. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you to the minister and to your officials. 
And as I say, now to the main event. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker. I 
almost feel like the Michael Jordan of politics. I have the 
opportunity of taking on two ministers this evening — the 
Minister of Northern Affairs and certainly the Minister of 
Municipal Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of northern Saskatchewan have for 
many years been a very proud participant of the Saskatchewan 
community and they believe in challenging life in every arena. 
They believe that they have to be professional in business, that 
they have to be personal when it comes to kindness, they have 
to be understanding in some of the hard times, but above all 
else, like all great nations, we do not want to be a burden to the 
province. We want to simply work for the greater destiny and 
certainly the greater future of our children. 
 
And I stand up this evening to basically speak about some of 
the challenges in northern Saskatchewan for both ministers — 
Municipal Government and Northern Affairs ministers. And I 
say with all honesty and genuine concern, Madam Minister and 
Mr. Minister, that we want to have some resolutions, 
resolutions to some of these pressing problems that have been 
very apparent for the past 20 to 30 years. And I say again, 
Madam Minister; these points are the people’s words. 
 
I was sent here three years ago to present the message to your 
government that the people of the North wish to become full 
partners, that they do not wish to become an area that is 
forgotten. They want to be partners when it comes to decent 
highways, to decent housing, to decent opportunities for their 
young people. 
 
(2215) 
 
We must strive continually to try and make them an integral 
part of our province. And that has been the message that I hope 
I have consistently presented here this evening. As the evening 
progresses, I also want to explain, Madam Minister, that there 
are people out there in northern Saskatchewan that may be 
watching this. I don’t have a number, but I certainly hope that 
there are some people out there watching this. And they will 
certainly take a lot of interest in some of your comments and 
certainly the Minister of Northern Affairs’ comments because, 
nowadays with technology, information from the Assembly 
here certainly gets beamed directly and immediately to a lot of 
these northern communities, so they are watching. 
 
Madam Minister, I also urge you, you and your colleague from 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

Cumberland, to not throw in the federal Liberal argument. I 
think we’re at a point here now that we’re senior politicians that 
people look to for advice, support, and they look for genuine 
progress to meet some of their ongoing needs. And I say that 
again out of respect and to also indicate to you that we have a 
five-page document highlighting the federal contributions to 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what I don’t want to do is I don’t want to stand here and 
defend the federal Liberal government all night, so I’ll 
encourage you to keep this particular debate and this particular 
discussion basically from the provincial perspective. 
 
Granted I will work very hard to continue ensuring and 
pressuring governments that they continue committing to 
northern Saskatchewan and perhaps doing more. That we 
understand. I think it’s a professional understanding as to what 
we’re trying to do this evening. However as they say in curling, 
I’ll keep the hammer for the final throw in the event we need to 
keep ahead of the game. 
 
Madam Minister, I guess my first question would be to the 
Minister of Northern Affairs. Mr. Minister, this afternoon or 
yesterday we proposed a concern to you from the native 
veterans, and you had a letter indicating that there was some 
concern from a Frank Tomkins of Saskatoon. And Mr. Tomkins 
wrote you a letter on February 17 asking you for a small 
donation to have an annual meeting so that they’re able to 
simply get all the Metis veterans together and certainly to talk 
about some of their challenges. 
 
I understand that a lot of work being done by the Indian 
veterans association is certainly progressing, and they’re 
certainly doing things comfortably on their own, and they again 
are always working with governments to ensure they have that 
continual dialogue and support. 
 
The non-aboriginal veterans again, does not matter what origin, 
these veterans have contributed and served their country. To the 
Minister of Northern Affairs, the Metis veterans feel forgotten. 
And the one question we have here, Mr. Minister, I’ll briefly 
read it out for you is — Mr. Tomkins simply indicates, quote: 
 

I hope that in the future our politicians will not forget that 
it was the veterans of Canada who helped save us all from 
fascism. Hopefully they’ll throw us a few crumbs from 
their plates so that we can live our remaining years in some 
measure of comfort. 

 
Mr. Minister, what is your response to the request from the 
native veterans association as . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. I’ve listened to the hon. 
member for Athabasca asking questions. And in looking 
through the Municipal Government estimates I’m frankly 
having trouble relating the questions to the question before the 
committee. And I’m wondering if the hon. member could tell 
me which subvote this falls under. Before seeking a response, I 
wish to point out that yesterday we voted off the Office of 
Northern Affairs under Economic and Co-operative 
Development. So if the hon. member can tie it in to a subvote in 
Municipal Government, then certainly the question is in order. 
But I’ve not seen the connection. 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I guess the 
point I’m trying to make is to the Minister of Municipal 
Government . . . Many of these veterans live in some of the 
municipalities in northern Saskatchewan. What kind of 
assistance or support can they expect from the government? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Chair is having a bit of difficulty. I 
think the government Deputy House Leader has some help. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chair, your comments are well 
taken and apt. I’m not sure that these questions do come under 
the estimates of Municipal Affairs. So I think your comments 
are well taken. However, there was discussion among the House 
leaders earlier in the evening and I think it was agreed that we 
would use this venue for the member from Athabasca to put 
questions to the Minister of Northern Affairs. 
 
So while your comments, I think, are correct, we do have an 
understanding and I think we are prepared to permit the 
member from Athabasca to proceed with this line of 
questioning. It was subject to an understanding and I apologize, 
Mr. Chair, for not having made you aware of the understanding. 
I think perhaps we should have. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I thank the Deputy Government House 
Leader. I’m going to ask for leave of the members to allow this 
to happen. Is leave granted to the member for Athabasca to deal 
with these issues? That’s agreed.  
 
Does the member for Athabasca wish to make a final question, 
comment, or is it to the minister to respond? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the question 
I have is for the Minister of Northern Affairs . . . and I certainly 
appreciate the cooperation of the House as many of the 
overriding issues of northern Saskatchewan certainly involve 
housing, municipal governments, health care, and highways. 
And certainly as Minister of Northern Affairs, he certainly has a 
lot of influence in that since that’s his jurisdiction. 
 
And many of the letters we have here have been addressed to 
him, Mr. Deputy Chair. So the question I have again in relation 
to Mr. Tomkins, when can the Metis veterans expect and 
certainly deserve some kind of recognition from the 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — In relation to the question, Mr. Chair, the 
letter that was sent from the National Aboriginal Veterans’ 
Association had this to say when they wrote the Minister of 
Veterans Affairs, Fred Mifflin. When they wrote a letter to the 
federal government, this is what the letter said to the 
government. This has been a reply of the federal government 
where . . . this is a proper issue and the proper channels of 
where the National Aboriginal Veterans’ Association had sent 
this letter to. This is what they said: 
 

So far the responses have been negative but I must stress 
the association’s dismay with this result. 

 
They also say — about the federal minister — Mr. Mifflin is 
adamant that Veterans Affairs cannot assist the association. I 
know that the member said that we shouldn’t raise issues and 
blame the federal government but it is clear that the association 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

here was trying to get money from the federal government. 
 
The Metis people and all people of Canada fought and died for 
this country. Many of them came back to try and make a good 
life for their people. And in regards to the particular instance 
here for Metis veterans, I had mentioned in question period 
their contributions in regards to what they learned in Europe 
they brought back in the development of institutions in the 
North and throughout the province. And they have helped out in 
many ways through the legions, etc. 
 
And it is sad that after all the contributions that the federal 
government is unable to provide the money. I am therefore 
proposing that I’ll be making a commitment on sending a letter 
to the federal government. If the member wants to join me from 
the other side, to have the federal government partner some help 
in regards to the proposal that was made in the letter, that would 
be very helpful. So the province of Saskatchewan is prepared to 
help the veterans. 
 
In regards to that, Mr. Chair, the children of the veterans, in 
terms of education, the Saskatchewan government is the only 
government in Canada that has provided $3 million worth of 
training for the children of the veterans. We don’t see that in 
Manitoba or Alberta. We see it in Saskatchewan. 
 
As a matter of fact the history of the Metis veterans, when the 
book came out last year, under Gabriel Dumont Institute, the 
history was created through that institution provided from funds 
from the province, and the book was released this past year, and 
I think you were there as well at that special occasion. 
 
So we are prepared to something about it. So I would like to 
talk to you, maybe later on, to find out what partnership you 
may have, as a member of Athabasca with the province of 
Saskatchewan, in creating a partnership with the federal 
government to help and work with the Metis veterans. So I 
would like to hear from you as well on what you think of that 
idea. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. I guess the point I’m trying to 
make this evening on that one minor issue that certainly has 
some bearing on the municipal matters here is that again as I 
mention, Mr. Speaker, the Metis veterans have a number of 
concerns about health care and other issues. They want to meet 
so that they can discuss this issue as a group and then bring 
their concerns collectively to the government. 
 
However, many of these war veterans live on small pensions, 
many live in isolated areas and simply can’t organize such a 
meeting without assistance. And what they’re asking from the 
provincial government is that there’s some way, shape, or form 
that they can get a small grant to help them organize to bring 
forth their concerns. That’s their argument, and provincially 
they’re asking the provincial government to come along and 
contribute in that fashion so that they’re able to do that on a 
collective basis with the federal government. 
 
And I think if you can find $300,000 for a severance package, 
certainly you can find a small amount of money for our Metis 
war veterans. Next time we have a discussion, Mr. Minister, I’ll 
certainly look forward and I’ll relay those concerns to our Metis 
veterans. 

Now, minister for Northern Affairs, I wish to make a brief 
address on the northern housing initiatives we feel are very 
important, Madam Minister. As you’re probably aware, there 
are many housing problems in the North. You have been privy 
to many of those discussions and you certainly have been made 
aware of some of the challenges when you talk about northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, the people up North are not asking for much, 
but what we do need, Madam Minister, is we need a 
comprehensive housing strategy which must address the 
following points, and I make these points as Municipal 
Government, as Municipal minister you are responsible for 
housing. 
 
Number one is we need a provision for senior-specific dollars 
for renovations to private homes. Last year we done an 
assessment, Madam Minister, and we brought you names of 257 
senior citizens from Pinehouse, Canoe Lake, La Loche, Buffalo 
Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Beauval and so on and so forth. There 
are approximately 257 senior citizens living in their own homes 
that need some type of assistance, Madam Minister. And I 
realized that at that point in time I did give the Minister of 
Northern Affairs that complete list. Could you somehow try and 
help these people? 
 
And I believe from that perspective, Madam Minister, all that 
was done is these people were sent a RRAP (residential 
rehabilitation assistance program) application form. And, 
Madam Minister, many of these senior citizens do not read or 
write very well and a lot of times they have trouble following 
the processes of application for renovations to their homes. So 
we need to concentrate on a senior-specific strategy. And we 
also make it known that there are that many senior citizens 
living in northern Saskatchewan in their own homes. 
 
(2230) 
 
And before I sit down and take my place for your response, 
Madam Minister, there are other issues we want to raise in this 
housing strategy, and we’ll do it issue by issue. However the 
key thing I want to point out, Madam Minister, is that these 
senior citizens don’t want $30,000 or $40,000 worth of work 
done on their home. They just want basic insulation. They just 
want basic windows, basic doors, and a decent floor. And this is 
not an incredible amount of money to ask for. 
 
And while I realize the response is going to be, we contract 
Provincial Metis Housing Corporation to do this type of work, 
many times there’s one guy working for 50 or 60 or 70 clients. 
And quite frankly that’s too much of a workload for this 
individual. And as a result, some of the seniors do not get the 
attention that they deserve. 
 
Couronne Janvier from La Loche has been phoning me on a 
constant basis. She lost her husband two weeks ago or a month 
ago. She’s another example of how many times she’s waited. 
And she’s been asking for this type of support. When we talk 
about people that have paid for their homes — people like Jonas 
Daigneault, people like Daniel Daigneault, and people like . . . 
well the list goes on. I think Clement Daigneault is another 
individual that have paid their dues and certainly waiting for 
some of their work to be done on their homes. 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

And these are exactly what we are talking about, Madam 
Minister, is that seniors in their last few years — I don’t say 
that few years by two, but I mean the last 10, 15 years of their 
life — should be able to live in relative comfort in their own 
homes. Could you give me a response to that, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — I can only offer some information to 
the member opposite about what is in the budget for northern 
housing delivery this year. There’s the remote housing program. 
There will be 20 units there, a million dollars. There’s a rental 
market housing program; it would be 40 to 50 units for $1.8 
million. The social housing program is 40 new units again, $3.2 
million. There is the RRAP and the emergency repair program, 
a million dollars — 140 homes will receive assistance there. 
 
The repair and maintenance budget for the existing portfolio, 
which is 1,200 rental units and 600 units that are owned where 
the mortgages are still outstanding, is 8.5 million, and the 
mortgage discount program which was announced last week 
when we were in the North at the round table meeting, at 1.6 
million. 
 
So that’s a total, Mr. Chairman, of $17.1 million in this budget 
year to be allocated to meet the needs for housing in the North. 
It’s 100 to 110 new units in total, and 140 units will receive 
renovation assistance. 
 
Now some of these are for seniors; not all of them are dedicated 
to seniors, but they’re all to meet northern housing needs. And 
considering the fiscal situation, Mr. Chairman, this is a 
significant contribution to meet the needs in the North for 
housing. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess the 
point I’m trying to make is that I want you to be aware, fully 
aware, that many senior citizens need extra help and extra 
assistance. And while I appreciate the endeavour here to explain 
what programs are being spent, it still does very little to ensure 
that people that I have mentioned in that particular category are 
getting the specific help that they need. 
 
So I would urge you to look at that option. Perhaps instruct your 
officials to look at ways and means in which we can alleviate 
that particular problem in northern Saskatchewan. And that’s 
primarily what we are asking for today. 
 
And the second issue I want to raise is an examination of the 
possibility of a housing package geared for working families 
similar to the remote housing program, ensuring that housing 
prices reflect the true market values. Many times in these 
northern Saskatchewan communities, people that traditionally 
start in the social housing program, they’re a young family. 
They’re not working yet, and they need a home for their family, 
and they eventually get one through the government programs. 
 
But what happens when that individual or that individual and 
the wife begin to work, the more they earn of course the more 
they pay. And of course that’s discriminatory against the 
working people and really hurts the working people. And as 
government up here, we should do everything possible to try 
and accommodate those people that wish to work. And I have 
20 if not 30 examples of different people that really wish to buy 
the home off the government at a decent market value price. 

Now I put the question to a number of ministers in the past, 
would you pay 90 or $100,000 for a home in Ile-a-la-Crosse or 
St. George’s Hill where the market doesn’t exist for resale? And 
would you also pay the interest associated with that particular 
mortgage? 
 
And I feel that the precedence we’re setting here is with remote 
housing program. The remote housing program, as you are 
probably aware, kind of accommodates that particular 
challenge. So what happens now is you have people living in 
government housing that really want to own their own homes, 
and they’re saying, well the people that are on the remote 
housing program, they get the initiative. They get the 
opportunity. 
 
We should be able to have that same opportunity because, 
Madam Minister, there’s a lot of people, especially in Buffalo 
Narrows, young families that are starting up, and they want to 
go to work. I have the list for you, Madam Minister, and they 
really want to begin to become their own bosses, control their 
own destiny. And they wish to buy these homes. 
 
So my question to you, Madam Minister, is there any way — 
and if there’s a will, I believe there’s a way — that we can look 
at a program geared to turning over existing stock of your 
portfolio to the remote housing concept that we have been 
seeing happening in these northern communities? And if so, 
great. We look forward to hearing your comments. If not, why? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the member may not 
be aware of the announcement that we made, one of three 
housing announcements that we made at the round table in La 
Ronge last week, where one of them is a mortgage discount 
program which puts the two different types of property owners 
on a level playing-field, and we’ve allocated $1.6 million to do 
that equalization. 
 
The other issue, if the member will think this through carefully, 
is that yes the rent in those units is set at 25 per cent of the 
income. And so obviously, if you’re for instance on assistance 
and you get a job and your income is increased, then your rent 
increases. But so does your ability to participate in the remote 
housing program. 
 
And if you took those existing units that are meant for, you 
know, rent geared to income, for low income families, and you 
sold them to people who were now working and had the ability 
perhaps to service a mortgage in a new house in the remote 
housing program or one of the others, where would low income 
people live? 
 
The occupancy of those social housing units that are rent geared 
to income are meant to have a turnover that when people have 
low incomes and they have a need for that kind of housing, that 
those units are there for them. But if they’re sold to people who 
have the ability to participate in another part of the portfolio, 
then there’s no place left for low income people to live. So I 
think if the member thinks it through carefully, he will realize 
the answer to his own question. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. What we’re trying to stress here 
is that those people that are living in current housing stock 
owned by the government, by the province, they are looking at 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

trying to own their own homes. 
 
There’s been a number of examples. Your officials are probably 
aware of the examples of people trying to buy their homes. 
What they’re not going to do, Madam Minister, is they’re not 
going to be paying 80, 90, 100, 150,000 for these homes. 
 
So what they’re saying is: I’m living here; I have a chance for 
an employment opportunity; I want to buy this house; I wish to 
have it under the similar program as the remote housing 
program and yet I’m unable to do that. 
 
And yet right next door to me is individuals that have taken 
advantage of the remote housing program and are now living in 
a nice, brand-new home. Great for them; I’m happy for them. 
And yet that same opportunity is not afforded to us, primarily 
because we still live in a government house. 
 
So in the event that you do sell these units, where you save is 
much similar to the remote housing program. The remote 
housing program is indeed a very good concept, primarily 
because it allows home ownership for a decent price. It puts the 
emphasis on home owners to maintain their taxes, maintain 
their homes, and to quite frankly have pride in their own 
belongings, and to also earn as much money as they wish. Now 
to me I think that is the whole concept, you know, behind the 
empowerment of people, communities, and ideas that we speak 
about. 
 
So when I talk about where could new dollars come from, well 
the establishment of a northern housing fund for the purpose of 
constructing new housing and repair . . . and continual flow of 
dollars for repair program from the proceeds of such sales, from 
the proceeds of some other sources of revenues that we can 
identify in northern Saskatchewan as time goes on. 
 
I think you will also see that there could be some administrative 
savings as a result of non-payment of taxes for some of these 
homes, because it would become the home-owners’ 
responsibility. The maintenance of some of these homes would 
also be lessened. 
 
So there could be some significant dollars generated, Madam 
Minister. And all I’m trying to impress upon you is that there 
has to be some way, shape, or form that we can encourage the 
working people living under the social housing programs in 
northern Saskatchewan, the ability to own these homes at a 
decent market price similar to the concept behind the remote 
housing program. 
 
And those are some of the comments I have for you this 
evening, and I’m looking forward to your response. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m glad to hear 
the member opposite say that the remote housing program is a 
good and positive program because we believe it is. And the 
average cost of style of house that has been going up in the last 
couple years is the three-bedroom house with the raised 
basement so that there is room for expansion in the lower level, 
and that that house runs approximately $70,000. And with the 
mortgage, the financing arrangements we have and the sweat 
equity, it’s very affordable for even a relatively low income 
working person. 

So we are spending $17.1 million in the North this year on 
housing. And while, you know, it may never be considered 
enough because we know the needs are great, we think that it’s 
a very substantial contribution. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Madam Minister, I couldn’t agree with you 
more that it is a substantial contribution. And what you’re 
trying to do is you’re trying to stimulate conversation on how 
we can accommodate some of the problem areas of housing in 
northern Saskatchewan. And certainly you look at the situation, 
when we talk about remote housing program, a good example is 
. . . you start off with a $300,000 fund, say, exclusively for 
Buffalo Narrows for example. And you say, okay we have 
$300,000 here. Why don’t we get some matching contribution 
from six people of their $300,000, and we could build ourselves 
six homes. 
 
Madam Minister, $300,000 from government alone will not 
build six homes. I understand that, and I respect that. But what 
if you were to challenge private citizens to come up with their 
contributions as you have with the remote housing program, 
and all of a sudden $300,000 becomes $600,000. And then the 
savings over a period of 10 years by these home-owners 
maintaining their own taxes and their own homes could 
eventually come to a million dollars over a period of time. 
 
So that’s the unique concept behind the remote housing 
program. You save an incredible amount of dollars on 
administration, on taxes, on maintenance, etc. 
 
So I think the concept certainly deserves a lot of merit. I think 
we have to look at that because the more we foster private home 
ownership in the North with true market values, the better off 
we are as a people. And then every working family, every 
working man can work and earn as much as he wants or she 
wants. The sky is absolutely the limit when it comes to 
earnings. 
 
Nowadays it discourages people from working. You know, if 
you’re going to pay $800 in rent, the more you make, then 
obviously it’s a disincentive. So we talk about disincentives in 
northern Saskatchewan. Housing by far is one of the chronic 
problems of trying to develop an economy in northern 
Saskatchewan, the shortage of housing and certainly the 
non-specific programs geared towards the working family. And 
the remote housing program is a fine example, a fine example 
of how to accomplish that. 
 
And, Madam Minister, the other two items is the devolution of 
more control of housing for the local level through the housing 
authorities. I think it’s an incredible step forward for Sask 
Housing Corporation to set up these local management boards, 
because what you have in essence, you have your own people 
patrolling if you would, for a lack of a better word, their own 
tenants. 
 
All of a sudden it’s not government. It’s not somebody from 
P.A. (Prince Albert) or somebody from Saskatoon telling you, 
you better sweep off your steps or you better maintain your yard 
or fix your fence. It’s local people saying if you don’t maintain 
your yard, if you don’t fix your fence, we’ll do it for you 
because that’s part of our portfolio, and we’ll charge you for it. 
Now that’s promoting and fostering responsibility. 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

(2245) 
 
So certainly, I think, the devolution of more control of housing 
decisions of the housing stock has to come to the local level. 
When you start to empower the local people to make these 
choices, imagination and innovation and certainly responsibility 
would be the end result. 
 
I think the other matter is the encouragement of homesteading. 
You talk about people in northern Saskatchewan want to 
develop their own homes away from communities. That would 
also diminish the demands for housing in northern 
Saskatchewan. And by homesteading, we can look at things like 
the RUD (rural underground distribution) program that you had 
under SaskPower a number of years ago, whereas you 
connected farm houses in certain areas that were isolated from 
the regular electrical grid system to homes that were off the way 
or off the beaten path. 
 
A lot of people in northern Saskatchewan — I would hazard 
maybe 200 people — would look at moving into homestead 
plots or certain areas within the forest to try and develop their 
own homes. 
 
So can I have your comments on those two points? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, the last issue first I 
guess, is that apparently some of what the member refers to as 
homesteading is taking place in the area around the community 
that he lives in. And this is an issue that would likely be well 
raised in the context of the New North, the new organization or 
young organization of the leaders of the 35 northern 
municipalities that we have tried to encourage. As well, we 
continue to work with the housing committee of the New North 
on housing issues. 
 
I’m glad that the member opposite appreciates the effort that 
Sask Housing has made to devolve responsibility for the 
maintenance and management of the northern portfolio to local 
people. There are about eight community-based organizations. 
There’s housing authorities right now that manage over 1,000 
social housing units in the North. They have a staff of about 24 
or 25 people, and as well, a growing percentage — it’s over 70 
per cent now — a growing percentage of the repair work and 
construction in the North is being done by northern contractors, 
creating employment there. 
 
So all in all, while there’s always more to be done, the housing 
picture for northern residents is becoming brighter, I believe. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I have a 
letter here. This basically explains exactly what we’ve been 
talking about and it’s from a lady in Beauval. Jolene Malboeuf 
writes, and I quote: 
 

Dear Mr. Belanger: I’m writing this letter in regards to 
northern housing’s policy, which requires 25 per cent of a 
person’s gross wages. It seems that this policy only 
benefits the low income residents. What about the 
middle-class citizens who are trying to get by but find it 
difficult because of this policy? People who are just 
starting off or making sufficient salary, it seems, are 
thrown back because of the 25 per cent gross pay. I was 

just wondering if something can be done. Sincerely, Jolene 
Malboeuf. 

 
And I guess that kind of hit, in a nutshell, Madam Minister. 
Some of the statements she makes there really hits home, some 
of the problems that she’s facing in Beauval. And certainly I got 
this letter in the mail from her and we talked to her at great 
lengths in terms of some of the challenges that all people that 
are working in northern Saskatchewan face. 
 
So I’m glad you’re taking a special interest into that, Madam 
Minister, and I certainly am looking forward to some of the 
ideas you may have within the next six months, a year. Do you 
have any idea as to what time frame you’re looking at for 
sufficient and certainly proper movement on some of these 
challenges that I’ve addressed here this evening in terms of 
housing? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, these are issues that 
we continue to work through, as I said, with the housing 
committee for a New North. I just want to make a brief 
reference to the problem outlined in the letter from a constituent 
that the member raises is that this is an issue not just in the 
North, but all over Saskatchewan. 
 
But you must remember, when people talk about social housing, 
people that are not aware often have the impression that our 
social housing portfolio is occupied by people, low income 
people who move in and stay there. And actually the turnover 
of tenants in our social housing portfolio is actually very high 
because, of course, as the member pointed out, people move in 
when their incomes are low, when they’re young, when they’re 
starting their families, whatever the case may be.  
 
And when their circumstances improve to the point where the 
25 per cent of their gross income represents more than a market 
rent, then they move out and make that unit available for 
someone else who is in a low-income situation. So it is very 
important that as people’s circumstances improve that they’re 
able to move into another form of housing and make those 
vacancies available for others who need it. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and that’s the 
point — when you raise that — the social housing program has 
a role to play. I understand that and I accept that. But certainly 
when you say a person’s economic position improves they 
move out but the question you have is, where do they move out 
to? 
 
I think the key thing is, at the very least, that some of the people 
that are living in your units that begin to work — that begin to 
work — are really taken and sat down with and consulted as to 
what their options are with that particular home. And there are 
thousands of examples, Madam Minister. I’m not exaggerating 
here. How people in that particular situation when you talk 
about innovation and . . . (inaudible) . . . when it comes to 
housing, this is exactly what we’re dealing with here. 
 
Some people are trying to get ahead. They find a job, they go to 
work at the mine site or they go off to school. And all of a 
sudden they’re offered a job somewhere and then their wife gets 
a part-time job somewhere, and all of a sudden the more they 
make the more they pay. So what happens now, they say we 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

can’t afford this house because we’re paying too much for it 
when somebody down the street that isn’t working is paying 
$110 and we’re paying $800 it doesn’t seem fair. 
 
So what happens is they say well, can we pay a ceiling rent. 
Can we pay say 400 a month? That would be a fair rent for 
some of these houses. And the answer is no. We’re stuck with 
25 per cent. 
 
So what happens now is that family moves out, relocates, you 
know takes all their belongings and upsets their children’s lives 
and then they turn around, and they try to live in a trailer or they 
construct a log cabin or they try and do something to find 
different accommodation. And what happens the government 
comes along, repairs that home at a cost, and then moves a 
family on social assistance there that only pays 110. 
 
Now what is beyond me and beyond a number of working 
people in northern Saskatchewan is how can a family on social 
assistance afford that house, yet a family that’s working cannot. 
That is the fundamental problem. 
 
And you see, when we talk about the incredible statements you 
could have as a government . . . when you start talking about 
these people taking care of their own payments for the house, 
their own maintenance, their own taxes, the savings are 
enormous. 
 
So I think the key point I’m trying to make again, Madam 
Minister — and I’ve got to stop using that phrase, the key point; 
I must say it about 50 times in a speech — is that some of these 
people really are concerned that they can’t seem to get a handle 
on their housing problems. And they want the government to 
respond to these problems, a response that is deserving of their 
respect and their attention. And that is the critical, critical point 
they’re trying to raise. 
 
Now again, when we speak about housing, it’s a massive 
problem. There’s one thing I would like to be known as in terms 
as my role as an MLA, is a role that I think that every person 
can certainly talk about, is our battle with the housing situation. 
There’s a shortage of houses, there’s a lack of a program 
specified for senior citizens, and certainly it does not work for 
the working family. 
 
So those three simple points. I’m sure we can put all our 
collective minds together here — because there’s very 
intelligent, capable people — to try and come out with some 
kind of innovative, exciting, and quite frankly, a responsible 
housing strategy for northern Saskatchewan. These are some of 
the points that have been for the last 10, 15, 20 years, have been 
a sincerely sore spot with many home-owners in northern 
Saskatchewan. Would you care to respond, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Well, Mr. Chairman, only to say to 
the member that if the circumstances and the income have 
improved to the point where the amount of rent that needs to be 
paid is 25 per cent of the income, it reaches over $500 a month, 
then a conventional mortgage or a mortgage in one of our 
remote housing units can be serviced for that amount. 
 
So I mean, I know, there’s a disruption in moving, but we have 
to make our social housing units available for low income 

people. And people who have higher incomes have other 
options — there’s a remote housing option, there’s the option to 
service a mortgage with 500 or $600 — will most certainly do 
— and then there are the rental programs if they don’t want to 
own. So I think we have to keep our eye on the ball about what 
the purpose of the rent-geared-to-income social housing units 
are, and they are meant for low income residents, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — I guess, Madam Minister, that’s going to be 
something that we agree to disagree on. I believe that there’s 
options available to us galore, all kinds of options that’s 
available. And I’m afraid, Madam Minister, that I’m not too 
pleased with that response. 
 
I can understand that there’s a general shortage of housing in 
northern Saskatchewan — some mention of 600, and certainly 
that there’s a role for social housing. I’m not denying that there 
isn’t a need for it. I think there’s a very prevalent need. 
 
But what we’ve got to do as I mentioned before is we’ve got to 
find some kind of way in which we can collectively put in an 
exciting housing program to address these needs. These needs 
are not needs I’ve made up overnight, Madam, Minister. These 
needs are people that have signed petitions for from Uranium 
City, from Buffalo Narrows, from La Loche, from Patuanak, all 
over the place. When they talk about having the north become 
part of the province, they’re talking about fairness, Madam 
Minister. And right now some of the housing policies and some 
of the housing practices do not promote independence of the 
northern people. And I want to make that point very clear this 
evening. 
 
On another point, Madam Minister, I’ve also got a report of 
some of the smaller centres — and surprising housing is also a 
major issue amongst the smaller centres — primarily a lack of 
housing and certainly again, you know, the remote housing 
program’s an issue. 
 
And I say with all honesty that this issue is not going to go 
away. People will continue in pressuring the government and 
will certainly continue writing letters to us until we respond. 
We have to respond. We get a significant amount of benefits 
from northern Saskatchewan, and I can rattle off those numbers 
here tonight if you wish. 
 
But, Madam Minister, we have to respond to this crisis in 
housing in northern Saskatchewan with the issues that are raised 
this evening; we have no choice. And if we don’t respond, then 
the homeowners themselves will certainly respond. They’ll 
begin a letter-writing campaign expressing some of their ideas 
and some of their concerns. So we need to make sure that 
housing remains top, on top of our lists. 
 
And the second part of my presentation, Madam Minister, is 
again to you. I know the Minister of Northern Affairs can 
hardly wait for me to ask him a few questions, but we’ll go to 
you first, Madam Minister. 
 
As I asked for a study to be done in my constituencies of all the 
smaller centres: the Patuanaks, the Cold Bay, the Jans Bays, the 
Deschambault Lake — where I was born; not born but raised 
for the first five years of my life — and certainly Garson Lake, 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

the small hamlet of Turnor Lake. All these small centres 
certainly have a lot of challenge. 
 
They have a very small operating income, and many times 
they’re located next to a big first nations’ town. And what 
happens is . . . many times like in Patuanak and in Jans Bay and 
in Cold Bay’s instances, they lived next to these big first 
nations’ populations. And the first nation’s population is doing 
quite well. They have huge budgets, not huge, but adequate 
budgets to operate their homes. And you look at some of these 
smaller centres and some of their operating grants are 50,000. 
 
And there’s a surprising number of recommendations here, 
Madam Minister. This report took about a month to put 
together, and we certainly want to commend Mayor Morin of 
Jans Bay for doing this. And one of the interesting concepts he 
raised in the document is called “The Challenges of 
Governments for Hamlets and Settlements in Northwestern 
Saskatchewan”, March 1998. 
 
And one of the ideas and the solutions that they talk about is 
something similar to the SARM concept. And they have 
recommendations here, they have ideas, they have strategies, 
and a lot of these things are very solid recommendations, 
Madam Minister, and I want to share that with you. I’ll send a 
report to you so that you’re able to respond to some of these 
things. 
 
(2300) 
 
And right from the far North to Garson Lake and so on and so 
forth, a lot of the small communities’ concerns are in this 
booklet. I’ve got five copies; I’m prepared to give you one this 
evening. Would you be able to commit tonight to meet with 
mayors and councillors of these small communities to address 
some of these concerns? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, last week on 
Wednesday, May 27, we had a meeting in La Ronge, a round 
table meeting. Representatives of many of the communities that 
you mention were present. We have every confidence in the 
leadership of those northern communities. The mayors of those 
northern communities, the committees of the New North 
association, the leadership that they have shown — we’ll work 
through those housing issues with them. They’ve already made 
very many constructive recommendations. 
 
As well, as we mentioned earlier, the management been 
devolved of over a thousand units to the local housing 
authorities and together we’ll continue to work and develop 
policies that will help to meet the needs of the North in a 
positive way. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’ll have one of 
the pages come and collect this report and hand it to you. But I 
think again, the points you raised; I must certainly echo those 
sentiments that the northern Saskatchewan leaders have made 
— a lot of very strong points. The mayors and chiefs and 
councillors and certainly the everyday citizens have talked 
about some of the challenges eloquently, probably a lot better 
than I can. But certainly they have made those concerns and 
issues raised and known for the past 20 years. I’ll now divert 
my questions over to your associate, your colleague from 

Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Minister, the issue I want to talk about is the northern 
power rates. As Minister responsible for Northern Affairs, I 
think some of the things we’ve been working on is the very 
high costs of power rates in northern Saskatchewan. So far, 
we’ve hit home on the small communities, we’ve hit home on 
the housing problems, and now the other disincentive in 
northern Saskatchewan is the incredible power or the rate of 
payment that many people in these northern communities pay 
for power. Sometimes the power bills are so high in these 
homes that it’s almost like a truck payment. So when we ask 
you that question, I’ll send a copy of the article that we have 
here, Mr. Minister, dated April 18 in which the headline says, 
Northern power bills high, Goulet ignores questions about 
costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question I have for the minister is that when 
you talk about power rates, in the response from the 
Saskatchewan Hansard of April 17, 1998 when I asked you the 
questions about the high power rates, these are some of the 
comments you made: 
 

Mr. Speaker, in regards to the hydro — for example he 
mentioned the case in Cumberland House — actually there 
was a $23 million settlement in regards to Cumberland and 
that agreement will be finished. The last payment was 
made of $3.8 million this year. 

 
Now Madam Minister, what that has to do with . . . or, Mr. 
Minister, what that has to do with power rates in northern 
Saskatchewan is totally beyond me. When you talk about power 
rates in northern Saskatchewan, I’m talking about right across 
the whole northern part of our province. I’m talking about 
Camsell Portage, La Loche to Pinehouse, right across. 
 
And the settlement from Cumberland House is not a direct 
result of the high power costs. As a result of that answer are you 
saying, because we compensated Cumberland House, that’s 
why the power rates are high? When one looks at the question 
here it makes that assumption. 
 
And I think the fact is the reason why Cumberland House was 
settled is because a huge part of their economy was displaced 
because of the lack of water. The dam stopped the water from 
coming towards Cumberland House; the government 
compensated the community for that. That has absolutely 
nothing to do with power rates. And I don’t think Cumberland 
House should in any way, shape, or form apologize for that. 
Their whole economy was debased because of the dam near 
Nipawin. 
 
And I make another comment, Mr. Speaker. Another quote, 
sorry: 
 

One of the offshoots of that development was the building 
of the famous Cumberland House bridge. 

 
Again, what has the bridge got to do with the power rates of 
northern Saskatchewan? That bridge was built — $2 million 
from the community, $2 million from the federal government, 
and $2 million from the provincial government. I believe those 
facts and those figures are correct. 



1654 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the quote that he asks, when he 
asked, about high power rates is: 
 

As far as the power rates, Mr. Speaker, they are the best in 
Canada, I think, when you’re looking at our rates. 

 
We got so many bills, Madam Minister, to show that some of 
these are . . . Mr. Minister that some of these bills are extremely 
high, and this is getting a bit ridiculous. And again as a result of 
that we went back into Hansard, and for people’s information 
back home, Hansard is the official transcript of this House. 
 
On December 11, 1986, the member from Cumberland, and I 
quote, said: 
 

When I mentioned the fact of compensation there was a lot 
of feeling about compensation and the fact that nothing had 
still come out. 

 
So I’d like to read a bit on what Angus Bear has to say in 
regards to the issue of compensation question. Angus Bear 
states: 
 

Maybe the government is afraid to pay it because he is 
penny-pinching. With all the money he makes in one year 
the powerhouse has paid itself a long time ago. I know this 
because it cost him 6 to 7 million. Today if he builds 
another dam it will cost him over $100 million. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, again we can go on from quote to quote to 
quote in which the minister talks about power costs. And again 
I’ll use another quote, Madam Minister, of December 11, 1986, 
in regards to another issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 

A lot of people in Cumberland House and Southend in 
Sandy Bay have for many years raised the issue of 
compensation in regards to hydroelectric power 
development. Not only have they raised the issue of 
compensation, but also their experiences in regards to their 
input in the development of hydro. Before I would get into 
the compensation question, I would like to relate to the 
people in this Chamber some of the words of a person who 
had worked in the hydro-development project for over 40 
years, in regards to the relationship that we talk about 
amongst ourselves. 

 
And again another quote from April 5, 1988: 
 

As I look at the question of power rates, one has to look 
and make a jump in regards to the overall strategy of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation in regards to the North. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the point I’m trying to make here is 
that we have in northern Saskatchewan, committed a significant 
amount of dollars to the well-being of this province. I believe 
the quote he made was $325 million per year from the three 
northern dams. Yes, compensation was fair, and yes, 
compensation was needed. Sandy Bay should be compensated 
as Cumberland House was. These people were displaced. 
 
But it’s no way, shape or form, any excuse for the high power 
rates. And I’ll ask the Minister of Northern Affairs for a 
response at this point in time. 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — First of all in regards to the power rates, I 
will basically still stick to the point that in Canada, if you want 
to look up the lowest power rates across Canada, maybe one 
other place might challenge us, next door neighbour in 
Manitoba. 
 
And in many cases they have dammed a lot of their rivers all 
through northern Manitoba, which we would not like to see 
because of the effects of a dam, not only in Cumberland House 
but in Sandy Bay, where the quote came from in regards to 
Angus Bear, the late Angus Bear. 
 
Now on the power rates, when I was growing up, on power in 
Cumberland, we started out with a coal oil lamp; later on we 
went to the gas lamp. And in the 1960s, toward the 1960s we 
started getting diesel. These diesel generators were a lot of 
money, and when SaskPower hooked up, it cut the prices down 
over the long run. 
 
One may argue that the prices should still be cut but the 
corporations are basically under attack by deregulation 
internationally, but also with federal policies as well — not only 
hitting our deregulation in SaskTel but impacting our power 
system as well. 
 
The Tories always attack our Crown corporations and make 
them look bad because they want to privatize. Some of the 
Liberals feel the same way. They’re attacking our Crown 
corporations all the time. 
 
I think that when you’re looking at the Crown corporations and 
the rates, compared to, let’s say, buying food, the food costs and 
the gasoline costs in the North are very high. When you’re 
doing outboard motor and you’re travelling around, the gas 
costs are very high. In some cases, it’s twice as high in certain 
situations. The food costs are very high. 
 
But when you look at the price for power, it’s the same per 
kilowatt-hour up in the North as it is over here, whereas it isn’t 
that way for the food. The food is way up higher. And also 
when you look at gasoline costs, it’s way up higher. So one of 
the things is that there is a similarity throughout the prices in 
the province, you know, per kilowatt-hour. 
 
And that was the basic point, you know, that was made in 
regards to what I said that we have one of the best prices in 
Canada. 
 
All I’m trying to say to you is that attacking the Crown 
corporations the way the Tories do and the way some of the 
right-wing Liberals do isn’t the way to make a proper argument. 
On your issue of doing facts, you said $325 million. I don’t 
know where you pulled that figure out from. It may have been 
gross revenue somewhere. But that’s not the profit margin of 
the hydro projects, the hydro plants in the North. It’s nowhere 
close. 
 
The total profit SaskPower made two years ago was $139 
million. This year it’s $132 million. So how in the world could 
they make 300 million. How in the world could they make 300 
million when the total profit for all the power in the province is 
132 million? It’s impossible. I don’t know where you got the 
figure from of 325 million. The actual fact on what the profit is 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

for the hydro in regards to Island Falls and north up in the 
Athabasca region is $7 million. So I thought I’d bring you that 
fact. You’re throwing around that $325 million figure. I don’t 
know where you got it from. 
 
So I think overall, while we would definitely like to see rates 
down for everything, we also have to look at the fact that it’s a 
lot more fairer than what we have to deal with for example in 
food, where our prices are way higher than the South. And our 
prices for gas are way higher than the South. 
 
At least on the power situation it’s the same cost per kilowatt. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. I think the key point that I want 
to stress to you is that I got your documentation on the amount 
of kilowatts that are generated from the three northern dams — 
the one of course around Camsell Portage, the one by Sandy 
Bay, and certainly the one by Cumberland House. Those three 
dams generate an incredible amount of power on a kilowatt per 
hour basis. 
 
And then if you multiply that by your kilowatt per hour charge, 
you can then see that quite frankly there is a large contribution 
that this particular region makes to SaskPower’s network. 
 
And the other fact is I got those figures, Mr. Minister, from the 
SaskPower annual report. And I would invite other people, 
other individuals, to research that. 
 
And the other point is that in northern Saskatchewan the entire 
infrastructure in the far northern part of our province, right 
across to Sandy Bay, I believe, was paid for by the mining 
companies over a period of time because of the diesel rates and 
some of the costs of operating these lines. The entire 
infrastructure in the far North, especially, was paid for by the 
mining companies. 
 
So there is profit being made off the northern dams. And, Mr. 
Minister, I can honestly say I don’t believe in any way, shape, 
or form that they’re $7 million. And I agree again with the point 
that the kilowatt per hour charge is the same in northern 
Saskatchewan as it is in the South, but what’s confusing to me 
is why does the North use so much of it. And I think the key 
point is that our homes are not properly insulated. 
 
(2315) 
 
And certainly conservation programs, and programs of other 
sorts are needed to reduce power consumption. That’s exactly 
our point. Natural gas perhaps could be bought to northern 
Saskatchewan, north-west and north-east, and that in essence 
would reduce the power usage and consumption. 
 
So I believe it’s quite important, Mr. Minister, is that we stick 
to the basics here, that we stick to the idea that we want to make 
things different and make things better for northern 
Saskatchewan communities. That’s why we’re here, aren’t we? 
We’re here for that particular reason. 
 
Now I’ll leave the power bill issue alone for a while. And I got, 
as I mentioned, I got a whole stack of petitions that people have 
signed complaining about the power rates for northern 
Saskatchewan. And I’ve got about two or three points here, Mr. 

Minister, and then we could certainly break for the evening. 
 
The one point I want to raise before we go any further is the 
other major issue. Since we’ve talked about the veterans, we’ve 
talked about housing, we’ve talked about the power rates, the 
other problem of course is highways. 
 
And I done an inquiry from one mining company, one mining 
company, and I asked them — which is public information — I 
asked them, what do you haul in terms of your trucks to Cluff 
Lake, on Highway 155? And of course Highway 155 is from 
Green Lake to Beauval to Buffalo Narrows and north. And they 
hauled 260 tonnes of explosives; they haul 12,207 tonnes of 
diesel; they haul 384 tonnes of gasoline; 103 tonnes of 
kerosene; 5,106 tonnes of propane. Some of the chemicals they 
haul are 6,599 tonnes of bulk lime; 776 tonnes of sodium 
chlorate; 3,487 tonnes of sodium chloride; 17,046 tonnes of 
sulphuric acid; 131 tonnes of ferric sulphate. In total, Mr. 
Minister, from this estimate, that there’s roughly 79,252 tonnes 
of chemicals, poisons, and supplies hauled on that Highway 
155. 
 
And yet there is very little effort being undertaken to rebuild 
that road. It’s very dangerous. It’s very dangerous for people. If 
you travel on that Highway 155 you’ll see what we talk about. 
People with vehicles and cars and all this sort are having great 
difficulty travelling down these roads. 
 
And a couple of years ago the member from the PC Party 
showed me some pictures of some of the roads in his 
constituency, and I’ll tell you, we’d take those roads any day 
over our roads. So he had nothing to complain about. And 
besides when the PC’s were in power — and that’s probably 
why we’re so deep in debt — they took care of their own. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to read a couple of the poems that we also 
have from the people of Patuanak. That’s one road that has 
never been fixed. And I want to use these two poems, one by 
Tera Aubichon — she’s a grade 9, 8 student. I’m sorry, she is 
. . . I’m not sure what . . . grade 8/9 class. And this is Tera’s 
poem. 

 
Highway 918 is a 
Road of disasters 
Leading to 
ACCIDENTS 
 
Broken mufflers 
Cracked windows 
Are useless when 
They are ruined. 
Patuanak has had 
Enough of this 
We demand right now 
PAVE THAT ROAD! 
 

Highway 918 by Janis Apesis 
 

On a road from Beauval 
A car rolls over. 
It rolls and rolls 
Then stops! 
 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

The windows are smashed 
The people are hurt 
Nobody knows 
Where they are. 
 
Dazed and confused 
They yell for help 
This is one story of Highway 918. 
 

And, Mr. Minister, this was an article that appeared in the 
Northern Pride on March 24 and it is very eloquently written by 
a number of school kids in Patuanak, and I want to send you a 
copy of that. Again I’ll have the page take a copy over. 
 
And while he’s here, I’ll also have him take a copy of a letter 
addressed to your colleague, the Hon. Judy Bradley, from the 
Chief in Council of the English River First Nations on some of 
their arguments why that road should be fixed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. I will remind the hon. member 
that use of member’s proper names is not allowed in the 
Chamber. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I guess I was 
reading from the letter, so I do apologize. 
 
I wanted to again continue on my course of reference to the 
northern roads. Why did I bring up the argument about the 
chemicals and why did I bring up the arguments about Patuanak 
and Highway 155? 
 
April 4, 1989, once again I quote from the Minister of Northern 
Affairs: 
 

Everybody’s becoming more environmentally conscious, 
especially in the transportation of chemicals, dangerous 
goods, but they’ll not improve our roads so that indeed 
there’s a greater safety, you know, for all the people who 
travel on our northern Saskatchewan roads. All they talked 
about was Waskesiu and La Ronge, you know, the 
southern edge of northern Saskatchewan. 

 
And another quote from April 5, 1988: 
 

But these roads are also downgraded in the past six years. 
They’ve become unsafe. They’ve become dangerous. Not 
only has there been more in the increasing number of 
people who die on our roads in northern Saskatchewan, but 
the fact remains that there’s an increasing amount of 
dangerous chemicals that are being transported on these 
roads. 
 

And it’s very important . . . one of the members from across 
laughs and make jokes out of it, but I don’t think at all that it 
is a joke. 
 
And another quote from April 4, 1988: 
 

Here we have 48,000 pounds in regards to transporting of 
hazardous chemicals like cyanide that are being transferred 
on this road. And there’s a record number of accidents, 
because not only a lack of improvement, there’s even a 
lack and a cut-back on maintenance on that highway. Not 

only do more people die on that road but there are more 
spills of hazardous chemicals. 

 
And I’ve got five or six quotes, the same argument he made 10 
years ago, Mr. Minister, on northern highways. 
 
Mr. Minister, Highway 918, Patuanak, Highway 155, are people 
roads, but the mining sector also uses it, like you argued back in 
’88. 
 
So I would encourage you to respond and give a commitment 
tonight that you will also commit to these highway problems in 
the constituency of Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Number one, on highways, there was a 
record historical increase on the amount given to northern 
Saskatchewan in regards to highways over the past many years. 
 
This year we went from 26 million spent on highways to 35 
million. That’s a $9 million improvement on highways. It is the 
single, largest improvement on highways I think in that many 
areas in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the improvements were made right in the 
home area of the member, surrounding his area. From Turnor 
Lake we had 1.2 million this year in addition to the 300 million 
from . . . 300,000 last year. We’re putting about 5 million in 
around Canoe Narrows, Jans Bay, so that people can travel 
safely in around their communities, as well as partake in the 
forestry industry. People are, on regards to going to the mine 
and going across to La Ronge, on that road there will be $5 
million spent on that road. 
 
So when you’re looking at provincial commitment, that is $9 
million extra over the 26, for a total of $35 million this year. 
 
For historical purposes the member likes not to talk about the 
federal Liberals. The federal Tories even used to put money into 
the North but the federal Liberals have gotten away from it 
except for the Athabasca Road which they’re going to save 
money anyway over the long run. Our Oceans and Fisheries, 
they don’t have to pay for the dredging, etc., on Athabasca after 
the road gets in. So they will save money in the long run. They 
will end up paying for the maintenance of that road. 
 
But in regards to the whole area of the South, the feds used to 
pay 60 per cent, province 40 per cent; yes, 35 million. We 
would have at least 70 million if the feds put in some money. 
That would have impact to Patuanak and 155. We’re improving 
those roads in regards to 155, but definitely to Patuanak we 
would go if indeed the federal dollars was there. So that’s what 
I would say to you. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess there’s 
a lot of issues we can talk and we can sit here and talk all night. 
But I understand it’s getting late in the evening and since I’ve 
been known to talk at great lengths, I see a white flag, so I’ll 
kindly slow down here and wrap up my comments. 
 
Madam Minister, again thanks to your officials for their 
attention and their time, and thank you for your time. And 
certainly the Minister of Northern Affairs, I appreciate some of 
the comments you made. I’m not convinced however in the 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

least way that these are the answers we want. 
 
What I want to point out, Mr. Minister, is that it’s time — it’s 
high time that we stop apologizing for what the North gets and 
start fighting for what the North needs. You’ve made those 
statements before. We are here genuinely standing in our spot to 
espouse those particular views. We support them. We believe 
that you have to make the people of the North as independent 
and as strong as quickly as you can. That’s the role, I believe, of 
a socialist government. 
 
And in closing, Madam Minister, and Mr. Chair, I want to read 
a message that I sent to the La Loche yearbook committee. And 
I believe it wraps up all what we feel that’s very important in 
northern Saskatchewan and that the work we’re doing today is 
hopefully going to have some benefit to our children of the 
future — to our own children. So the message I have to all you 
this evening in the most eloquent way I can is simply to read it: 
 

Our greatest gift. The measure of our people, of all people, 
is the manner in which we appreciate our children. 
 
We must afford them confidence and peace for these are 
the greatest gifts any nation can bestow upon its children. 
 
For all of us, there is no time for anything but challenging 
life in every ‘arena’ it has to offer, whether the challenge 
be in sports, business, the arts, or politics. 
 
However, our greatest challenge is to develop our children 
and nation to become independent, compassionate, and 
free to dream . . . 
 

Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Subvote (MG01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (MG02), (MG07), (MG03), (MG12), (MG15), 
(MG16), (MG05), (MG13) agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Vote 143 

 
Subvote (SH01) — Statutory. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
Budgetary Expense 

Municipal Government 
Vote 24 

 
Subvote (MG13) agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 
(2330) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chairman, on behalf of myself 

and the Minister of Northern Affairs, I’d like to thank our 
officials for attending tonight and assisting, and I’d like to thank 
the members opposite for their questions. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As well on behalf of the 
official opposition, to extend an appreciation to the minister and 
her officials for the times we’ve had and the responses, and 
look forward to the responses to some of the questions that we 
raised that you’ve agreed to respond to. 
 
Thank you so much. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Madam Minister, on behalf of the Liberal 
caucus, and especially myself and the member for Athabasca, I 
too wish to thank yourself and your officials for your 
attendance this evening. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:32 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 29  The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1623 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1623 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1624 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1625 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 59 —The Jury Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur le jury 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1625 
 Bill No. 60 — The Wildlife Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1625 
 Bill No. 61 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2) 
 Loi n° 2 de 1998 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1625 
 Bill No. 62 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2)/ Loi n° 2 de 1998 modifiant le Code de la route de 1996 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1625 
 Bill No. 58 — The Adoption Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1625 
 Bill No. 29 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1625 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Labour — Vote 20 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1626 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1626 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1633 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1634 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1636 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Saskatchewan Municipal Board — Vote 22 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1637 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1637 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Municipal Government — Vote 24 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1638 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1638 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1642 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1643 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1646 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1647 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1647 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Saskatchewan Housing Corporation — Vote 143....................................................................................................................1657 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 — Budgetary Expense 
 Municipal Government — Vote 24 ...........................................................................................................................................1657 
 
 


