





























































Hansard: May 08, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1033 
 May 8, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to present a petition on behalf of residents of the 
community of Gladmar. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review of the health crisis we are currently 
experiencing. 
 

This petition comes, Mr. Speaker, from the Oxbow, Carnduff, 
Alida, Carievale, and Lampman area of south-east 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition I present this morning is signed by the good folks 
from the Gainsborough, Alida, Pierson, Carnduff areas of the 
province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present to do with the closure of the Plains. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Carnduff, Oxbow, 

and Carievale. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition, and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present a petition 
on behalf of people concerned about the impending closure of 
the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Sonningdale and Radville. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from 
Gainsborough, Alida, and Carievale. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased, on behalf 
of Saskatchewan people, to present a petition as well dealing 
with the issue of a moratorium on the Plains Health Centre. 
People from the areas of Gladmar and Minton signed this 
petition. I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has signatures on it from the 
community of Weyburn. 
 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from a 
number of communities in the eastern part of the province, 
east-central, Churchbridge, Langenburg, the city of Yorkton, 
Kamsack, and Esterhazy. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
present petitions on behalf of citizens of this province 
concerned about the catastrophic deterioration of health care 
services under the NDP (New Democratic Party), and 
specifically the impending closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
Your petitioners this morning come from Ponteix and Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward petitions on behalf of 
the people in the province that have been supporting the Save 
the Plains committee and the Liberal caucus thrust in stopping 
the closure of the Plains hospital here in Regina. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 
the Ponteix, Vanguard, Cadillac area of the province. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, people 
from the south-west continue to be concerned about the 
double-laning of the Highway No. 1. Your petitioners today are 
from the Piapot and Maple Creek communities, and I’m happy 
to present this on their behalf today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: funding the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; saving the Plains Health Centre; 
calling an independent public inquiry into Channel Lake; 
putting a moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre; and having the Workers’ Compensation Board 
reinstate pensions for disenfranchised widows, widowers. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, an Act to 
rename the Plains Health Centre as the Tommy Douglas 
memorial hospital — short title, the Tommy Douglas memorial 
hospital Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 47 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: what action has your 
government taken to organize a round of meetings with the 
SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) 
and municipalities to discuss inequities in the tax system; 
has your government directed SAMA to revise the 
assessment procedure to reflect the more fair and equitable 
system; has any action been taken to have SAMA 
implement a mass appraisal technique for property 
assessment using sales data that recognizes the lower value 
of commercial properties in small town, low tariff, low 
traffic, low tourism communities in such a way that 
recognizes that location and community size reduce the 
value of commercial properties in these communities; 
 
(2) What action has been taken to ensure that the 
assessment appeal process is designed to be 
non-confrontational to: (b) ensure that the assessment 
appeal process would be less costly in terms of time and 
money for appellants, respondents, and to municipalities; 
(c) place less burdens on local boards of revision and the 
appellants who appear before them; (d) make easily and 
readily accessible to appellants and boards of revision such 
data that facilitates the appellants to make their appeal, and 
the board of revision to hearing such appeals and 
responding to them; (e) to have SAMA rules and 
procedures emphasize the role of SAMA and SAMA 
representatives as public servants whose role it is to assist 
municipalities and the individual appellants who make the 
municipalities to determine a fair assessment; and finally 
(f) to guarantee the communities in close proximity of one 
another and a similar makeup, e.g., neighbouring small 
towns, would not be isolated from one another in 
determining such things as market adjustment factor and 
that issues of social impact and justice would not be 
deemed irrelevant to the process. 

 
I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Every 
year about this time our east and west galleries are overflowing 
with enthusiastic young people. And I’m delighted this morning 
to introduce them to you and to my colleagues in the Assembly. 
 
We are pleased to welcome this morning 189 Canadian 
Automobile Association School Crosswalk Patrollers. They are 
here. They visit Regina every year as part of their annual 
jamboree. And we all know that means late nights and early 
mornings but lots of good times. And I had the pleasure of 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

speaking with half the group earlier on today, and I look 
forward to speaking with the other half later on. 
 
But they are here from all over Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re accompanied by 26 chaperons. I know that they plan to 
visit the science centre and the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) museum. But I also know that we as a society 
owe a great debt to these young people who we all see every 
day on school crosswalks making sure that children get safely 
to and from school. Many of us have even been school 
crosswalk patrollers. 
 
So please join me in extending a very warm welcome to these 
fine young people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming all of our school patrollers 
from around the province. We know that they do a tremendous 
job all throughout the year, and this is a day of recognition for 
them when they can come and enjoy the kinds of things that are 
planned for them. 
 
I hope they have a great day here in Regina and also a very 
excellent morning here in the legislature. Welcome to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I said yesterday that coming so 
far from Regina I rarely introduce guests. But I’d say that there 
are 17 of the school patrollers here today from the Battlefords, 
and I would welcome all of them particularly, along with the 
other young people, and Lynn Brisebois, who is accompanying 
them, from North Battleford. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I’d like to introduce to you and to 
the House, Ron Gillies, who is a librarian for the city of 
Lloydminster, and he’s in Regina for the Saskatchewan Library 
Association conference which is on this weekend. 
 
I’d ask all members to kindly join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 
today, a group of people that I will refer to today as, in our 
Legislative Assembly, as being Beechy Day. There are over 2 
per cent of the people in the legislature today are — or were — 
from the village of Beechy. 
 
I bring your attention to, in the Speaker’s gallery, Keith 
Andrews, who is a chaperon with the school patrol group, and 
seated in the west gallery is Keith’s son, George Andrews, 
along with Danny Ringrose. And I just want to point out this is 
the first year, Mr. Speaker, that Beechy has had a school patrol 
— so my congratulations to the village of Beechy. My thanks to 
Keith and to the school patrollers. 
 
Please join me in welcoming my special guests from Beechy. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, to you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce an individual in your gallery, Mrs. 
Audrey Horkoff, who hails from Kamsack in the Saltcoats 
constituency. Mrs. Horkoff has joined us today to highlight 
concerns of our health care system and I’d appreciate if all 
members here today would welcome her here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatoon Eastview By-election Candidate 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to take this opportunity to welcome Judy Junor into the 
Saskatoon Eastview by-election race. I was very interested to 
read her comments that she won’t be forced to toe the NDP 
Party line and that the Premier and other MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) have said they don’t want her to lose her 
voice. 
 
If that’s the case, we have three specific questions for her. Does 
she support the NDP decision to close the Plains hospital — yes 
or no? Does she support an expanded compensation package for 
hepatitis C victims — yes or no? And does she support health 
boards putting gag orders on SUN (Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses) nurses as was recently done at the Living Sky Health 
District — yes or no? 
 
Judy Junor says the Premier doesn’t want her to lose her voice. 
I challenge her to use her voice to answer these three important 
questions. Does she support the Plains hospital? Does she 
support hepatitis C victims? And does she support the right of 
nurses to speak out against bed closures? Or is she simply going 
to tow the party line like everyone else on the other side of the 
House? 
 
I challenge her, Mr. Speaker, to answer these questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good Economic News for Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
Statistics released these labour force stats this morning. For 
April 1998 the unemployment rate was 6.6 per cent. This is a 
half percentage point lower than April of ’97; that labour has 
grown by 33,200. There were 468,700 persons employed, an 
increase of 5,400 this April over last. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not only the only good news for the people 
of Saskatchewan, I also have five recent, good-news headlines 
from Saskatchewan weekly newspapers. And they are: “Official 
ribbon cutting” of Kerrobert Agro Services, Kerrobert Citizen, 
April 17; “Lewko’s Greenhouse expands,” Ituna News, April 
18; “Tamara Therapies celebrates grand opening,” Foam Lake 
Review, April 20; “Businesses benefit from furniture/hardware 
marriage,” Minor-Journal of Esterhazy, April 21; “Number one 
in North America,” Kinistino-Birch Hills Post-Gazette, April 
28. 
 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, as both the labour statistics and these good news 
headlines illustrate, Saskatchewan’s economy is continuing to 
thrive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Cuts 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
current Minister of Finance promised on budget day one year 
ago, the hospital closures, the acute care bed closures, and the 
elimination of nurses had come to an end. 
 
The current Minister of Health indicated a month ago that any 
further cuts would be inappropriate. How has the NDP 
honoured these promises, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Let’s look at a few of our rural health districts. We recently 
heard 25 beds were being chopped in the Living Sky Health 
District. The East Central District faces cuts in the next couple 
of weeks. And today we learn that the people of Carrot River 
are going to lose their hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder that the people of Saskatchewan 
now view this government as arrogant, out of touch, and one 
that just simply doesn’t care. 
 
We encourage the member from Carrot River to get up and say 
something. Don’t sit there in a cone of silence as other New 
Democrats have. Don’t allow this government to continue 
gutting health care in your constituency without saying a peep 
about it. Remember the pledge you made when you were 
elected — that you would support your constituents. 
 

Mother’s Day Tribute 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, 
Sunday is Mother’s Day. This is the day we have set aside to 
say “Thanks, Mom.” Thanks, Mom, for wiping my nose when I 
was little. Thanks, Mom, for walking me to school. Thanks, 
Mom, for helping me with my homework. And thanks, Mom, 
for being my friend. 
 
I could continue on, as all of us could, with thanks Mom stories, 
but I would run out of both words and time to express how 
special our mothers are. Instead, I’ll just ask all of you to join 
with me in recognizing and appreciating not only our mothers, 
but all mothers, for everything they have done and continue to 
do to love and support us every day. 
 
Thanks, Mom. We love you. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tribute to Tommy Douglas 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
recent edition of the Ottawa Citizen noted that this NDP 
government has offered to help find financing to make a motion 
picture on the life of the late Tommy Douglas. Saskatchewan is 
the birthplace of medicare, and New Democrats would have us 

believe that Tommy Douglas is its father. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a movie would be a fitting tribute, but there’s a 
better way to acknowledge the contributions of Mr. Douglas. 
There should be a landmark, a lasting tribute to the former 
Saskatchewan premier which truly acknowledges his dedication 
to health care. 
 
The Liberal opposition has today served notice that we will be 
introducing a Bill urging all members of this House to support 
renaming the Plains hospital the Tommy Douglas memorial 
hospital. A structure as sound as the Plains would serve as a 
lasting tribute to Mr. Douglas for future generations and we 
cannot image anything more fitting. 
 
When this motion comes before the Assembly, we hope for the 
support of all members of this Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Aboriginal Family Violence 
Initiative Funding Announcement 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I am pleased to inform you that yesterday the Minister 
of Justice was in Yorkton to present the Metis Women of 
Yorkton with $40,000 to enhance their program to stop the 
cycle of violence in aboriginal communities. 
 
This funding is part of a province-wide program that is 
providing $350,000 to organizations for programs that will 
work to respond to the effect of family violence among 
aboriginal people in larger cities. 
 
The Metis Women of Yorkton, along with seven other 
organizations, received start-up funding in 1997-98. This 
funding will enable Metis Women of Yorkton to deliver 
individual and family counselling to those affected by family 
violence and in particular, to those that provide healthy 
environments for children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, violence and abuse in any form is unacceptable 
and today’s announcement is another example in the way in 
which our government is continuing to work in partnership with 
communities, with families, individuals, to foster family 
relationships that are free of violence and of abuse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tribute to Mothers and Loved Ones 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Mother’s Day this year is a 
somewhat poignant occasion for myself. We have had to move 
my mother back to Saskatchewan in failing health. 
 
I know that I am not alone in this House in dealing with 
situations of this sort. Other members are facing similar 
situations or have lost parents in the past year, as indeed of 
course this is a story repeated throughout our province. 
 
To me though this should serve as a reminder to all of us that 
our mothers, like all our loved ones, are given to us for a limited 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

time. We must do what we can when we can, and we must tell 
those near and dear to us that we love and appreciate them. And 
we should do it today rather than wait till tomorrow. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Chili For Children’s Fifth Annual Fund-raiser 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to make 
a member’s statement today and I want to say that the children 
are our future and our most valuable resource. We all know 
that, Mr. Speaker. Food is a basic need of nurturing our children 
and unquestionably one of the most important responsibilities 
of our society. 
 
In Regina, Chili For Children answered that need in our 
community five years ago. It is an innovative, pioneering 
program that has attracted national and international attention 
all because of one Theresa Stevenson, saw the need and, Mr. 
Speaker, did something about it. 
 
Tonight Chili for Children is holding its fifth annual fund-raiser 
at the Centre of the Arts, and Chief Perry Bellegarde with 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations will be the guest 
speaker. I want to congratulate them for their excellent work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a direct link between the well-being of 
children and the prosperity of a nation, and by feeding our 
children we are making our province and our communities a 
better place for all us and a better place to live. That’s why our 
government has launched the successful action plan for children 
in 1993 and has continued to add to it every year. This year’s 
budget put a total of $53 million in programs addressing child 
poverty, including $18 million for the Saskatchewan Child 
Benefit and Saskatchewan employment supplement. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, working with people like Theresa 
Stevenson, Chili For Children, the business people, and 
individuals sponsoring tonight, we will make Saskatchewan a 
better community, a better place to live. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Luther College Choir’s Cuban Performance 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We often say in 
this Assembly that in our province, country, and in our world 
there is much more to unite us than to divide us. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, 34 members of the Luther College High School choir 
have just had a wonderful, firsthand experience to support this 
claim. 
 
They, their director, Dr. Carl Cherland, and four chaperons 
recently gave several performances in Cuba, Mr. Speaker, with 
lots of time to meet local citizens, tour the countryside, and 
learn about the very culture of Cuba. This is the first Canadian 
high school choir ever to tour Cuba, and it was a perfect choice, 
Mr. Speaker. They sang in the church where the Pope had been 
just a few weeks ago, and they sang in schools and other places 
throughout the country. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Luther choir sings in our rotunda here every 
Christmas, and indeed I think two years ago they were here on 
throne speech day. So we know what a good choir they are, and 
what good ambassadors they are. Now others have had the 
opportunity to experience the talent and the spirit of our 
Saskatchewan children. 
 
I congratulate Dr. Cherland and his choir, and thank them for 
being perfect Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Closure of Carrot River Hospital 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
another day and another hospital closure in NDP Saskatchewan. 
This time the NDP are getting ready to close down a 
much-needed 18-bed hospital in Carrot River. And what do we 
hear from the NDP member for Carrot River Valley? Nothing. 
It’s clear he’s not going to stand up for his constituents, and 
that’s why they’re going to get rid of him and replace him with 
someone who will in the next election. 
 
For the Minister of Health: Mr. Minister, why are you closing 
another rural hospital? Will you ensure that this doesn’t happen 
and make sure that the Carrot River hospital remains open? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to 
the member opposite. As the member opposite knows, that 
throughout the last five or six years in this province we have 
elected health boards. And the process of the elected and 
appointed health boards has been to provide a process, and 
where they in fact have been ensuring that the quality and the 
level of health care needs that are provided across the province 
are met. 
 
And the responsibility today of the district health board in 
north-east Saskatchewan is to review what the overall need for 
the services are in that area. And at the end of the day, they’re 
going to be providing a plan that will reflect what the needs of 
the people in that particular part of the province are. 
 
And I expect that within short order they will be making that 
announcement. Today they’re consulting with people within 
their district and will be making a decision in terms of what is 
in the best interests of people who live in that part of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, in spite of what Judy Junor 
says, it’s clear that the muzzle is on the NDP members and it’s 
still as tight as ever. Occasionally the straps slip a little, as 
demonstrated by the Chair of Crown Corporations the other 
day, but they quickly get tightened up again. And the muzzle is 
firmly on the NDP member for Carrot River Valley, who 
refuses to stand up for the people he represents. 
 
Mr. Minister, how is it that five years after your initial attack on 
health care, you’re continuing to close rural hospitals? The 
NDP health reform has been a miserable failure. You know it, I 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

know it, and everyone in Saskatchewan knows it. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you give us the assurance that the Carrot 
River hospital will remain open? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well first of all, Mr. Member, what I want 
to do is I want to remind you that now that you are . . . you’re 
carrying a new flag and you’ve abandoned your red flag and 
taken on a blue flag and now have come across to the new 
party. Remember when you continue to make the comment, you 
continue to make the comment that in this province there have 
been a closure and an abandonment of 52 hospitals, I want to 
say to the member opposite that if you examine closely what the 
leader of the previous . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. Now the 
Chair had no difficulty at all being able to hear the question 
being put. And I ask — order — and I ask for cooperation of all 
the members to allow the minister to be heard in providing the 
response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — If you were to examine again the language 
that the previous Conservative leader of your party said, and 
what he continues to say today, and continues to pulls the 
strings of the member who is acting today as the leader; and this 
is what the member from Kindersley said — and I say to you 
one more time — what the member from Kindersley said when 
he talked about what’s happened to rural hospitals in 
Saskatchewan. And he’s your leader today, by the way. He just 
pulls the strings from the back chair. 
 
And I say this to you. He said during this . . . during his opening 
comments he said that, on health care, Boyd again cautioned . . . 
and I quote: “Boyd again cautioned, cautioned praise of the 
Romanow NDP government for closing rural hospitals that had 
been made . . . that had to be closed.” That’s his comment. So 
you should have the chat . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 

Regional Hospital Services 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions as well 
are for the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government needs a health plan and they need 
it now, because right now there are no beds in Regina and there 
are no beds in our regional centres. Just ask Mrs. Ann Kaban, 
who lost her husband before his dying wish to see Yorkton one 
more time could be met. 
 
Mike Kaban was diagnosed with cancer in October of 1997, but 
did not receive radiation treatment in the Plains until February. 
Once the treatment was completed on March 6, he was to be 
transferred to Yorkton but — you guessed it — there were no 
beds available even though his doctor had been requesting this 
transfer for two weeks. The first available bed was on March 
11, two days before Mike died. And by this point he was 
unconscious and unresponsive to his loved ones. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mike Kaban is gone and his family is extremely, 

extremely upset that his last days were spent in Regina because 
there were no beds in Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is your plan to ensure health services in our 
regional centres? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to say to the member opposite a couple of things. 
 
Yesterday he and his colleagues rise in the House and say: why 
is it that we have now physicians that are going from Saskatoon 
to Humboldt to provide procedures in a rural area, and debate at 
length here that this shouldn’t be the case — because they 
recognize that there’s beds available. 
 
Yesterday they . . . yesterday the members opposite make that 
campaign, and say, and say that we should not be. The members 
opposite, the Liberals, say that we shouldn’t be campaigning on 
this issue. 
 
And I say to you, the member from Moosomin, that in the case 
of the individual who you are talking about, whom I have some 
information on, and I want to say to you that this individual has 
been in a hospital bed in Regina for three weeks, of which 
you’ve been going around the province and saying, of which 
you’ve been going around the province and saying that there are 
no beds in Regina. You’ve been going around the province, part 
of the Liberal campaign, saying that there are no beds. This 
individual has been cared for, has been ensured that it’s top 
quality of health . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid 
the words and the response by the minister are of little solace to 
the loved ones of Mike Kaban. According to his family, Mr. 
Speaker, because he couldn’t return to Yorkton, Mike fell into 
deep depression — a deep depression that his wife and other 
family members believe shortened his life. They are extremely 
upset, Mr. Minister, and they are not satisfied with the answers 
they are getting from the health district board, and I’m certain 
they’re not satisfied with the answers they’re now receiving 
from you. 
 
Mr. Minister, people like the family of Mike Kaban need 
somewhere to turn to when the health system fails them. That is 
why I will be introducing a Bill later today to create a health 
ombudsman. Mr. Minister, will you support this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the 
member opposite, that if he’s asking for greater accountability 
within the system, within the health care system today, that I 
want to point out for him again of all of the methods that are in 
place today for the accountability. 
 
First and foremost in each of the districts, each of the health 
districts are responsible to provide an audit on their delivery of 
service, and they do that on an annual basis. Then they have 
two public meetings in which they advise the public in each of 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

their constituencies . . . or each of their districts, in terms of 
what those services are. Then each of those health plans are 
provided for each of us here, to the legislature, to review in 
detail and debate. And further to that, all of those health plans 
are then reviewed by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
There are now four mechanisms, Mr. Chair . . . or Mr. Speaker, 
in order to review the delivery of health care services in the 
province, of which we all have an opportunity to review, 
discuss, debate, and analyse. So I say to the member opposite, 
the inclusion of any further accountability in this would not in 
my opinion, enhance the process in any greater fashion than it is 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highways Budget 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Highways. Madam Minister, 
under your leadership Saskatchewan people have witnessed an 
amazing transformation — the transformation of our road 
system from paved highways to wagon trails. That’s quite a 
trick, Madam Minister. 
 
And what really is impressive, that it only took the NDP seven 
years of neglect and broken promises to do it. Madam Minister, 
last year you and your NDP government promised to spend 
$250 million every year for the next 10 years, but last year’s 
Highway budget was only $200 million and this year is 218. 
 
Madam Minister, you’re already $82 million short of your 
promise. Will you commit today to honour your promise and 
immediately allocate the missing $82 million back into this 
year’s Highway budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very 
pleased to have the opportunity to answer this question because 
I want to clarify what our commitment was. It was a $2.5 
billion commitment as of last year for over the next 10 years. 
And that’s what we are going to honour. 
 
We added $30 million to our budget last year, an additional $20 
million this year. And we will continue to ramp up the budget in 
the upcoming years. 
 
What we have said is that we will be spending $2.5 billion on 
our highway and transportation system, which we will honour. 
And we will be doing that in a progressive manner each and 
every year until we can honour that commitment. 
 
As I have said before, over 10 years it will average, when you 
divide by 10, it will average $250 million per year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the number of letters and 
concerns we’re getting on highways this spring . . . and I’ll just 
list a few of the numbers, but 381, 10, Highway 21, 44, 49, 5, 
23, 41, 8, 50 — the list goes on and on. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan highway system is falling apart. 
It’s unsafe. It’s killing and it’s maiming people. It’s a disgrace. 
It’s chasing business out of the province and it’s keeping other 
businesses from coming here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hurting tourism in this province. It’s costing 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) millions in 
insurance payments that aren’t really necessary if the roads 
were fixed. Our highways and road conditions are costing 
vehicle owners millions of dollars a year in repairs. And, 
Madam Minister, you’re already $82 million short of your 
highway funding commitment. 
 
Was this $250 million a year just another broken promise your 
government is famous for? Madam Minister, the highway 
system is in critical condition. Where’s the NDP’s plan for 
reviving this patient? When are you going to try and catch up to 
your commitment . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now the hon. 
member has been extremely lengthy in his preamble. If he’s 
done, then I’ll recognize the hon. member for Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think one of 
the good news items that we heard today is that we have great 
economic development in this province and that we’re . . . 
unemployment rate is down. And certainly with that great 
economic development, we have to have a good transportation 
system. 
 
We have committed our dollars, and we’re making that 
commitment of $2.5 billion over the next 10 years. We’re not 
getting . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. members will 
recognize that the Minister of Highways and Transportation is 
not that far from the Chair, and it’s difficult for the Chair to 
hear. And I will ask the hon. members in the opposition to 
allow the hon. minister to be heard in her response. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said, 
we’ve got good news in economic development right across this 
province. And certainly we’ve put our strategy there with more 
dollars and better planning right across the province with our 
area committees. We’ve met with the road builders and they’re 
also on a gradual process of adding dollars into our budget. 
 
But I’d like to say, what have we got from the federal 
government? We’ve gotten zero dollar commitment into the 
huge issues that are facing transportation in this province. 
 
We also saw the party opposite put us into such a deficit 
position on which we spend $2 million a day on interest. Those 
are the kind of dollars that we should be able to have to put into 
our infrastructure. 
 
We have made a commitment of dollars. We’ve made a 
commitment to good planning. It’s certainly more than what 
any of the opposition members have done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

Health Care Funding 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier likes to sell himself as the saviour of medicare. That’s 
why the fact that the NDP is now pushing two-tier medicine on 
the people of Saskatchewan is so shocking. 
 
Today I’ve introduced this House to Audrey Horkoff of 
Kamsack, who lost her mother to leukemia last fall. She feels 
that if her mother did not have additional insurance for private 
care, her final days would have been unbearable. 
 
Mr. Premier, your party has attacked any suggestion of 
two-tiered medicine in the past. Why are you forcing it on the 
people of Saskatchewan now? Not out of design but because of 
neglect. Would Tommy Douglas have allowed such a thing to 
happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I will say with the 
greatest of respect to the hon. member opposite, he never even 
met Tommy Douglas or knew Tommy Douglas and I think it ill 
behoves him to use the name of a person who, in consult with 
Woodrow Lloyd, built up medicare in this province on this side 
of the House, as this party does. 
 
I say to the member opposite that it’s somewhat galling to have 
the Liberals get up and argue the question of our health care 
reforms, having been the party responsible for cutting $7 billion 
of health care dollars nationally — 7 billion nationally, 7 billion 
nationally. Every premier — Liberal, Conservative, NDP — in 
Canada says you people are destroying medicare. 
 
What have we done? We have come back and back-filled every 
single penny that the Liberals took away from Canada and from 
the provincial government and have upgraded on top of it in this 
budget, $90 million more to do precisely what the member, 
under crocodile tears, says he supports, namely no two-tiers; 
when we know his member from Arm River supports two-tiers 
and what the federal policy is directing us towards — two-tier 
health care. 
 
The Liberals have no credibility on health care whatsoever, and 
the Saskatoon Eastview by-election will show that in spades. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, it seems the Premier, under 
stress, has developed selective memory loss here because I’ve 
had to remind the members opposite on a number of occasions 
of a resolution that was passed by our party’s convention last 
fall, and I’ll read again and I quote: 
 

We uphold the principles of the Canada Health Act and 
support a publicly funded, publicly administered universal 
medicare system and oppose those who seek to undermine 
it with a two-tiered health system. 
 

And that’s what we’re . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. Now the 
hon. member doesn’t need shouting from government benches 

nor does he need shouting from his own caucus benches. He’s 
quite capable of asking the question himself. I’ll ask the House 
to allow him to be heard. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So we’re opposing 
those who seek to undermine our health care system and that’s 
what we’re doing here right today. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you are as opposed to two-tier medicine as you 
state, and believe a two-tier structure is not being established in 
Saskatchewan, why is the Liberal opposition being contacted on 
a daily basis by people like Audrey Horkoff. In a letter to the 
Regina Health District, Mrs. Horkoff writes, and I quote: 
 

The implications are clear. Without insurance you are at 
the mercy of the system. It’s not a pretty sight, and one that 
none of you can possible accept with a clear conscience. 
 

Mr. Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The hon. member has 
been extremely lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask him to go 
now directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Premier, we might expect to see two-tier 
medicine from people from Ralph Klein. Why are we seeing it 
from you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member gets up 
and repeats and repeats and repeats and repeats to this House, 
some resolution that the Liberals passed — provincial Liberals 
passed — at their last convention in Yorkton, opposing two-tier 
system. 
 
Don’t read it to me. Read it to your colleague, the member from 
Arm River, who gets up in this House and supports two-tier 
system. Don’t read it to me. Read it to Ralph Goodale. Was he 
at that provincial Liberal convention? And if Ralph Goodale 
was there, what is his answer to you for having cut back health 
care spending in Canada $7 billion? What did Ralph Goodale 
say about that? How did he vote for that resolution? 
 
Don’t read it to me. Don’t read it to this House. Read it to your 
own Liberal Party, which is on a mission to destroy medicare in 
Canada, on a mission to destroy medicare. This party and this 
government is defending medicare and we’re going to do it all 
the time, and the people of this province know that they cannot 
trust you or the Tory Party for the defence of medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This NDP 
government continues to maintain and cry that it opposes 
two-tier health. At the same time it’s neglect, Mr. Speaker, and 
underfunding is pushing two-tiered medicine on the people of 
Saskatchewan. The creation of Clockwork Health Connections 
out of Saskatoon certainly underlines this point. According to 
this brochure from this private company, Mr. Speaker, it says 
and I quote: “assist Saskatchewan people in accessing health 
services.” 
 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

Mr. Minister, if our health care system’s in such fine shape as 
you suggest, why would any Saskatchewan resident need help 
in accessing additional private health care services through this 
company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Liberal 
Party in Saskatchewan, Dr. Melenchuk, was interviewed by 
Costa Maragos of CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
on November 1996, and he said that he would cut $1.3 billion 
from the Saskatchewan health care system because he said he 
was a doctor and he said he knew where the inefficiencies were. 
Then Costa Maragos said, where are those inefficiencies? He 
said, I’m not going to tell you. He was asked a few days ago, 
how is he going to find the money to keep the Plains hospital 
open in light of the fact that the federal Liberals have cut it back 
$7 billion; he says, I’m not going to tell you. 
 
What does he say on November 27, 1996? “Private surgical 
clinics should be permitted to open in the province, says Liberal 
leader Jim Melenchuk.” That’s what he said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does this Liberal Party have any credibility on 
health care at all? Given the statements that they want to cut 1.3 
billion, I invite you, sir, I invite any member of this House . . . 
and in particular, it would give me undying pleasure to see the 
Conrad Black newspapers just once — just once — exercise a 
bit of journalism to ask the Liberal leader where he will cut $1.3 
billion from the Saskatchewan health care budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s the arrogance of the big government, “I know 
best” attitude that the people of this province hate so much. Mr. 
Speaker, the fact is if our health care system wasn’t crumbling 
under this NDP government, there wouldn’t be a market for 
private companies to help people access proper health care 
services. Among other things, Clockwork Health Connections 
provides the rest and recovery service for rural and northern 
patients who have been given the boot from hospitals but are 
not yet ready to go home. This service is based on a hotel 
setting, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not the Howard Johnson, which is 
this government’s hotel of choice, and Clockwork provides 
24-hour nursing care. Patients are not left to fend for themselves 
as under the government program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the fact that there is even a niche market for this 
kind of service not an indictment of our deteriorating health 
care system in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member who 
just got up and asked his question said, on May 1, 1996 in the 
interview to the STV (SaskWest Television), the following, 
quote: “If there are people that are prepared to pay, (referring to 
health care) then I think we have to let them pay.” 
 
That sounds to me like two-tier medicine. That is what this 
member says, and that is what his doctor says. 
 
But look at this, Mr. Chairman . . . Mr. Speaker, look at this — 
Mr. Speaker, I can barely hear myself give the answer with 

these Liberals yelling at me the way they do, and they’re yelling 
at this because they know exactly what they’re waiting for them 
— they know that the people in Saskatoon Eastview realize that 
nationally, the Liberal Party has cut $7 billion from health care. 
Every Premier, Liberal, NDP, and Conservative — and this is a 
fact — in communiqué after communiqué to the Prime 
Minister, has said you are attacking medicare. 
 
This province, this government, has come back at the largest 
expenditure of health care in the history of our province at $1.7 
billion. We oppose a two-tier system. We are building the best 
health care centre for southern Saskatchewan right here in 
Regina. We are getting the very best that modern medicine can 
provide, not those people who support two tier, who support 
private, for-profit hospitals, who want to destroy by their lack 
of funding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Health District Lay-offs 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a further 
question to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, we’ve just 
learned that there is a news conference scheduled for 1:30 today 
in Swift Current to announce lay-offs in the Swift Current 
Health District. Mr. Minister, this announcement is going to go 
totally contrary to what the Minister of Finance said last year 
about no further cut-backs in health care. 
 
Mr. Minister, we understand those lay-offs could include 
nurses. Mr. Minister, will you confirm that in fact the Swift 
Current Health District is planning to lay off staff this afternoon 
due to the budget process? And will you finally admit that your 
health care reform process is a disaster? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that earlier this morning I had been advised by the 
Department of Health, who said to me that the Swift Current 
Health District was intending to make some reductions in some 
of their services after they completed their additional work. 
 
Now the member opposite should be assured and the member 
opposite should be apprised that there will be no health care 
staff who were providing front-line work — nurses, LPNs 
(licensed practical nurse), aides — there will be no cuts to any 
of those people. 
 
There will be no bed reductions; there will be no bed reductions 
to the Swift Current Health District. They’re looking at 
streamlining some of their services within the region and 
they’re going to make some additional reductions, and the 
district health board has advised that that’s what it will be. But 
it will be no nurses; there’ll be no long-term care staff that will 
be reduced and there will be no bed cuts in Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you just 
announced that there were further expenditures in health care. 
But what do we see in the province of Saskatchewan? What do 
we see in North-East Health District; the community of Carrot 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

River? Cut- backs. Living Sky, cut-backs. East Central, 
cut-backs, and now the Swift Current Health District. And how 
many more districts are going to be cutting back? 
 
On one hand you’re saying you’re putting more money in, but 
every district, on a daily basis now, is now having to live with 
the fact that they’re going to have to address shortfalls by 
cutting back. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe the people of Saskatchewan are saying 
to you that the health care is in a shambles; it’s time to do 
something about it. When will you admit the fact that health 
care is facing a crisis situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker. The crisis that is being 
faced in this legislature in this province is by the Tory 
Saskatchewan Party and by the Liberal Party. That’s the crisis. 
We know that by the public opinion polling that is taking place. 
I’m saying to this House, Mr. Speaker, that health care is in 
transition in every part of this country. Every province is 
involved in a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Now the Chair is having 
difficulty being able to even hear the Premier’s response, and I 
ask for the cooperation of the opposition to allow the Premier to 
be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I was about to say that 
every province in Canada is involved in, every province in 
Canada is involved in health care renewal. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan began ours 4 or 5 years ago, and 
we have well turned the corner to building the finest health care 
system in the country. We are funding at $1.7 billion, the 
highest expenditure in the history of this province. And we’re 
doing it in the face of $7 billion of cut-backs by the Liberals of 
this province and this country — $7 billion. 
 
The crisis I said is in the Saskatchewan Party, and it is so. I see 
that the Leader of the Saskatchewan Tory Party must have been 
on coffee break. The $24,000-a-year consultant was in the 
gallery just now, consultant. 
 
And here’s what The Estevan Mercury says, why I say it’s a 
crisis: 
 

We say if the Saskatchewan Party is determined to give 
Hermanson what they feel is fair compensation, then we 
suggest they make some concerted efforts to get him 
elected so he can pick up his provincial pay in a proper 
manner and not in some back door. 

 
You want to put health care as a test and a crisis, don’t have 
your policy consultant having a cup of coffee in the legislative 
gallery. You have him running in Saskatoon Eastview and 
telling us about medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 210  The Saskatchewan Health Ombudsman Act 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading of 
Bill No. 210, The Saskatchewan Health Ombudsman Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
54, The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
55, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Now the Chair does ask 
for the cooperation of the House to enable the Bills to be 
processed properly, and I ask for the cooperation of members 
on both sides of the House. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 56, 
The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the municipal employees pension plan is currently 
in an enviable position. This pension plan boasts a surplus. To 
maintain its status as a registered pension plan, the Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Commission must either improve the 
benefits being offered to its plan members and pensioners, or 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

forfeit a portion of its surplus by means of contribution of funds 
to employees and employers. 
 
The Municipal Employees’ Pension Commission, in 
consultation with the plan’s actuaries, legal counsel, 
participating employers, and plan members, are requesting plan 
improvements that will consume about 80 per cent of the 
existing plan surplus. 
 
The plan improvements will comply with the Income Tax Act. 
After the implementation of the improvements, the plan will 
continue to enjoy a healthy surplus which will help to protect 
the plan from corrections in financial markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the municipal employees’ pension plan provides 
benefits to municipal employees, school board employees, and 
designated police officers and fire-fighters. 
 
Over 700 employers and over 9,000 employees, active and 
inactive, participate in the plan. The plan currently pays benefits 
to about 2,500 members. The plan is administered by the Public 
Employees Benefits Agency, Saskatchewan Finance. 
 
The definition of “average highest salary” will be amended to 
be based upon the highest three years of contributory service to 
replace the current highest 60 months. This will increase the 
pensions for plan members. 
 
To protect the members’ pensions during periods of disability, 
members can apply to the Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Commission to have employee and employer contributions 
waived for the period of disability while continuing to 
recognize the period of disability as contributory service. 
 
This plan improvement serves two purposes. Plan members will 
not be required to contribute to the pension plan while they are 
disabled and perhaps without regular income. And by having 
the period of disability recognized as contributory service, 
members will know that their future pension income is not 
being jeopardized as a result of their disability. 
 
Permanent employees who were required to serve a waiting 
period prior to joining the pension plan, Mr. Speaker, will be 
granted one-half of the waiting period as contributory service 
and will be given the opportunity to purchase the remaining 
one-half of the waiting period. 
 
This provides members with the ability to restore service for the 
waiting period which they were required to serve prior to 1993. 
The pension formula for service prior to 1990 will be enhanced, 
thereby further enhancing the pensions of the longest-serving 
plan members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments being proposed to The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Act serve the purposes of improving plan 
benefits for members and of using a surplus that has accrued in 
the pension plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
(1100) 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today on this particular issue dealing with the municipal 
employees’ pension plan. 
 
This plan covers approximately 2,500 members — employees 
of municipalities, school boards, and as the minister said, 
designed police officers and fire-fighters. 
 
I guess one of the questions that we’re going to have to ask, Mr. 
Speaker, is who are the designated police officers? How do they 
become designated? And what’s the difference between this 
pension plan and what other officers have that are not 
designated? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill improves the municipal pension plan for 
those who are collecting it. Currently it’s calculated based on a 
60-month or five-year highest salary earning. This is being 
changed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the hon. member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Jess: — Permission to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your west gallery I 
would like to take this opportunity to introduce two good 
friends of mine from the Leader area. 
 
Mrs. Gladys Dearborn is a farmer and a businesswoman in the 
town of Leader, and her son Bill is a farmer. As well, he has 
been more recently became famous in that area as the driving 
force between the great Sand Hills grain terminal, and he has 
recently been elected as Saskatchewan Wheat Pool delegate. 
 
And I’d like to ask all members to welcome them to the 
Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the hon. member for Kindersley on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — For the introduction of guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well would like to 
join with the member opposite in welcoming the Dearborns 
here to the Assembly today. Mr. Dearborn is a long-time 
resident of my constituency, and certainly would want to 
welcome him. 
 
I would also want to extend our best wishes to your son Jason, 
who is very instrumental in the Saskatchewan Party’s policy 
development these days. And we would want you to extend best 
wishes. And I’d ask all members to welcome them as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 
(continued) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
saying earlier, this change is going to mean that people 
collecting the municipal pensions will now be basing their 
pension on their best three years, or the highest return for three 
years. This will provide a higher salary for the purposes of 
calculating their pension benefits. 
 
I think it would be interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that your 
best three years is certainly better than what the MLA pension 
is, unless you happen to be the Premier, the member for Regina 
Dewdney, the member for Shellbrook-Spiritwood, or the 
member for Regina Northeast. All of those members, Mr. 
Speaker, are on a plan that pays out the best of, I believe it is, 
four years. 
 
So in this sense this particular pension is a little bit richer in 
terms of time period, although I suspect it's not richer in terms 
of money that would be paid out as pensions. 
 
So perhaps those particular members at some point in time 
would like to speak out as to the benefit of changing this 
particular Act from five years to three years. I’m sure that they 
may very well be interested in lobbying to get their own 
pensions changed to even improve the lucrative pensions they 
currently have. 
 
Those pensions that I speak of, Mr. Speaker, are certainly 
different than those that the rest of us have in this Assembly. 
 
After July 1, 1998, during period of disability, contributions 
may be waived for both the employee and the employer. But the 
period of disability will still be included in the calculation of the 
member’s contributory service. 
 
This means, Mr. Speaker, that while the member isn’t pay . . . 
the person collecting the pension or in whose name the pension 
is being collected, will not be putting money into the pension 
program, but they will at the end of the day, base that amount 
on the time that they have served. 
 
The amount of the allowance payable to members based on the 
service prior to January 1, 1980 will be increased — means 
they’re going to get more money out of this. So people that put 
in their pensions earlier, before 1990, will get a better return by 
this change-over, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the main questions that we’ll be asking is how these 
changes will affect municipalities who have been greatly 
strapped for cash. We have seen this government continuously 
reducing the amount of money that are going to municipalities. 
And fact is, last year municipalities I believe lost approximately 
$30 million out of their grants from government. Those monies 
would have been used to build not only roads, Mr. Speaker, but 
also to pay the pensions of their employees. That money was 
reduced. 
 
So I guess the question has to be asked, who is going to pay for 
these additional costs. Will the entire cost of this Bill that is 

being introduced to expand the pensions be paid out of the 
surpluses that the minister mentioned? Or does it mean that the 
ratepayers of this province are going to have to pay greater 
taxes to pay for these enhanced pension programs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those are all the types of things that we need to investigate. We 
need to be contacting the municipalities, both rural and urban, 
to determine how this particular Bill is going to affect their 
finances. We need to talk to the people who are going to be 
collecting these pensions to see whether or not it serves their 
particular interests and their needs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at the present time I would move that we 
adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Amendment Act, 1998. The automobile auto 
insurance Act is a universal, mandatory automobile insurance 
plan administered by SGI. 
 
As it now exists, the Act insures snowmobiles. There are 
approximately 33,000 snowmobiles in Saskatchewan. Less than 
one-third are registered and insured with the SGI auto fund. 
These are the only off-road vehicles registered and insured with 
the auto fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recent years the loss ratio on snowmobiles has 
been very unfavourable. For every dollar in snowmobile 
premiums taken in, $2.65 is paid out. Losses have cost the auto 
fund on average $3 million per year. This is obviously an 
imbalance, and it means that snowmobile claims are being 
subsidized by premiums paid by other road users, other 
automobiles that are insured through the fund. 
 
Amendments to the Act will remove coverage for first party 
damage to a snowmobile. As well, amendments will remove 
no-fault benefits to snowmobile riders under the personal injury 
protection part of the Act. Snowmobiles will be continued to be 
registered and those that are registered will have liability 
insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments removing the injury coverage 
under the personal injury protection plan are consistent with 
both Manitoba and Quebec. Another amendment will permit 
SGI to pay long-term disability benefits for injuries by an 
annuity. People permanently disabled in vehicle accidents are 
entitled to periodic payments that continue as long as the 
disability lasts — sometimes for ever. This involves ongoing 
processing of payments by SGI. It would be more efficient to 
have these payments made through an annuity purchased by 
SGI for the recipient. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, we are proposing an amendment which 
will allow SGI to suspend driver’s licences of thieves and 
vandals. While it is now possible to sue thieves and vandals for 
damage of vehicles, chance of recovery are very small due to 
the perpetrators’ usual poor financial situation. We believe 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

licence suspensions will send a strong message about the 
serious consequence of car theft and vandalism. 
 
These amendments work to make our compulsory insurance 
plan more fair, more efficient, and more socially responsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Act to amend The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
while the minister seems to think that he gave an excellent 
speech, he’s the only one in the House who seems to think that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes that the minister is proposing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you — first I want to thank the members 
opposite for allowing me to interrupt what I’m sure is going to 
be an excellent speech — to introduce a group of 18 
kindergarten students who have joined us from St. Matthew 
School. 
 
You will notice them in your gallery, and I understand they’ve 
just completed their tour and I will be meeting with them very 
shortly. So if you’d join with me in welcoming them, that 
would be great. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Battleford-Cut 
Knife on her feet? 
 
Ms. Murrell: — With leave, to introduce guests also. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you. It is my pleasure also to introduce 
to this Assembly 17 grade 7 students from Wilkie. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Bev Barth. Chaperons are 
Joe Wagner, Karen Johnson, and Janice Guigon. 
 
They have not had their tour yet so they will be proceeding and 
meeting with me later. And I’m sorry that they missed question 
period because I’m sure now that I’ll have to answer all the 
questions that were already asked. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
welcome the students here today. And perhaps one of the 
questions that the students could ask the two members is, are 
they getting anything from Dairy Queen for you? Just a possible 
suggestion that, you know, I’m sure would . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I know the hon. member recognizes the rules 
of the House do not allow hon. members to draw visitors into 

the Assembly . . . into the debate. And I’m sure that he’ll not 
want to do that any longer and get back to the matter before the 
House. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 
(continued) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We do have 
some important business to discuss about snowmobiles. And the 
minister was talking about some of the changes they’re 
proposing to make to insuring of snowmobiles. 
 
The SGI auto fund will scale back that insurance beginning on 
August 1 because SGI coverage for snowmobiles will now be 
limited to the liability insurance. Vehicle damage insurance and 
the personal injury protection program will no longer be 
provided. SGI, as the minister said, has lost a considerable 
amount of money over the last few years in insuring 
snowmobiles — approximately $8 million in the last three years 
— so roughly 2.3, $2.4 million a year. 
 
I guess one of the reasons though that . . . one of the 
possibilities for those losses is the way SGI was operating that 
insurance fund, Mr. Speaker, when it came to snowmobiles. 
One of the things, in talking with the insurance people involved 
in selling insurance and in talking to dealers who were selling 
snowmobiles — and including talking to the snowmobile 
association — was they wanted to see some changes in how 
SGI was administering that Act. 
 
They were asking that people who were going to insure new . . . 
or new claims, or new clients for insuring snowmobiles be 
asked to bring their snowmobile in for an inspection prior to the 
issuance of the insurance. That way the insurance broker, the 
insurance adjuster, could make a determination whether or not 
this vehicle was in proper shape; whether or not there was any 
potentials for claims on that snowmobile if the insurance was 
issued, because I think we’ve all heard the horror stories and the 
potentials for difficulties that arise when those inspections are 
not made. 
 
And some of these things may have been part of the cause why 
there was such a large claim against the insurance monies 
collected, the premiums collected off snowmobiles. But it 
seems that that’s not the direction that the government is going. 
They’re simply getting out of insuring snowmobiles other than 
providing liability insurance. 
 
(1115) 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’re giving it to the private sector. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Now the minister says, we’re giving it 
to the private sector. Well I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the private 
sector will be providing insurance. 
 
I note that in a newspaper article, the recommendation was that 
SGI CANADA would perhaps be providing those kind of 
services. Hopefully they will be. I know with other particular 
kinds of vehicles, that it’s very difficult at times to get 
insurance depending on the numbers of vehicles that are out 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

there to be insured, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Dealers were concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the loss of 
insurance, because it meant that people may not be purchasing 
machines because they could get no insurance or because the 
people would no longer be fixing their machines up. Those 
were some of the concerns that were expressed to us. We’ll be 
asking the minister those types of questions. 
 
The minister talked also about major changes in the attempt to 
deal with young offenders and car thefts. Now it’s unusual for 
this particular government to address these issues so we are 
interested to note just how they’re going to do it. 
 
This Bill would give SGI the right to suspend a driver’s licence 
for those who are vandals and thieves until restitution is paid to 
SGI. Well, Mr. Speaker, if restitution is to be paid to SGI, what 
about the deductible that the person who owned the vehicle had 
to pay? Will that also be included in that restitution? I don’t 
note that it’s in there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if SGI can hold up the licence of a person who has been 
convicted of vandalism or a theft until they get their money, 
well what about the money that the victim had to pay out for 
their deductible? Surely that should also be included, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I guess the question has to be asked for those who are 
under 16 years of age or indeed for some of those that are over: 
they don’t seem to feel that there is any requirement to obey the 
law, so why are they concerned about having a driver’s licence? 
 
As one person told me, I don’t need a piece of paper to drive. 
They don’t need that licence in their own mind. They’re not 
worried about the insurance liabilities. They’re not worried 
about the vehicle damage that may be a result from, you say, of 
their own automobile or of a stolen automobile. They have no 
regard in that area. 
 
While it is a small, token step forward, Mr. Speaker, I think it is 
only that — just a token. 
 
We will be discussing these changes with the snowmobile 
association, with the dealers who sell snowmobiles, and with 
people who ride and own snowmobiles. So therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on this issue. 
 
Debated adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 26 — The 
Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and my thanks to 
the members of the Assembly for allowing us to return back to 
the Bill. Obviously we could have done this another day, but it 

might just as well be done now as later. And this is an important 
Bill because of course it leads us to other Bills that reflect the 
same area of concern. 
 
As you will know, Mr. Speaker, the oil and gas industry doesn’t 
affect everyone in the province as directly as it does people who 
are living in those areas of the province where production takes 
place. Naturally everyone who has a home that is heated by 
natural gas has some concern and so everybody has that aspect 
of the industry in their minds. 
 
But for those of us who live in rural Saskatchewan the problems 
that the industry can cause naturally affect those farmers and 
those ranchers where the gas and oil wells are presently located. 
That of course brings me to my feet because of course in the 
Cypress Hills constituency we have one of the larger natural gas 
fields. We also of course have a lot of oil production as well. 
 
The Kindersley area of course is the other constituency that has 
a lot of those kinds of activities as well as Lloydminster, and of 
course the south-east corner. 
 
But in reality, Mr. Speaker, there are only abut five 
constituencies in the whole province that are particularly 
affected by the negative effects that the oil and gas industry can 
produce. And while there are numerous good things that come 
from the industry, including all of those good things like jobs 
and industry and revenues for the government and revenues for 
even municipalities, the reality is that there are some downsides 
that go with the industry, and naturally they need to have roads 
in order to . . . where they’re working and all of those kind of 
things. And so it’s important that we discuss these issues and 
these amendments at some length because they do affect so few 
people. We need to discuss them in debate more effectively I 
think and more lengthfully than we normally would because it 
can never be a political issue at election time. 
 
So obviously if only the negative effects can only affect a 
certain number of seats, naturally then we have to do our job 
here in the Assembly, and we have to do it through the process 
of debate to convince the minister that certain things have to be 
done in order to have fair play for those constituencies, because 
it can never be done in the broader context of democracy with 
an election. 
 
So I want to talk to the minister about the Act to amend The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Act first of all, and of course later on 
we’re going to be talking about some other Acts that go into the 
same areas of concern. And that of course, right there, is one of 
the arguments we want to put forward. 
 
Here we are talking about amendments to an Act and in a few 
minutes from now we will be talking about another Act that 
affects relatively the same areas of concern. We’ve got too 
many Acts. We’ve got too many ministers controlling the same 
industries. We’ve got too much red tape. You can’t get through 
the red tape from one ministry to the other ministry to the next 
ministry all in the same area of concern because we have too 
many Acts. 
 
And what do I base that argument on, Mr. Speaker? Well very 
simply, we do have comparisons to make. I’ve used the 
comparison of Alberta many times in this Assembly. In 1997, 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

the Alberta government already at that time, when Mr. 
Blakeney was the premier of this province, saw fit and saw the 
necessity to bring about changes that would bring all of these 
Acts under one umbrella. 
 
And yet in Saskatchewan we continue to fool around with 
several different Acts regulating one industry. And not only 
several different Acts, but Acts that are under jurisdiction of 
different ministers. So that when the industry or anyone 
connected with the problems of the industry want to solve a 
problem, they have to go through two and possibly three 
different ministries in order to get a resolution to a problem. 
 
In Alberta they saw the necessity not only to put that umbrella 
under . . . all of these Acts under one umbrella so that these 
conflicts could be avoided, but they have also saved themselves, 
as a government, hundred of millions of dollars in the process. 
And this government of course, has never seen the light of day 
of saving all of that money by putting all of these Acts under 
one umbrella. 
 
And of course in Alberta they’ve done it through the Surface 
Rights Act and they have put all of their pipeline Acts, all of 
their Acts of the oil and gas conservation nature, they’ve put 
them all under one umbrella under the Surface Rights Act. They 
have saved themselves hundreds of millions of dollars by not 
having duplications of boards that people have to go to in order 
to discuss issues that they disagree about. And they’ve also, of 
course, eliminated the need for political patronage in those areas 
to fill those boards. 
 
More specifically, Mr. Speaker, in the Act that is before us, this 
Act of No. 26 — the Act to amend The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act, the minister in this Act apparently is 
attempting to change the context of the Act. And let me say 
this, that what is contained in this Act is necessary in our 
society. Having it under an Act as an individual entity that is 
controlled by the Minister of Energy, that’s what’s wrong. It 
should be under the jurisdiction of the surface rights Act which, 
of course at the moment, is under the jurisdiction of the 
Minister of Justice. 
 
It wouldn’t matter if the surface rights Act were under the 
jurisdiction of the Minister of Energy and Mines. It wouldn’t 
matter, I don’t think, to society, which minister controlled it. 
But it should all be controlled by one minister. And so having 
said that, the general principles involved in this Act are 
necessary for regulating the industry. The provisions of the 
amendments now changes a whole lot of the general 
philosophical way that this Act is going to be administered for 
the industry. 
 
And to tell you the truth, I’m rather surprised that the oil and 
gas industry hasn’t been beating on the door of the minister 
protesting the potential outcome of this particular amendment to 
their livelihood. Because in fact, it is going to affect the 
livelihood quite considerably of people that produce natural gas 
in particular. 
 
Now let me just quote from the explanatory notes, which I think 
are probably accurate. Now it says here that the existing 
provision is under section 55 that: 
 

No gas shall be used, consumed or otherwise disposed of 
in the province until a permit authorizing the use, 
consumption or disposition is granted by the minister. 

 
Now this at the time that it was brought in — and remembering 
it was probably important back then — but you have to 
remember, Mr. Speaker, that deregulation of the gas industry 
has taken place as far back as 1987, if I’ve got this correct. Yes 
I do. According to these notes here, 1987 deregulation allowed 
consumers to buy gas directly from the producer. And what this 
regulation change is doing basically, as I understand it, is 
removing the necessity, if the minister decides, of having to 
have a permit. But it’s only if the minister decides and it’s only 
those people that the minister decides to make an exemption 
for. In other words, the minister becomes the dictator. 
 
And I was very quickly writing down things as I went along 
here, and one of my marginal notes I wrote down is Hitler. 
Because of course Hitler was a dictator and the minister of 
course is setting himself up to become the dictator of the oil and 
gas industry, with the right to individually decide which oil and 
gas companies have the right to operate with or without permit. 
 
And with that much power of course, the minister then becomes 
in a position where he can say to a particular company, if you 
don’t play ball with me and do what I tell you, you won’t get 
your permit and you won’t be allowed to continue to work and 
operate. That is a form of blackmail that should not be in our 
democratic process. The rules and regulations should apply 
equally to everyone, and the minister should not have the right 
to pull permits unless there has been cases of wrongdoing. 
 
I also have in my marginal notes here as I went through this, 
Mr. Speaker, and when I went through this part of the 
deregulation allowed . . . The natural gas deregulations was 
implemented in 1987, it says here. Deregulation allowed 
consumers to buy gas directly from producers. Requiring 
natural gas permits facilitated the transactions from a regulated 
to a deregulated market-place for the buying and selling of 
natural gas. The government’s review of producer reserves and 
the issuance of permits ensure customers that gas under contract 
was available. Now 11 years after deregulation was 
implemented, consumers are confident that the market-place 
works. 
 
I hardly thought that, Mr. Speaker, when I was sitting in on the 
Crown Corporation meetings the other day and the discussion 
was about Channel Lake. Natural gas — it goes on to say — 
permits are no longer necessary, provided . . . providing for the 
subsequent . . . rather than the abolition of permits, allowed a 
reinstatement of permit’s obligations should circumstances 
warrant such action. 
 
In other words, this is saying just exactly what I’ve said a few 
minutes ago. It is saying that the minister now has the control 
over whether or not to issue permits or whether permits are 
required. And if he has that right for individual companies, then 
it is not fair to the other companies. And it could be used as a 
lever for the minister to become the dictator of the industry. 
 
(1130) 
 
It also makes me wonder what has changed after 11 years in 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

Saskatchewan that wasn’t changed before. And I’m starting to 
suspect that that word Channel Lake has gotten into the reason 
why we are here with this particular amendment. However, I’ll 
let the minister explain that when it’s his turn to talk about this 
as we go through this in the days to come. 
 
I want also to discuss, with regards to this particular 
amendment, the section 56 of the amendment is going to be 
changed. Both 55 and 56 have the potential now to be removed 
by the minister’s dictatorial power as I understand this. Now 
new provisions of section 56.1 is being added that will allow 
the minister to suspend and reinstate existing sections 55 and 
56. 
 
In other words, the minister can have it both ways. He can 
either put the law together or he can take it apart without ever 
further debating it in the legislature. Now we have a Bill that in 
effect can have provisions 56 and 55; 55 and 56 can be either 
taken out or put in at the whim of the minister without ever 
having to talk to anybody again. 
 
He doesn’t have to go to cabinet, he doesn’t have to discuss it 
with the Premier, he certainly doesn’t have to come back to the 
Assembly. And so he becomes a dictator with this process. And 
I don’t believe that that’s in the best interests of consumers. It 
certainly can’t be within the best interests of the industry. 
 
And I’m kind of wondering if all of the talk and rhetoric we’ve 
heard about wanting to build our province and to diversify it, 
isn’t lost in this kind of an approach. Are we not saying to the 
gas industry that we want to have dictatorial powers over you? 
And wouldn’t the company that is looking to come to reinvest 
their money in the gas fields or the oilfields be looking at these 
kinds of regulations before they come to our province if it 
happens to be outside capital? 
 
Let’s suppose that somebody that has money, like Channel 
Lake for example, a new company that is owned under another 
name now in Alberta . . . is a gas field down at Medicine Hat. 
Now suppose they found themselves in a profit position after 
selling natural gas to SaskPower and they found themselves 
with a profit and wanted to invest it across the border, north of 
Maple Creek, in the Sand Hills and expand some oilfields there 
. . . or some gas fields. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, would they not take a look at this kind of 
legislation and say, do we really want to come to Saskatchewan 
where the minister can either invoke or revoke section 55 or 56 
of an Act that tells us whether or not we have to have permits, 
that doesn’t spell out exactly what those permits cover, and of 
course doesn’t spell out what the cost of those things could be. 
 
And so I am saying that this is a contradiction of the basic, 
fundamental democratic approach to legislation that we all 
understand, which is that the rules should be written down 
specifically so that people can understand them and they should 
not be able to be changed in mid-stream or halfway through a 
contract. In other words, it makes it . . . The legislation actually 
really is a contract with society, a contract that the government 
writes up, and that contract with society is a contract under 
which the government sets out the rules, the playing rules, 
within a certain segment of our society, in this case with the gas 
fields. 

The rules though, can be changed with this piece of legislation 
being amended. And that is very onerous. And we’ve said very 
many times before that people don’t mind playing by rules but 
they want to know what the rules are before they start the game. 
 
But if the minister has the right to change the rules halfway 
through the game, then of course the potential for profitability 
by these companies could easily be wiped out — and would 
they take the chance then to come to the province and get 
involved in that kind of a structure? 
 
And I’m saying that this is the wrong way to go to accomplish 
what the minister has set out to do. Not only is it the wrong way 
to go to set out what he wants to do, because he’s going to 
frighten off the gas industry, but it is also the wrong place to be 
doing it because this Act should be under the umbrella of an 
umbrella Act, the same as Alberta has. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about section 56, Mr. Speaker. 
Therefore it says under 56 the present rules are that: 
 

For the purpose of developing, conserving and managing 
gas resources of Saskatchewan, the minister may, on 
application and after consideration of: 

 
(a) the extent of current gas reserves in Saskatchewan and 
the trends in discovery of new reserves; 
 
(b) the present and reasonably foreseeable future gas 
consumption and use requirements of Saskatchewan 
persons; 
 
(c) Saskatchewan gas volumes committed under previous 
authority removal permits; 
 
(d) the economic benefits to Saskatchewan; and 
 
(e) the public interests of Saskatchewan; 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what has changed that makes it no longer 
the public interest of Saskatchewan for these things to be set 
down in legislation? I see very little that has changed. 
 
The issue — here it says, “issue a gas removal permit to an 
applicant on any terms and conditions that he considers 
appropriate or amend a gas removal permit.” Now these kinds 
of regulations, Mr. Speaker, have been in place for a long time. 
But here we have the minister asking for the right to be able to 
put these things in or take them out at his discretion, or 
whenever he feels like it. 
 
So what it does is spell out a recipe for disaster. The recipe for 
disaster here is that the industry will know that if they 
contribute to the political contributions of the party in power, 
they’re most likely not going to have to worry about section 55 
and 56 because the minister will exempt them. 
 
And that is one of the fears in our system by the people in our 
general public, is that we don’t write legislation that allows 
governments to put themselves into that kind of powerful 
position. And it changes the rules from one group to the other, 
and it also provides for the potential opportunity for corruption 
to creep into our system. I guess that’s the word I have to use. 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

There is a potential for corruption in the system with this kind 
of an Act and this type of an amendment. 
 
But I think I should go on a little bit further with the quote of 
how this section works so that the people will understand that 
part of it. The removal of gas from Saskatchewan is prohibited 
unless a permit authorizes the removal is granted by the 
minister pursuant to this section. Again I say, Mr. Speaker, the 
potential of this amendment is to be able to take this section out. 
 
I ask the minister then: what would be the difference? What has 
changed, what has changed that provides us with no longer 
having the need for Saskatchewan to be protected for our own 
personal use? There’s nothing that has changed there. 
 
I mean we haven’t got any more . . . In fact we not only don’t 
have more gas fields; in fact I heard in this very legislature that 
— by one of the people speaking for the government — that we 
are falling behind in the drilling of gas wells as compared to the 
number that are being exhausted. 
 
In other words, our total reserves that are drilled and in place 
are in fact depleting. And so we have a more serious problem of 
concern with watching what’s going on than we had before. 
 
And so then I asked the minister and I asked society, Mr. 
Speaker, why would we want to be making these changes that 
provide the minister with the opportunity to selectively 
eliminate parts of the legislation at his whim when in fact 
nothing not only has changed for the better, but things have 
actually, according to the government in terms of supplies of 
natural gas, have depleted and have gotten worse. 
 
If that be the case and if their figures are right . . . And I heard a 
figure of something like we need to produce 400 more gas wells 
per year. They were telling us how they had to reduce the 
royalties, if you will recall. And the royalty structure had to be 
designed in order to encourage more production because we 
were falling behind by 400 wells per year that needed to be 
drilled. And we therefore had to give royalty benefits or tax 
concessions, whatever people understand and want to call it — 
in other words, a gift from the government that basically 
encourages business to come and drill. 
 
And we had to do that because we were falling behind. And 
now the contradiction of course is that the minister is saying, 
well, we no longer have these concerns because I want the right 
to take this out of legislation whenever I feel like it, but I’ll 
have the right to put it back just in case. 
 
Well I think the just in case is already here. Nothing has 
changed. In fact, we probably have more need to protect our 
interest than we had before. 
 
But anyway it goes on, and I think we should study this a little 
bit in depth: 
 

Notwithstanding subsection (1) and any permit, if in the 
opinion of the minister emergency conditions exist that 
create actual or potential shortages of gas for 
Saskatchewan persons, the minister may, for the purpose of 
alleviating the conditions, order the diversion of any gas 
authorized by permit to be removed for as long as the 

conditions persist. 
 
Now that was a protection, Mr. Speaker, that’s put into section 
56, the section that the minister wants the right to take out or 
put in at his discretion. What has changed? Not anything, 
because what this really says is that we need the right to protect 
our supply. 
 
Why did SaskPower get into Channel Lake to begin with? They 
got into it because they wanted to ensure the supply of natural 
gas for the production of power in Saskatchewan. And they 
weren’t that sure that they had a good enough handle, even 
through this kind of legislation, on being able to guarantee 
reserves that they might need potentially at some time. If you 
got a bad winter where it was 40 below for 90 days instead of 
10 above or something, as it was many days last winter, you can 
have the opposite in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think what the former president of SaskPower, Mr. 
Messer, was telling us in those Crown meetings was that they 
went into the Channel Lake deal because they wanted to 
guarantee those supplies of natural gas. They wanted to 
guarantee them so badly that they were willing to buy a 
company that had assets in Alberta and exchange those assets of 
course for other gas as necessary, but nevertheless have a 
guarantee of supply. 
 
The bottom line is there that it may not necessarily be the gas 
that came out of that well or this well or the one over there, but 
they would have legal right to a volume of gas from somewhere 
in that system. 
 
And that’s a natural way that the system works, and I believe 
his explanation. I understood it, and I think that he probably 
told it exactly right — that there was a need to guarantee that. 
So in this legislation we are saying the opposite when we say 
we want to take 56 and 55 out of this legislation and that the 
minister would have the right to do that. 
 
So in effect all I see us really doing here is throwing away the 
right for this legislation to protect Saskatchewan people and 
giving to the minister dictatorial control over the industry — 
dictatorial control over our gas industry that he should not have. 
No minister should have. I’m not saying that as an individual 
that this person will abuse that right, but what about the next 
guy? 
 
This minister sat down with his officials and said, you know, I 
could do a good job of deciding who should have to buy a 
permit and who shouldn’t, because I have a responsible attitude 
towards the people of Saskatchewan, and I will do it right, and 
because sometimes these permits aren’t necessary. It would 
make life easier when I’ll have the right to decide who’s good 
and who’s bad, or who isn’t, and we’ll go back and forth and 
we’ll make the whole thing work good. 
 
And it’s the old story, Mr. Speaker. If you have a dictator who 
has a heart and compassion for the people, you might actually 
have a better system of government. But what happens when 
that dictator dies and you get a new one who hates the people 
and wants everything for himself and does everything bad. 
 
And you see, this minister may be setting this legislation up 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

with the full heartfelt intention of doing a better job and doing it 
well for himself, but he won’t be the minister for ever — even 
if it’s as long as till the next election. He may go sooner or he 
may go later, but the fact of the matter is that some day he will 
change and somebody else is going to take this legislation and 
have control over it. And that person may not be as loving and 
caring and conciliatory to the process and wanting to make it 
work. He may abuse this process. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I see that there is a need to have rules. 
Everybody knows that we have to have regulations, we have to 
have rules. But having a minister under legislation in a 
democratic process with the power to bring legislation in and 
out by putting parts in and taking parts out at his whim, without 
having to go back to the legislative process, is dead wrong. And 
this piece of legislation is therefore dead wrong on principle 
even though we do need to have regulations. 
 
And so I’m not arguing so much the right and the wrong of 
these permits because in some cases they’re right, in some cases 
they’re wrong, and it is a very complicated process. But simply 
allowing the minister to be the one that decides the rules as it 
suits him, that’s not going to fly for very long before you’re 
going to find people within the industry itself saying we can no 
longer trust doing business in Saskatchewan; we are going to 
move our assets away. 
 
And again we will find the industry either having to be 
compensated with some kind of tax concession or tax break in 
order to encourage them to come back here and stay here, or 
else they simply won’t be here. And not only will we be 400 
wells per year short in the production of gas to be 
self-sufficient, we’ll probably then end up being 800 wells 
short. 
 
(1145) 
 
Now I think we need to study this just a little bit further because 
people should understand what all is contained in this Act. And 
under section (4) of 56 it says: 
 

Every person who applies for a gas removal permit 
pursuant to this section shall, in addition to providing any 
other information that the minister may require, submit to 
the minister contract and market information as described 
in section 18.2 and in regulations made pursuant to that 
section relating to the sale of the gas that is the subject of 
the removal permit. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again maybe we don’t need that particular 
kind of red tape for the industry. And maybe it makes sense that 
we shouldn’t have that. But should we be dealing with it in the 
process that the minister has the right to apply this when he 
feels like it or not apply it when he gets the other urge. 
 
I understand the members opposite don’t want to hear about 
how the gas and oil industry is going to fail. They probably 
don’t want to hear about how their water in Regina is being 
polluted as well. But we’re nevertheless going to take the 
opportunity to tell them. And even though they have thrown in 
the white towel, Mr. Speaker, I am going to continue to press on 
to point out to the minister the wrongness of his legislation. 
 

I will move on to . . . I will move on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
something that is more pointed so that the minister can more 
specifically understand exactly what we’re saying. I have here 
in my hand a letter from the minister which he supposedly 
wrote himself because he signed it. And it says in here that the 
oil and gas environmental fund was established under The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Act. And of course what we are talking 
about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the amendment to The Oil and 
Gas Conservation Act. 
 
And the regulations under this Act state, and I’ll quote the 
regulation that he was referring to in this letter: 
 

Where, in the opinion of the minister, all other remedies 
have been exhausted or an emergency exists, the minister 
may spend moneys from the fund for the following 
purposes: 
 
(a) conducting or completing the abandonment and surface 
restoration of a well, structure test hole, oil shale core hole 
or related facility that has been left incomplete by the 
insolvency or disappearance of the owner or (the) operator; 
 

Now this refers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to a particular piece of 
legislation . . . a particular amendment in the legislation that set 
up a fund some years back to take care of situations where oil 
and gas companies went bankrupt and things like that. And it 
was necessary. I say to the minister that we do need these 
regulations. That was a good regulation then; it is now. 
 
And it goes on to say under (b): 
 

containment, clean up and surface restoration of a problem 
that, in the opinion of the minister, is a major 
environmental problem that arises from oil or gas 
exploration, development, production or transportation 
operations within the scope of the Act. 

 
Now the Act was quoted by the minister and it’s accurate I’m 
sure. He copied it straight off the Act. But he then interprets the 
Act, and here is where we have the problem — with the 
minister being in charge of Acts and the minister being in 
charge of making the decisions of the interpretation of the Act. 
 
And that’s what this Act does. It was onerous before we 
brought in these amendments today. It was onerous then, and 
it’s even more onerous now. Because even then the minister had 
the dictatorial power to decide who should qualify for that fund 
and who should not. And I go on to read a part of the letter here. 
And it says here: “The situation at the Anton ranch clearly does 
not fall into either of the categories above.” And therefore the 
oil and gas environmental fund cannot be used in this case. 
 
Think about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, think about this. These 
people have been claiming deaths from cattle that drank affluent 
that came out of a gas well. And he says that under (b) 
“containment, clean up and surface restoration of a problem that 
in the opinion of the minister is a major environmental problem 
that arises from oil or gas exploration, development, production 
or transportation operations within the scope of the Act,” does 
not apply to those people. 
 
And that’s the kind of a minister that we’ve got — that wants to 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

have dictatorial power over the right to take two sections out of 
the Act and put them in or out at his whim . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . We’ll get to that in the next . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for the process of the record, the minister is 
challenging me to a debate which I readily accept. And because 
he has been so deadheaded wrong in so many cases in the last 
six months that I will take him on in a public debate in this 
forum or any other, any day and any minute without 
preparation, because he is so wrong, he is so confused, and he is 
so much of a dictator that it would be simply too easy to beat 
him in a debate to even probably bother with it. But I will take 
him on any time, and right here is as good a time as any. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister doesn’t know how to run his 
department. He determines to be a dictator. He does it by the 
legislation he brings in. He does it by the interpretation of the 
legislation he already has jurisdiction over. He does it in open 
letter which he is foolish enough to sign his name to. He is 
absolutely wrong. 
 
The man doesn’t understand legislation. He doesn’t understand 
the gas industry. He doesn’t understand the oil industry. He 
should not be the minister in charge of Energy and Mines 
because he quite simply doesn’t know what the heck he’s doing. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I shall prove the fact as we go 
through not only this Act but the next one. Because it becomes 
more important even in the next Act than this one. But it starts 
with this one and that’s why it’s first — because they thought 
this was the puppy of the crowd and it would be easy to shuffle 
through. But it’s not going to be so easy. 
 
I want to quote a little more from this letter: “If an issue is 
related to damage associated with an oil spill from a pipeline, 
the Public and Private Rights Board would continue to be 
available to provide mediation services.” Now that’s under this 
Act that we’re talking about. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is wrong with that again, as we 
go back to the Alberta experience. In the Alberta experience, all 
the way back in the days of Allan Blakeney’s government, in 
1977 the Government of Alberta, with 10 times as many gas 
wells and . . . and I know that that’s just a figure out of the air, 
but many times, to be more accurate, many times more 
activities in oil and gas, understood the need for an umbrella to 
take care of all of these issues. Back in those days they put all 
of these Acts under one umbrella, and this government is 20 
years behind the times — 20 years out of touch with the reality 
of what has to be done in order for people to get fair play. 
 
Because they say in this letter, signed by the minister himself, 
that the Public and Private Rights Board is something that we 
should look forward to having people to go to solve their 
problems. How dead wrong could anybody be. Does anybody 
know what the Public and Private Rights Board is? It is a group 
of people hired by the government to do what the government 
tells them. And what do they say when people’s land are being 
expropriated? They say, that’s fine. Here’s your rubber-stamp. 
You go ahead and take it. 
 
Does that board have any jurisdiction to set compensation? No. 
Do they? No. Do they ever help anybody but the government 
side? Never. It’s been the experience of the last 30 years that 

this board is nothing but a rubber-stamp of the government that 
does absolutely no good for anybody. And it is one of the 
reasons why you have so much anger and frustration out in the 
country as a result of things that are done in the areas of 
expropriation with regards in, of course this case, with the oil 
and gas industry. 
 
But I also know for a fact that this Public and Private Rights 
Board is applied to of course, the telephone companies and to 
the power companies and to the lines that they put in and the 
expropriation orders that they require, and this is suppose to be 
the board that people go to, to get fair play and understanding. 
They give nobody fair play. They don’t have hearings. They’re 
not required to have hearings. They don’t investigate the 
projects. They don’t look at the projects. They simply give a 
rubber-stamp to the government to do whatever they please. 
 
And there is no place in legislation that farmers and ranchers 
and property owners can go except in one case, and that is The 
Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act provides for 
the Surface Rights Arbitration Board. But their jurisdiction is 
very limited within the oil and gas field. And in Alberta they 
put all of these entities under this one umbrella. And now in 
Alberta the farmers, even if they’re not happy, have a place to 
go. 
 
They can go to, not a public review commission set up by 
government hacks picked from their political patronage roles, 
they go to a semi-judicial board that is set up that has the 
powers of a mini-judge. And that board sits as a legal entity 
with a right not only to listen to the problems, but the right to 
determine compensation; the right to determine how the process 
will be done; and they have the right to order that a gas or oil 
company, and in Alberta, or the power company or the 
telephone company, they have the right to order them to put 
their lines around an environmentally sensitive area. They have 
the right to do those kinds of things. 
 
And in Saskatchewan we have this hodgepodge of Acts and 
amendments with three different ministries all flying in 
different directions with nobody listening to the other person. It 
is absolutely frustrating to contact any one of them, and to get 
two of them to agree has finally happened in one case, and I 
congratulate the ministers for that, but it was not necessary and 
it is not necessary for that kind of process to exist. 
 
What we need, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is for this government to 
think about what they’re going to do as a legacy that people will 
remember them for. Do you people not want to have a legacy 
that will be remembered as having done something good for the 
people of Saskatchewan? You’re not going to be here for ever. 
And history will be written about you as it about every 
government. Would you not rather have history write that you 
left a legacy of having umbrellaed all of these problems and that 
for 50 years from now that system could still be working? 
 
I’m not saying that people will be happy about having their 
properties expropriated, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But they’re a lot 
happier when they have a board of a semi-judicial authority that 
they can go to, at very minimal cost, and explain their side of 
the story and then have that group listen to that story and come 
up with a decision that is a compromise of resolving the issues. 
 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

And that’s what we’re talking about here. A legacy of a 
government to provide for a compromise system that is already 
in existence in Alberta since 1977. And they don’t put in pieces 
of legislation like this where the minister tries to set himself up 
as Fidel Castro, where he has the right to decide who can or 
cannot, by his own whim, come into the province to go into the 
gas industry, in this case, because he has the right to determine 
who they can or cannot sell to. 
 
And that is what is so dead wrong about this piece of 
legislation, is that it gives too much power to one person. And it 
gives too much power that can be changed according to how he 
likes the colour of your hair when you happen to come through 
his door. And that of course can lead to corruption, and we 
don’t need any more corruption in this government; we’ve 
already seen enough of that. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I’m saying is that we need to 
contact the oil and gas industry. We need to contact the lawyers 
who write legislation and who study legislation and who have 
to work with it. We need to do that because the whole process 
of this Public and Private Rights Board, the whole process of 
this piece of legislated amendment, this is wrong. 
 
And the industry must not know about it or surely they would 
be out here protesting on the lawn, even though I have to know, 
and as you have to know, that these people don’t of course run 
their businesses that way. 
 
But the reality is that this legislation is not good and I think we 
need to take some time to contact these other people and I 
therefore would move that we adjourn debate for the present 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 25 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 25 — The 
Pipelines Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 
certainly not a pleasure to have to get up and talk about another 
Bill right away, but as I said earlier when discussing the 
amendments to the previous Act, these types of things do all 
sort of tie together. And what we are talking about here is an 
Act respecting the pipelines. 
 
We have of course a much larger Act and a much larger 
amendment before us here than we had in the last one and it’s 
going to take quite a long time to go through all of it. But we 
will because it is necessary to democratic process that we do 
that in order to try to get the government to see the light of day 
as to what they have been doing wrong. 
 
Again I want to make the point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that these 
regulations and rules in life are necessary. Fundamentally you 
do have to have rules. Fundamentally you do have to have 
regulations. That’s what government’s all about and that’s what 
society’s all about. We need to have clear-cut rules to the game 

before people start to play the game or they won’t play the 
game. 
 
(1200) 
 
And in Saskatchewan we have oil and natural gas reserves and, 
as a result of course, Alberta having oil and natural gas 
reserves, we do need to have a way of getting those products 
from one point to the other. And that leads us, of course, to 
pipelines. It has been of course, kind of an accepted practice 
that in Saskatchewan, if a well produces a small amount per 
day, trucks are used to haul the oil from place to place. But any 
time production goes up we then of course use pipelines 
because that is a cheaper vehicle in the long run for the 
transportation. 
 
So we are going to have pipelines because you’ve got an 
industry in Alberta that sells oil and natural gas to people in 
eastern Canada. They sell oil and natural gas to the Americans. 
In order to get from Alberta to Ontario you’ve got to go through 
Saskatchewan. They don’t like to fly oil and natural gas so it 
always goes by pipeline and we naturally then . . . they’re going 
to have pipelines. And if you’re naturally going to have 
pipelines, you’re naturally going to have to have some 
regulations. And you’re certainly going to have to have some 
rules, because of course we all know what happened at Cabri 
not so long ago where the natural gas pipeline blew up. And 
that’s a very serious situation. 
 
And so to have a government with a minister that’s in charge 
with an Act that gives him the opportunity to be able to regulate 
those conditions that lead to those type of explosions, that is 
necessary because of course the big companies that are . . . and 
small companies too, the companies that are involved with the 
production of oil or natural gas naturally are profit driven. And 
if they have a pipeline that is 30 years old and on the verge of 
blowing out, the profit motivation probably will be such that 
they would say, well we’ll let it go for another five years and 
keep on using it. And the government of course, then has to 
have some regulations that once the pipeline becomes so 
deteriorated or so badly worn, that it would have to be replaced 
or that the company would have to be regulated not to use it to 
cause another explosion and perhaps kill people. So rules and 
regulations we concede are necessary. 
 
Again though I make the point that in Alberta you have already 
got in 1977 the provisions that The Pipe Lines Act fall 
underneath the umbrella of The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act. And I have with me today copies from the 
Alberta government of all of those documentations that I’m 
going to provide for, in this case now, both the Minister of 
Energy and Mines and the Minister of Justice. Both of these 
ministers of course, need to be brought into this because of 
course they handle separate parts of the industry. 
 
We also need to bring in of course, the Minister of the 
Environment because of course half of the regulations that we 
presently have in Saskatchewan are under his jurisdiction, or a 
third rather, a third under the Minister of Justice and a third 
under the other minister. In Alberta all of this is in one package 
under one ministry, has been for years — easy to run, easy to 
regulate. 
 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

The Bill that we have before us is changing things in The Pipe 
Lines Act that are already duplications to what has been done 
under the surface rights Act in Saskatchewan. Getting back 
more specifically to this particular Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the reality is that we are duplicating in this province by many 
times because we’ve got many Acts that regulate the same 
industry under different ministers’ jurisdictions. And it is not 
only a confusing process, it is an expensive process. 
 
Again under The Pipe Lines Act, you have a board set up to 
have some kind of an appeal process, which of course is never 
ever used except in the government’s favour. That board of 
course, costs the government lots of money. They are nothing 
but political hacks who are drawn from the political 
contribution lists of government — and it doesn’t matter if it’s 
this government or the last government or if it’ll be the next 
government — that’s just the way it is. And it’s foolish because 
it’s not necessary. 
 
Because if we do it the way Alberta does it and put it all under 
one umbrella, you’ve got one board; it is a board that is drawn 
from the community on the basis of knowledge and ability — 
hopefully — and of course you have a chairman for that board. 
It’s one board that handles all of these jurisdictions. 
 
Public and private review commission is eliminated under that 
process and you eliminate that board and you eliminate all of 
the stigma that goes with direct expropriation without any 
accountability and without any recourse by the people to be 
able to talk to somebody about their problems. 
 
You eliminate the need for all of the environmental problems 
that have to be dealt with . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Again, 
the minister and his followers are hopeful that they can come up 
with this kind of umbrella. I can tell by the expressions on their 
faces that they are understanding the need for this umbrella 
process. And of course, if they’d lived in the oil patch for 
awhile, they’d have known this 20 years ago. 
 
It is time that somebody explained to these people what is 
wrong. The last government missed it altogether. Allan 
Blakeney missed it altogether. So we’ve been gone through 
three administrations in this province and we’ve missed it 
altogether because of course it only affects five constituencies 
in this entire province. 
 
And that’s why it’s been missed, because nobody cares when 
you’re sitting in Regina about what’s going on out at 
Kindersley or Gull Lake. The reality is though, that there are 
problems with expropriation. 
 
Last year you had the deal with the Condie power line and you 
had no process for those people to be able to go to a board to 
explain their problems. And if you had had the opportunity for 
those people to sit down with a board to explain their problems, 
it wouldn’t have changed the expropriation but it would have 
changed the outlook that they had towards expropriation. 
 
And I know that socialists don’t understand this because they 
don’t believe in private ownership of land. They think the state 
owns it all and that the state should own it all and that 
expropriation is natural because the government’s supposed to 
own it all anyhow. But the reality is that you’re living in North 

America where you’re the only socialist government around 
and everybody else believes in private ownership. 
 
And the reality is though that when you expropriate from 
private owners, you are taking something that they have bought 
and paid for. You’re taking it and it makes them mad. And if 
you want to have a process where you can have some 
compromise in defusing that anger, this is the way that you can 
do it. You provide them with an opportunity to go before a 
board that is inexpensive and that will listen to their problems 
and then come up with a compromise. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what we are making the point about. 
We’ve got some good regulations already in place that this 
minister of course wants to change for his own expediency in 
order to become a dictator. But the reality is that while we need 
rules and regulations, they should all be under one umbrella. 
 
I want to, for the benefit, Mr. Speaker, of the members opposite 
who seem to think that this is not an important issue, to read 
into the record a very short but important letter. This very short 
and important letter is from the Saskatchewan Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board. And it says: 
 

We have reviewed your letter to the Premier of January 29, 
1998 and in particular the comparison of the Louisiana 
basin with the Saskatchewan and Alberta sedimentary 
basins. I found your material informative and interesting. 
Certainly we do not wish to have a situation in 
Saskatchewan as it is described in the material where oil 
and drilling wastes are not handled in an environmentally 
acceptable manner. I encourage you to press for 
amendments to The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act that you feel are necessary and we look 
forward to working with you in the future. 
 

That’s from the chairman of the board, Richard Gibbons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the members opposite, if you think this is a 
joke or that it’s not important, remember, this is the man that 
you, your government, appointed to be the chairman of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now I know the hon. member is 
a veteran member and recognizes very well the existence of rule 
28, which requires debate to be taking place through the Chair 
and that he’ll want to conduct his debate in the spirit of rule 28. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I most certainly 
want you to know, and through you the members to know, the 
importance of bringing together all of these Bills and all of 
these amendments under one umbrella so that we can simplify 
the process of our government and our governing in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Number two, to eliminate many of the costs involved and to 
save the taxpayers many hundreds of thousands of dollars. 
 
Number three, to provide a vehicle so that people can have a 
reasonable understanding of expropriation and a reasonable 
comfort level, once their properties have been expropriated, of 
knowing that they have been allowed the best opportunity 
possible to be able to take care of environmental considerations 
on their farms and ranches, as well as to take care of other 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

considerations like farming techniques and all of those other 
things that go along with farming and ranching. 
 
Those are the points, Mr. Speaker, that I want to make through 
you to the government so that they will fully understand that 
while we agree that rules are necessary, we also know that there 
is a better way to do it. 
 
And while we agree that rules are necessary, some of the 
amendments that are being brought forward by this minister are 
dead wrong. And they are not only not going to help the oil and 
gas industry, they’re not going to help the people of 
Saskatchewan either because they create a dictatorship in the 
province that is not acceptable either to the public or to the 
people involved in investing their money in the industries. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what we have to prove to this government is 
the good points that are necessary in putting in an umbrella. 
Now I’ve offered for evidence to them, the letter that I’ve read 
and I’m quite prepared to table that so that they can peruse it, 
and certainly they’re welcome to have copies and they’re 
welcome to read it and all of those kind of things. 
 
And it’s necessary that they do that because this is the chairman 
of the Surface Rights Board who has an understanding now not 
only of the comparisons of the oil and gas basin in 
Saskatchewan and Alberta with the ones in Louisiana, but he 
also has an understanding of course of the legislation in Alberta 
because he himself has a legal background and has done some 
studying on the matter. 
 
We also have, Mr. Speaker, offered to the government the 
package of all of the Acts and regulations that Alberta has. And 
we are certainly willing to share with all of the members, either 
by tabling or by direct contact, all of this material. From Alberta 
I have received the surface rights in Alberta, revised 1998, from 
Alberta’s Agriculture, Food and Rural Development. We have 
pamphlets that describe how the industry works, and the fact 
that it is all under one umbrella over there. 
 
And that’s important for these government members to 
understand that, that the process not only has been tried and 
proven, it is nice and close by. And I actually have the 
documentation with me that they are willing or are able to 
share, and I’m willing to share with them. 
 
We have the surface rights and the land agents’ guide for 
landowners and occupants concerning land agents and surface 
rights agents. That too is under one umbrella, just like I’m 
asking for this amendment and this pipeline Act to be included. 
And we’re going to get to that more specifically in this actual 
pile here. We have the well-site selection and surface owners. 
And of course in Alberta you have an opportunity as a property 
owner, because they believe in private ownership over there . . . 
they’re not like the socialists in Saskatchewan that believe the 
government owns everything. 
 
Over in Alberta they respect the individual ownership. They 
respect the fact that farmers and ranchers have paid for their 
land and their properties and have some rights on them. And 
they understand the need therefore in order to protect the 
environment, which of course in most cases affects not so much 
the people that live on the land but the people who live in the 

cities. They understand the need to respect the environmental 
conditions and they know that if you don’t take care of the 
water supply on one farm, it might be the person in the city that 
drinks the polluted water because water runs downstream. And 
they understand that in Alberta, but in Saskatchewan we 
haven’t quite figured that out yet. 
 
So what we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, is that all of these Acts and 
all of these amendments need to be put under this umbrella. I 
have, to prove my point to the government, Mr. Speaker, a copy 
of the Surface Rights Act from Alberta. This is a consolidated 
form that was sent to me by the minister in charge over there, 
and it was consolidated in February 11 of 1997, as recent as last 
year. We also have the Surface Rights Act general regulations 
from the province of Alberta — all under one Act; everything is 
put under one Act. 
 
From Alberta of course, we have the letter saying to myself that 
they were more than happy to be able to supply this information 
and that if we want to contact them to be able to try to set up a 
piece of legislation in Saskatchewan, they’re more than happy 
to work with us. 
 
And I offer that to the ministers through you, Mr. Speaker, that 
the government has indicated through a letter to myself, signed, 
that they are very happy to work in cooperation with the 
minister from Saskatchewan if they want some guidance in 
producing an umbrella legislation that would bring all of these 
pieces of legislation and all of these amendments together under 
that umbrella. They’re quite happy to help us out, and I think 
we ought to take them up on that. 
 
We have of course, the seismic operations in farmers and 
farmers’ rights, and of course in Saskatchewan there are some 
rights in that area. In Alberta, people of course have more rights 
and they’re more respected. 
 
(1215) 
 
Now more specifically, Mr. Speaker, the pipelines in Alberta. 
And this is of course an amendment to The Pipelines Act that 
we’re talking about and want to have put under this umbrella. 
But in Alberta, the pipelines in Alberta, what farmers need to 
know and what it says in there of course, is that it is all under 
the umbrella of one piece of legislation; it’s all under the 
umbrella of the Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation 
Act over there. 
 
And the Surface Rights Arbitration Board over there can handle 
every pipeline, not just flowlines. And that is important, Mr. 
Speaker, for this province to understand, is that pipelines are 
not so much different than a flowline. They do have a 
difference. They do need to be defined as differently, but they 
all can be handled under one piece of legislation, and they can 
all be handled by one ministry. And it would be very simple and 
very inexpensive compared to the process that we are 
employing here in Saskatchewan now. 
 
Now the document, of course, is not a lengthy one. I think they 
suggest probably 15 to 20 minutes to go through each one. And 
I’m more than happy to, as I said before, share them with 
government members. Because of course it makes the point, 
and then of course the last document that they have provided 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

me with was the negotiating of surface rights because in Alberta 
they do want people to negotiate. They want people to settle 
their own problems. They encourage that. 
 
The whole process of a board of arbitration, and the whole 
process of this umbrella that they have there, where all of these 
pieces of legislation that we’re talking about would in Alberta 
be under, the whole process of that is a backup system in case 
private negotiations don’t work out. But they encourage that 
and they have totally opposite philosophy in Alberta than we 
have. 
 
In Saskatchewan the philosophy is that the board of arbitration 
is the board of last resort. In other words, you try to have 
everybody negotiate, and you provide an atmosphere though so 
that people feel that they have to take less than they’re worth or 
less than they should have, that they don’t protect their 
environment, they don’t protect their water, they don’t protect 
their food supplies as much as they should, because it’s a board 
of last resort. 
 
In Alberta the philosophy is exactly the opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
And that is that it is a board of first resort. It is considered that 
as soon as there is a dispute you make the whole process and 
the vehicle of the process easy and simple for people to access 
very quickly, very easily, before tempers flare, before people 
become angry. And as I’ve said before, they include the power 
corporations, they include the telephone companies. 
 
All of those areas of expropriation that have to do with the 
public good are all handled under this same umbrella. And it is 
all handled with that option of people having a very inexpensive 
right to go to an arbitration board that hears both sides of the 
story and then works out a compromise position. It doesn’t 
work every time. They still have a provision for courts to be 
accessed in those very serious areas of dispute. 
 
But the reality, Mr. Speaker, is that most people who have a 
piece of their property expropriated, first of all don’t like to be 
expropriated because that means you get paid less; that’s the 
fundamental thing that happens. They also of course have 
concerns about environment and the pollution to their land and 
to their grass or to their crops or whatever kind of land it 
happens to be. They have all of those kinds of concerns. 
 
And when people expropriate, that means they take by force. 
People become angry when something they’ve bought and paid 
for and slaved to buy is taken by force. In this process you 
mellow out that forcefulness. You still take the land by right of 
entry orders, which of course in itself has a more receptive 
sound, but what happens is that the land is not taken until you 
have the right to sit down and have your day in court at an 
inexpensive cost that you can afford. 
 
In the Saskatchewan process, if you’re not a millionaire you 
can’t fight back. In Alberta, except of course with the Surface 
Rights Act, which doesn’t regulate pipelines, but for flowlines 
and oil wells and gas wells, that is in place here. So we have the 
vehicle, we have the legislation; we just haven’t included 
everything the way Alberta has. 
 
They’ve used that surface rights legislation as their umbrella. 
And that’s what this government should be looking at. And 

that’s what I’m saying to them through you, Mr. Speaker, is that 
they should be doing. 
 
We could eliminate so much of the cost and so much of the 
hassle. Plus it provides people who are being expropriated by 
people like SaskPower with that opportunity to have a chance to 
vent their views and their anger, and to diffuse it, and to not feel 
so badly once this program has gone ahead, because they’ve 
had their chance to say their piece. And they’ve also had a 
chance to make their arguments for changes that might or 
should be made. And in Alberta that board does have the power, 
and they do. And I can give you some classic examples of 
things over in Alberta that have been changed. 
 
An entire gas industry project had to be moved because the 
fumes from the burn-off of that gas plant were poisoning the 
feed supplies of a dairy operation and they detected that those 
things were going into the milk. Now this government doesn’t 
seem to think that that’s important. But in Alberta they 
recognize the fact that pollution is something that has to be 
taken care of in order to provide for a safe environment for us to 
be able to continue to live in. 
 
And I guess maybe the reality is that they’ve probably read the 
lengthy report that was done in the Wall Street Journal some 
years back. It’s called the “Louisiana Report,” which compares 
all of the problems that have happened in the southern United 
States, in the oil basin, with what’s going on in Alberta. 
They’ve done extensive studies — hundreds of thousands of 
dollars worth of studies — to prove to everyone that we need to 
take care of our environment. 
 
And the result has been that they’re light years ahead of us now. 
And wouldn’t you be surprised to know that the oil industry still 
prefers to work in Alberta to Saskatchewan, even though they 
are more rigidly regulated in terms of environment than we do 
in Saskatchewan. That has to do of course with other rules and 
other regulations. 
 
But the fact of the matter is that in Alberta the industries are 
regulated under an umbrella, and they all do it with a relative 
state of peace and harmony that we do not have in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The negotiation of course for right of ways under pipelines in 
Alberta, it says here, and I want to quote this for the record: 
 

After January 1, 1977 pipelines and utility companies also 
gained rights and rights of entry under the Surface Rights 
Act. 
 

So there you have it. The pipeline Act is under the jurisdiction 
of the Surface Rights Act. 
 
And I wanted to read that into the record, Mr. Speaker, so that 
the minister cannot dispute with me the fact that in Alberta this 
umbrella does exist, it is real, it has worked since 1977. No 
question about it, they’ve amended it, they’ve worked on 
problems over the years, and it would be necessary for us to do 
that as well. But I suggest to the minister that the amendments 
to this pipeline Act are not the way to go in the whole scheme 
of things. 
 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

Now that we have talked about the generalities of the umbrella, 
because I know this government is not in a position to be able to 
put an umbrella together immediately and probably doesn’t 
have the desire to do it anyway. The reality is though that this 
particular piece of legislation in itself is wrong, in itself is not 
good. And I want to now more specifically pick it apart, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I wrote to the Premier some time back to outline this, and I 
think it’s important that I quote from this letter in order for 
people to understand that this is not a new initiative to try to get 
changes made to the thinking of this government. This has been 
going on for a long time. So it’s not like they don’t know about 
what’s going on in the world; it’s just they’re too stubborn to 
act on it. 
 
I have written to the Premier, and in this letter I say that your 
government is planning to take control of flowlines and the 
lines from the oil and natural gas wells that take product to 
central collection centres out of the jurisdiction of the Surface 
Rights Act and place them under The Pipelines Act which at 
present supersedes the Surface Rights Act, 1969. 
 
As the statements we have seen are contradictory, this part of 
the changes may be taken out of the amendments that are being 
prepared for The Pipelines Act. At this point it is the 
government’s intention to introduce these changes in the spring 
sitting of the legislature. We were aware of that at that time 
because of course the minister had seen fit to share with us the 
draft copy of his legislation. And subsequently we did find out 
from legal opinion that in fact the flowlines do still remain 
under the jurisdiction of the Surface Rights Act in some form. 
And we’re glad of that. 
 
But the contradiction that lies in here is not necessary, because 
once again we could be doing this whole package under that 
umbrella I talked about and then we wouldn’t have to have 
these contradictions. It would be just one straightforward thing 
where the Surface Rights Act would take care of both flowlines 
and pipelines. So you wouldn’t have to agree about which Act 
has jurisdiction, and you wouldn’t have to have the red tape of 
dealing with two or three different ministers to try and figure 
out who you’re really talking to and who you should be talking 
to. 
 
I continue here with why will changes to The Pipelines Act 
negatively affect our environment and why should The 
Pipelines Act not only not be amended but be abolished and 
placed under the jurisdiction of The Surface Rights Acquisition 
and Compensation Act. The answer at that time that I offered 
for the Premier, Mr. Speaker, was as follows. 
 
Under The Pipelines Act, oil and natural gas companies and 
pipelines have access to expropriatory rights . . . entry rights 
onto private and Crown land. With this right they have no 
responsibility to answer for their actions as do those controlled 
by the Surface Rights Act. 
 
Yes, The Pipelines Act has a board which hears disputes. 
However, the board has no mandate to order changes that can 
protect the environment. The Surface Rights Board of 
Arbitration is a quasi-judicial board set up under authority of 
the Justice minister. It has, under legislation, the authority to 

grant right of entry onto any land. Expropriation powers is what 
it really means. However with the right, the oil and natural gas 
companies, there is the built-in responsibility to answer for their 
actions, as any property owner can ask the board to disallow 
entry unless certain precautions are taken to protect the soil and 
the water from pollution. 
 
Now it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this was a reasonable 
approach for us to take with the Premier. And it went on to say 
pollution from drinking water, and under today’s conditions, 
this should be changed . . . Oh no, I’ve got that wrong. I just 
skipped to the wrong page there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But anyway I wanted to talk a little bit about the Premier and 
his response quite actually, to say the least, I was disappointed 
because the Premier chose of course not to directly respond. I 
guess when you get into areas of pollution and areas of the oil 
and gas industry, the Premier being a lawyer by trade probably 
realized that he should let his ministers respond. Unfortunately 
they know even less than the Premier knows about the issue, 
which was evident by some of the responses that I got. 
 
Here, I just want to quote a little more from this letter and I’ve 
got the right page here now. And it says: 
 

If pollution does occur, property owners can ask for a 
hearing where both sides present their evidence and 
arguments. There is little cost for either side and the board 
has the power to order restitution and clean-up. 
 
This approach is much more protective of the environment. 
The principles needed are in place through the Surface 
Rights Act and only need to be updated, enforced, and 
expanded to include all pipelines as well as the oil and gas 
wells and flowlines. 

 
While there are many examples of abuse of The Pipelines Act, I 
would like to give you one classic example. In 1981 a pipeline 
company came to William Kruczko of Maple Creek and said 
that they were going to put in a pipeline on his land. At the 
same time a natural gas drilling company was negotiating with 
Bill to place flowlines on his land. They offered Bill $800 per 
acre for the use of his land. 
 
Now back to the pipeline company. They offered Bill $100 per 
acre. Naturally Bill said no, and asked for the same as he had 
been offered for the flowlines which are controlled by the 
Surface Rights Act. The pipeline company went to Regina and 
returned with an expropriation order and proceeded to place the 
pipeline onto Bill’s land using 15 acres of his land. This was 
done under The Pipelines Act. Bill received no compensation 
and had no recourse to anyone. 
 
Yesterday, which of course was when we wrote this letter, 
January 27, 1998, Bill received a cheque for $1,500 plus 
interest for the use of his land. Now there was no court case, no 
lawyers fighting back and forth. This just showed up out of the 
clear, blue sky. 
 
And I want to explain that, Mr. Speaker, because here under 
The Pipelines Act this man’s land was expropriated at $100 per 
acre way back in the 1980s, and they never had to go to a board; 
they never had to account for anything. There was no process in 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

place. 
 
And yet if it was a flowline he would’ve had the right to go to 
the Surface Rights Arbitration Board and get within 30, 60, 90 
days there or some . . . I just don’t know the exact dates. But 
under the legislation there are time limits. And the board hears 
the case and it’s resolved then, instead of going for 15 years and 
then somebody digging up the file. 
 
And I wasn’t really surprised to hear about Channel Lake when 
I . . . because I’ve been talking to folks that have been handled 
like that by SaskPower over the years. I mean if they can’t even 
remember that they’ve expropriated a man’s land in 
Saskatchewan, how the dickens did they plan on running a 
natural gas company like Channel Lake. I mean the fact is they 
couldn’t, and they didn’t, and that’s true. But the whole place is 
in a shambles. 
 
And one of the reasons for that is, of course, in this small area 
of concern for SaskPower is because you’ve got two many 
ministers involved in too many pies and they don’t know what 
they’re doing. And you’ve got to get these Acts under one 
umbrella so that they can all be handled with some jurisdiction 
that has authority to be able to accomplish a settlement. 
 
Now I further explained to the Premier at that time, that had this 
pipeline been under the watchdog eye of the Surface Rights 
Act, a right of entry would have had to be granted. The line 
would’ve had to be installed, but an opportunity for Bill to 
present his concerns about the price and the environmental 
impact would’ve taken place at a hearing set up by the Surface 
Rights Board. Seventeen years have gone by, and these same 
heavy-handed tactics continue under an Act that clearly violates 
our human rights laws as guaranteed under our constitution. 
 
(1220) 
 
And the Premier of course didn’t even bother to answer as to 
whether or not he shared that same opinion. But anyway, I 
guess he’s the Premier so he gets to do what he likes. 
 
Now I went on to explain that now this is not to say that the 
Surface Rights Act is perfect. It is not. However, the principles 
are better. One of the major problems with the Surface Rights 
Act is that the method of selection of the board and others is the 
fact that the legislation is outdated. 
 
For example, under the . . . (inaudible) . . . Acts of 1969, 
damages caused by the oil pollutants spills onto the land or into 
drinking water; under today’s conditions, this should be one 
million, not one thousand. 
 
But anyway, that was just an attempt, Mr. Speaker, to point out 
to the premier at that time that if this umbrella were in place it 
would solve not only the pipeline problems but it would also 
solve these environmental problems to some extent. 
 
We’re not going to stand here and try to say that we have the 
answers to cure all pollution problems. But we certainly have 
better vehicles than the ones that we’ve been using. And we 
certainly have a need in this province to use better vehicles . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And if the members opposite want 
some examples of that, I’m quite prepared to stand here the rest 

of the day and give them some because the fact of the matter is 
that we have water wells that are being contaminated and 
polluted in the province of Saskatchewan that not only affect 
the aquifer that I drink my water out of, but it also affects the 
aquifer that you folks drink your water out of. 
 
And if anybody thinks that water underground doesn’t move, 
you’d better check with the experts to find out that they have 
done tests and there are ways of testing to find out that water 
does move underground. 
 
Now you’ll say, why or how did you know that or how did they 
do that? Well I’ll tell you how. The fact of the matter is that 
these days technology has advanced to the point where you can 
put perfectly safe radioactive isotopes into a water well and 
follow those radioactive isotopes by taking water out of another 
part of the ground some place else, miles away. You can test to 
see if that particular isotope is in fact the one that you had put 
down the original well. If it is, you know that that water moved 
from one well to the other. If it doesn’t come up there, of course 
it hasn’t. 
 
But in the oil patch of course they’re using that technology to 
follow the injection of salt water for the purpose of water flood, 
as they call it, which washes of course oil from the structure 
underneath by the use of rotating the water back and forth 
through the ground. 
 
This is happening thousands of feet underground and this 
technology is very refined. These radioactive isotopes that are 
used to determine where those flows are running and how far 
they run and how fast they run. And they can measure in fact 
where that water pumped down this well is going to. And then 
they can drill an interceptory well to intercept that flow and 
catch more of their oil at another location. That’s a very highly 
technical type of procedure that has been developed over the 
years. 
 
The people in Calgary have a laboratory where they do the 
testing work. And this technology of course has been used 
extensively in Saskatchewan, and it can be used in water as 
well, is my point. And it has been. And they have proven that 
water underground of course runs exactly the same as rivers 
above ground. There’s absolutely no difference in the way that 
it happens. Water runs downhill. No matter where you are it 
eventually goes some place else. 
 
And the water in the aquifer in my well gets polluted, you can 
bet your bottom dollar that 75 miles away, within three or four 
days the people down there are going to get that same pollution 
because they’re going to drink the water. 
 
Now do you think that doesn’t matter that there’s a little 
pollution in some guy’s well because he’s out there in the Sand 
Hills north of Maple Creek? Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
and to the members opposite through you, that it matters, it 
matters a lot. Because when a well in the Great Sand Hills at 
Fox Valley gets polluted as a result of a pipeline that breaks, 
and the effluent runs into that well and pollutes it, and 
underground is your pipeline, it breaks, it follows the pipeline 
down and finds an easy aquifer. 
 
Just like anything else it follows the course of least resistance 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

and it goes down and into the aquifer into somebody’s well. 
That well is polluted. 
 
We have living examples, proof of this, proof positive — wells 
that are documented to have been destroyed in this manner. And 
that well is drilled in some places 300 feet deep out in that 
country because that’s where you get the only good water 
supply. And we have a case of where a pipeline, exactly the 
type of thing that’s being mentioned in this legislation in this 
Act that’s before us today, Mr. Speaker, and that well is 
polluted as a result of that effluent going down into that aquifer. 
 
Do you think that that doesn’t matter to other people? Let me 
explain further. This just happens to be called the Belly River 
and the Judith River. They’re the two underground rivers that 
are in that area. And surface water of course is not very good 
because most of it has already been polluted. So they have to go 
to these underground lakes that run for miles and miles around 
and they’re underneath all of south-west Saskatchewan. 
 
And when you put a 300-foot level, you put pollution in it over 
there. Do you think that doesn’t matter to the people who are 75 
miles away at Gull Lake? It does, because even though their 
well is 600 feet deep because the land cover of course is deeper 
there, it’s the same body of water. And when they pollute the 
water well over at Fox Valley, within a matter of a few weeks 
time the people in Gull Lake are going to drink that pollution. 
 
And the same thing happens here in Regina. If a pipeline breaks 
over there . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member will be aware 
that the item before the House is second reading debate on The 
Pipelines Act. And this of course requires that the debate would 
be two things. One, it would deal with the principles of the 
legislation that’d be proposed before the House. And secondly, 
it would deal . . . the debate would deal with the Act itself. 
 
And the Chair has been listening for quite some time to the hon. 
member’s remarks and having a bit of difficulty finding the 
connection between the hon. member’s remarks and the Act 
which is before the House. And I’m sure that the hon. member 
will want to conduct his debate in such a way that he’ll be 
debating the principles of the Bill and of the Bill that is before 
the House, The Pipelines Act, at this moment. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you for that direction, Mr. Speaker. 
And most certainly I was just getting around to tying that all 
together. Because of course what this particular amendment to 
the legislation and the Act respecting pipelines, what that really 
is doing is providing an easier opportunity for pipelines to 
pollute our water. And that was the connection. 
 
Because this Act is actually going to provide for the problems 
that we are going to experience and have experienced and allow 
them to get worse instead of better. And that was my 
connection. And I’m going to stick with that theme of now 
explaining to government members and particularly through 
you to the minister, why other people in our community think 
that this Pipelines Act is dead wrong and that the minister’s new 
amendments are not helpful, and that they in fact are probably 
dead wrong as well. And of course in the broader scheme of 
things that the whole group of amendments and the whole 

group of legislation should be put under that umbrella that I 
referred to earlier. 
 
I want to quote from a letter directly concerning this particular 
amendment I received of course after asking for a legal opinion 
from a prominent lawyer in the south-west. I asked for a legal 
opinion from him with regards to this draft legislation when we 
had gotten it. And I have an answer from him and I think it’s 
important that I read some of this into the record because he 
refers directly to this piece of legislation, these amendments. 
 
Now I’ll skip the first paragraph because it relates to another 
matter, but certainly if government members want to have a 
copy of this letter, they’re more than welcome. Again, we could 
either table it or they could come and get it and read it. The first 
paragraph is nothing that the . . . are being kept from seeing. It’s 
just not relevant and I want it to be relevant to the Act for the 
moment, Mr. Speaker, having noted your concern. 
 
I have received from Murray Walter, barrister and solicitor from 
Swift Current, Saskatchewan, the following letter: 
 

I have reviewed the draft Pipeline Act of 1998 and I note 
that compensation for flowlines will still be determined by 
the Surface Rights Arbitration Board and that is positive. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that sentence in itself will tell the 
members that this man knows what he is talking about. He’s 
fair and he’s willing to give credit to the government as well as 
point out to them their shortcomings. Because he says, the first 
thing they do, this is positive. Okay? But he says: 
 

However it would also be preferable if compensation for 
other pipe line right of ways were also dealt with by the 
Surface Rights Arbitration Board. The Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board procedure is a simple procedure that is 
relatively inexpensive. It therefore gives landowners a real 
alternative other than just accepting whatever 
compensation is offered by the pipeline company. 

 
You see, what he is doing, Mr. Speaker, is pointing out to 
myself and to the government members that The Pipelines Act 
is not doing the job that it is set out to do, and it’s not doing, 
through these amendments, what the minister had of course 
proposed that it was supposed to be doing. And that an easier 
way to do it would be to fix it the way that he has suggested by 
using the other Acts and going to this umbrella process that 
Alberta has used. 
 
It also goes on the say that: 
 

The Expropriation Procedure Act provides for mediation 
pursuant to the Public and Private Rights Board and that is 
commendable. However, if settlement cannot be arrived at 
through mediation, the only remedy is for the landowner to 
commence court action in the Court of Queen’s Bench. In 
most cases, the costs of proceeding with court action are 
much too high and therefore this remedy is inaccessible. 
The net result is that The Expropriation Procedure Act 
benefits the party that has the deepest pockets, which in 
this case are the pipeline companies. Most landowners are 
therefore obligated to accept the offers from the pipeline 
company. 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, we don’t really have any choices 
and we don’t have any justice and we don’t have any fairness. 
We simply have a system being promoted by this amendment, a 
system promoted and encouraged and continued that is unfair 
and only allows for the people with the most money to benefit. 
 
That’s not what society and justice are supposed to be about. 
They’re supposed to be about fair play for all parties concerned. 
And what we are saying to the minister again is that not only do 
I think this, but a prominent lawyer gave his legal opinion. And 
for the past few weeks we’ve been hearing that the government 
takes very seriously legal opinions. They’ve offered many of 
them in the Channel Lake dispute. They say we should take that 
seriously. Legal opinions are important and they are something 
that we need to accept as a part of the way of making our 
decisions. And if it’s important in that process, it’s important in 
this process. 
 
I also will take the liberty of pointing out to the members 
opposite that this is not only one of the most highly respected 
lawyers in our community, but he’s also a person who once ran 
as a candidate for the NDP. And he has been struggling for 
years to get these people to listen to some kind of rational 
approach to putting all of these Acts and pieces of legislation 
under an umbrella and getting them all together just as we have 
been suggesting. 
 
You see I didn’t come up with all of these ideas myself. I’ve 
been using the ideas of a lot of other people. Because a lot of 
other people who live in these areas have dealt with these 
problems for years. 
 
And of course the attorneys who work in their law offices are 
on the front line because as soon as a property owner has a 
problem with a pipeline company or one of the effects of these 
amendments, they go to the lawyers and they ask for help. And 
the lawyer throws up his hands and says, I’m sorry; if you’d 
have lived in Alberta, I could have helped you. But in 
Saskatchewan you’re going to have to go to court and you’re 
going to have to spend a half a million dollars, and I’m going to 
charge you a hundred thousand because it’s going to take me a 
half a year of my life to put together a case just so we’d have a 
chance of winning. And you wouldn’t want to go if you’re 
going to lose. 
 
And how many farmers do we know, Mr. Speaker, that have a 
hundred thousand dollars to be able to start out paying the 
lawyer and another $400,000 to add to it as they go down the 
process of our legal system; then spend a half a million dollars 
and by the time you’re done they end up in the Supreme Court 
because no oil or gas company will ever give in to a property 
owner. They’ll spend those deep pocket dollars that the lawyer 
refers to in this letter, and they will spend it to make sure that 
they never establish the precedent that they have to pay 
anything. 
 
And that is why people like Murray Walter have been trying for 
years to get these kind of amendments not only not put in, 
because they’re wrong, but to get the whole Act put under an 
umbrella, under one jurisdiction in the government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite don’t want to take me 
seriously then surely they would take seriously one of the 

people from the legal community who has run as a candidate for 
their party. Surely that must cut some water with them or hold a 
little weight. 
 
Now we also of course had the minister make a reply. And he 
of course decided that he didn’t like what Murray Walter had to 
say, so in our correspondence we had of course gone back to 
Mr. Walter and asked him if he would update his legal opinion. 
And just for the record, I will read in a very brief letter that he 
wrote back with regard to the responses, because we were 
getting from the minister, basically, the word no. No we’re not 
going to make the changes you suggest. No we’re not going to 
have an umbrella. No we’re not going to fix things so that it’s 
fair. So anyway it goes on here: 
 

Thank you for forwarding the copy of the letter from Mr. 
(and it was the Minister of Energy and Mines that he 
referred to) dated April 3. 
 
I note that (the Minister of Energy and Mines I’m injecting 
again for the name) points out that it is necessary that there 
be a process of expropriation. While I agree that 
expropriation is necessary, expropriation is already 
provided for flowlines pursuant to The Surface Rights 
Acquisition and Compensation Act. Therefore, if pipelines 
came under the provisions of The Surface Rights Act the 
expropriation could be done similarly as the flowlines. 
 

(1245) 
 

The minister couldn’t get that through his head. He had to have 
a lawyer tell him twice. And he still hasn’t figured it out and 
I’m absolutely just about ready to give up with this man 
because, Mr. Speaker, if you tell a man three times something 
that is a fact; and you get that fortified by lawyers who are 
working in the field, working with these problems on a daily 
basis, working with this legislation on a daily basis; and he tells 
the minister three times and he still doesn’t understand . . . 
 
Can you imagine the frustration that a farmer has who suddenly 
has a pipeline company coming through his land and 
expropriates his farm and takes it away and he has got no place 
to go for recourse? Can you image the frustration? Can you 
imagine now why sometimes farmers sit at the edge of their 
fields with a rifle in their hands. Or why they jump off their 
tractor with a 12-inch crescent wrench in their hands when they 
see an oil company truck. It’s because they haven’t got any 
recourse to any rational or justice type system. And The 
Pipelines Act is one of the greatest offenders we’ve got. 
 
The Expropriation Act that SaskPower and the telephones work 
under is another terrible example. And all of those things could 
be taken care of in a much better way with this umbrella where 
this Act and these amendments should be placed. Everything 
should be put under that one umbrella because it has been 
proven to work better in Alberta. Not perfect, but better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer also to another letter with regards 
to this particular amendment. The minister I guess decided to 
take some great lengths to try to recover some of his credibility 
and so he wrote several pages. And I could thank him for the 
effort that he and his staff went to in writing these letters. I 
appreciate that effort. The fact that they’re wrong is another 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

thing. But I do appreciate that they were willing to go the work 
to try to prove their point so that we in fact could enter into a 
rational debate with them to show them where their conclusions 
and their analogies were wrong. 
 
And the fact that the minister and most of his staff have never 
seen an oil well became quite evident. The fact that they know 
very little about the gas industry also is very evident. And the 
fact that they absolutely have no comprehension of what 
farmers and ranchers go through when pipelines are put into 
their properties, of course that also becomes very apparent. 
 
I want to get into this debate, some of the minister’s points of 
view. Because we have to of course refute those in order to 
make our point that the minister has more homework to do. 
 
Now in this letter we were writing to the minister, and we were 
writing in reply to his letter on April 3, which I also have a copy 
of . . . And I will try to match paragraph with paragraph of his 
comments in his letter with the things that we came up with 
after negotiating with not only Murray Walter, the attorney that 
I mentioned earlier, but also with the people from the Cypress 
Surface Rights Association, the people from the North-west 
Surface Rights Association. There’s an association up at 
Lloydminster where Terry Crush of course is heavily involved. 
We also of course have Myles Bass in the south-east and the 
surface rights association down there. 
 
And I want, Mr. Speaker, to let the minister know through you, 
that we had extensive correspondence with all of these 
individuals. And that correspondence, I’m happy to say, 
fundamentally and basically supported the premiss that Murray 
Walter had been putting forward all along. 
 
And so we have, generally speaking, agreement and 
consolidated agreement from all parts of the province where the 
oil and gas industry presently work. And of course that doesn’t 
mean that this particular Act wouldn’t affect other people. 
Because of course there are some pipelines, like the 
TransCanada Pipeline, that go through other areas of the 
province, like Regina itself. And just to the south here there is a 
major pipeline that has gone through past the city. So this is of 
concern to other people in the area as well, to some extent. 
 
But certainly the most important people in corresponding with 
those that we wanted to draw information from and opinions 
from, were those areas where we thought they had the best 
expertise and the most length of opinion based on the reality of 
their lives and the things that they have had to live through. 
 
Now in the letter of April 3, the minister of course starts out in 
paragraph no. 1. He says here: 
 

Your letter of March 9 (and of course there was a very long 
series of letters here) 1998 suggest surface rights issues 
pertaining to pipelines should be under the jurisdiction of 
The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act. 

 
My reply to the minister at that time was as follows: 
 

I am writing in reply to your April 3 letter. 
 
The paragraph number one your assumption is correct. I do 

believe that the Pipe Line Act should be placed under the 
jurisdiction of The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act. 

 
We answered his question directly with a positive response 
because that’s what we believed, based on the information that 
we’ve got, as a consensus from all of the people who are 
involved in the surface rights areas from all across this 
province. And of course some of these people have taken the 
time to go to Alberta to study also the umbrella legislation that 
they have over there, and the whole process that is in place. 
 
His no. 2 paragraph reads as follows: 
 

As I have noted in my previous correspondence to you on 
the proposed Pipelines Act 1998 (and that, Mr. Speaker, is 
the one that we’re talking about today) surface rights issues 
related to flowlines will continue to be addressed under 
The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act 
with the new pipeline (regulations). 

 
Now after considerable negotiation and discussion with other 
people we responded with the paragraph that said: 

 
In paragraph number two you state that flowlines (a form 
of pipe line) issues will continue to be addressed under The 
Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act. I am 
glad to hear this. My point is that this is a better way of 
protecting the environment; therefore, all pipelines should 
be treated this way. 

 
Because the minister had completely missed the point. He 
thought we wanted flowlines under The Pipelines Act. What we 
really want is The Pipelines Act to be included under the 
surface rights Act with flowlines, so that our environment can 
be protected. And it does become a serious environmental 
problem that we are dealing with here. 
 
His next paragraph, paragraph 3: 
 

At the present time, The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act does not apply to surface rights required 
for pipelines. It only applies to surface rights required for 
drilling and producing oil and gas wells and the 
construction, operation and maintenance of flowlines, 
service lines, and power lines. Your proposal could not be 
accomplished without amendments to The Surface Rights 
Acquisition and Compensation Act. 

 
Our response to that, Mr. Speaker, was this: 
 

In paragraph three you state that the Surface Rights 
Acquisition and Compensation Act does not apply to the 
surface rights acquired for pipelines. Again I agree with 
you. My point is that they should be, and yes The Surface 
Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act would need to 
be amended to allow this to happen. Would this be any 
harder than the amendments to any other Act? 

 
This in fact would be a very simple task for a government 
in power. Just as easy as amending the Pipe Line Act with 
the added bonus for the tax payers of eliminating the 
advisory boards now being paid to do nothing under the 



May 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

Pipe Line Act. Ask yourself why our power lines and 
service lines are included. Answer because they are a part 
of the whole package needed to produce oil and natural 
gas. Follow the analogy through. Are not pipelines a part 
of the whole package of the oil and gas industry. 

 
Now in paragraph 4 the minister goes on to say that the surface 
rights required for major pipelines in public utilities have been 
and should remain subject to expropriation: 
 

. . . because of the significance of these facilities to the 
public good. There must be a simple, fair and efficient way 
to facilitate the construction and operation of major works 
like pipelines. That is accomplished through The 
Expropriation Procedure Act. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we replied to that in the following paragraph. 
 

In paragraph four you state that the expropriation powers 
are required because of the significance of these facilities 
(pipelines) to the public good. You further imply that the 
only way to accomplish this is through The Expropriation 
Procedure Act. Not true. The Surface Rights Acquisition 
and Compensation Act can and does do exactly the same 
thing with their right of entry order — if unchallenged, 
proceeds in seven days. If there is a challenge, the board 
has the power to set up a hearing within a very narrow time 
line frame and with the advantage that the hate and the 
hard feelings created by evoking The Expropriation 
Procedure Act can be greatly diminished when both sides 
have their day in court so to speak. With the further 
advantage that the unforeseen problems often missed in the 
heated anger of expropriation can be reasonably dealt with 
and avoided. 

 
Please remember that for the most part we are talking about 
expropriation powers for private profit, motivated by the 
profit-motivated company. In most cases the public good has 
little to do with it. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact of life. The 
public good rarely comes into this debate and rarely is a factor. 
 
It is mostly the private profits of private companies that are 
driving all of these entities. And of course they use the 
argument that we can overlook our environment and pollute our 
water wells because it’s for the public good to get some gas and 
oil down a pipeline. Well that just doesn’t wash any more. 
 
Now number five he says: 
 

As you are aware, the vast majority of surface rights for 
pipelines are acquired through negotiations and mutual 
agreement between pipeline companies and landowners. 
Expropriation is a very rare event. Nevertheless, a process 
like this must be available to ensure that surface rights can 
be acquired in the event of dispute. 

 
Our answer here is that: 
 

In paragraph five you state that the surface rights acquired 
for pipelines are different from those required in those 
areas covered by The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act. Again you are mixing the facts. 
 

Yes, leases are the legal term used for well sites. Flowlines 
are normally farmed over just like other pipelines. 
Pipelines can and should be handled under The Surface 
Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act because your 
statement that no ongoing access to the surface is required 
is wrong. Pipelines require constant attention and constant 
repair. Ask the people at Cabri or Fox Valley where the 
Trans Canada Pipeline has blown out. The Surface Rights 
Acquisition and Compensation Act provides a built in 
mechanism for compensation (for) crop loss, etc. where 
problems arise. Pipelines could and should be handled the 
same way. 

 
I didn’t require leave to speak on this particular one, just for the 
member’s information. I did require on the previous Act which 
of course didn’t take so long, because it shouldn’t even be here. 
 
But I do want to read on from the minister’s letter here: 
 

The surface rights required for a pipeline are generally 
quite different from those required for wells and other 
surface facilities which occupy the surface of the land for 
some period of time. While a surface lease is required for a 
well giving exclusive access to the well operator, a less 
intrusive interest is required for a pipeline. Easements 
rather than surface leases are appropriate for pipelines. 
 

I’m almost tempted to say, so who cares. But I better not; I’ll 
keep on reading. 
 

Once the pipeline is constructed, the landowner regains use 
of the land and no ongoing access to the surface is 
required. 
 

Well of course what the minister is doing here is basically 
explaining how the laws of acquirement work in our province. 
And while they have absolutely no relevance whatsoever to the 
real discussion of why pipelines should be under an umbrella 
Act and why amendments to this Act are being made, 
nevertheless he made the statement and we did deal with it in 
our comments that I’ve just read in our statement with regards 
to his paragraph no. 5. 
 
In the minister’s paragraph no. 6, The Surface Rights 
Acquisition and Compensation Act: 
 

All oil and gas operations are subject to the same 
environmental review and safeguards regardless of how the 
surface rights are acquired. 
 
Again, most surface rights for wells, flowlines, and 
pipelines are acquired under mutual agreement between the 
operator and the landowner. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is the comment made by the minister. 
And we, of course, answered to his comment as follows: 
 

In paragraph six you state that all oil and gas operations are 
subject to the same environmental review and safeguards 
regardless of how the surface rights are acquired. This is a 
half-truth. The same government regulations are in place; 
however, what you miss is the input and understanding that 
people who live on the land, in many cases for four 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1998 

generations, can contribute to what would be best for the 
environment. Most surface rights are settled through 
mutual agreements and in these cases serious problems are 
not foreseen. However, again in those cases where the land 
owners see a problem, under The Surface Rights 
Acquisition And Compensation Act, these problems can be 
explained to a real live board of arbitration before a right 
of entry is granted (nice term of expropriation order). 
While right of entries are usually granted, they often 
include (and rightly so) recommendations to be followed. 
The Pipe Line Act does not provide these protections as 
pointed out by Murray Walter’s opinion. 
 

The copy of which, of course, I have placed into the record 
previously, and for those who want to refer back to that I 
suggest that they get a copy of Hansard because I think my 
voice won’t last long enough to quote it again. But if the 
members insist, I certainly could do that. 
 
Now the minister goes on in paragraph 6: 
 

For the reason noted I believe it is appropriate that the 
surface rights for pipelines, other than flowlines, continue 
to be dealt with under the current Pipe Line Act or the 
proposed Pipelines Act . . . 
 

Well . . . (inaudible) . . . answered that. In fairness to your own 
colleagues, I ask that you reconsider your thinking. And I 
answered it this way, Mr. Speaker, and I say it again, that I 
know that you support and supported the Guyana power plant 
purchase. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The hour of adjournment having been 
reached, debate shall now cease on Bill No. 25. 
 
And with a wish for an enjoyable weekend. If you’re with your 
families and your constituencies, and particularly for those hon. 
members who are mothers, with a wish for a Happy Mother’s 
Day, this House now stands adjourned until Monday afternoon 
at 1:30. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1034 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1043 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1043 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1045 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................1045 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Eastview By-election Candidate 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
 Good Economic News for Saskatchewan 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
 Health Cuts 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1036 
 Mother’s Day Tribute 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1036 
 Tribute to Tommy Douglas 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1036 
 Yorkton Aboriginal Family Violence Initiative Funding Announcement 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1036 
 Tribute to Mothers and Loved Ones 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1036 
 Chili For Children’s Fifth Annual Fund-raiser 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1037 
 Luther College Choir’s Cuban Performance 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1037 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Closure of Carrot River Hospital 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1037 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1037 
 Regional Hospital Services 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1038 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1038 
 Highways Budget 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1039 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1039 
 Health Care Funding 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1040 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1040 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1040 



 

 Swift Current Health District Lay-offs 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1041 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1041 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1042 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 210  The Saskatchewan Health Ombudsman Act 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1042 
 Bill No. 54 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1042 
 Bill No. 55 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1042 
 Bill No. 56 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1042 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1042 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1043 
 Bill No. 45 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1044 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1045 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 26 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1046 
 Bill No. 25 — The Pipelines Act, 1998 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1052 
 
 


