





























































Hansard: March 09, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 
 March 9, 1998 

 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that I have 
received a communication from the private secretary to His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour will 
open the third session of the twenty-third legislature at 2:30 
p.m. today, the 9th day of March, 1998. 
 

2:32 p.m. 
 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 
the session with the following speech as tabled: 
 
Mr. Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is my pleasure today to welcome you to the third session of 
the Twenty-Third Legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would also like to extend welcome to all those citizens of 
Saskatchewan who are observing these proceedings, both here 
and in their homes. 
 
Winds of Change 
 
We meet here to chart a course for Saskatchewan's journey into 
a new year, and beyond into a new century, and a new 
millennium. 
 
Our future is bright and full of promise. 
 
But it is your responsibility as leaders to keep in mind the 
hazards we do not yet see and the capricious winds of change, 
blowing across a world where very little is certain. 
 
Many other people and many other governments are trying to 
manage the uncertainties of today’s world by defining people 
and their worth solely in terms of their capacities as individual 
consumers. 
 
They argue that the rich should get richer, the poor should get 
poorer, and that their own local economies ought to be run from 
boardrooms in New York City, on Bay Street, in Zurich. 
 
Our citizens and my government do not agree. 
 
My government believes that while the Saskatchewan economy 
must look outward, it should be run from Saskatchewan, for the 
benefit of Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
That’s the Saskatchewan way. 
 
The Saskatchewan way is to work together as a community -- a 
community that has always taken "quiet pride" in our own 
blessings and our own energies, in the qualities that have 
always marked this province and its people. 
 
The Saskatchewan way is to make change work for us, to use 
the new international structures of commerce and trade to sell 
not only our goods and services but our democratic ideals. 
 
The Saskatchewan way is to build on the values of our people – 

community, equality, co-operation, compassion, and common 
sense. 
 
Those are the values of my government. 
 
To fulfil them, my government intends to help build 
Saskatchewan -- by investing in people. 
 
The Saskatchewan Success Story 
 
My government believes in the strength of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
We see and celebrate those contributions in every walk of life. 
 
I spoke earlier of quiet pride. I am sure every Member of this 
Assembly shares my quiet pride in the performance of our 
athletes at the Winter Olympics in Japan. 
 
Our Olympic medal winners -- Catriona LeMay Doan, Sandra 
Schmirler, Jan Betker, Joan McCusker, Marcia Gudereit, Atina 
Ford, Shannon Miller, Clare Drake, Fiona Smith and Hayley 
Wickenheiser -- proved that the people of this province are 
world-class winners. Recognizing these achievements couldn’t 
be a better way to mark International Women’s Day in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We recognized achievement as well late last year, with the most 
recent inductions into the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
We honoured Boyd Anderson and Ross Pinder for their 
visionary risk-taking within our entrepreneurial private sector. 
 
We honoured two teachers, Margaret Belcher and Dr. Stirling 
McDowell, who are fine examples of the people who make up 
the best public service in Canada. 
 
And we honoured Carol Gay Bell and Victor Cicansky, 
celebrating the great tradition of excellence in our arts 
community, those writers, film-makers, painters, sculptors, and 
musicians who contribute so much to Canadian culture. 
 
My government had the pleasure of hosting an evening at 
Government House in honour of the University of Regina 
Chamber Singers last month – back from winning a remarkable 
first prize at an international choral festival in Wales. When you 
can sing as well as the Welsh, you’ve really arrived as a 
province. The Chamber Singers are here with us today. 
 
In a word, we celebrate Saskatchewan people. The fountain of 
our pride and the source of our strength as we look to the 
future. 
 
That is why investing in people is my government’s priority. 
 
The Challenges to Come 
 
The past is no guarantee of the future; Shakespeare advises us, 
“What’s past is prologue.” 
 
We can take pride in our accomplishments, but we dare not rest 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1998 

upon them. There is much left for us to do together, and a long 
way for us to go. 
 
Therefore, in this year to come my government will continue to 
invest in people, as they build their local communities and the 
larger community of Saskatchewan. 
 
INVESTING IN FAMILIES 
 
My government will invest in people, by investing in families. 
 
As communities are the bedrock of Saskatchewan, our families 
are the bedrock of communities. 
 
My government will make it a priority this year to address 
issues that affect Saskatchewan families -- and, especially, 
Saskatchewan children. 
 
The centerpiece of my government’s agenda in this session will 
therefore be the introduction of a new strategy that provides 
hope and a better future for thousands of low-income families 
and their children. 
 
• My Government will introduce amendments to The 

Saskatchewan Assistance Act to implement the Building 
Independence – Investing in Families strategy. Through 
this fundamental reform of welfare, we will be creating: 
 

 - a new Child Benefit, starting July 1998, that will have 
both provincial and national components. This Child 
Benefit will be the first new national social program in 
30 years; 

 
 - a new Saskatchewan Employment Supplement; 
 
 - new supplementary Family Health Benefits; 
 
 - and training programs that create bridges to  

employment for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Our province will continue to act on our compassion for those 
who are genuinely in need. That is what friends and neighbours 
do in a community. We will also continue to work to ensure 
that no one takes undue advantage of friends and neighbours 
who have sincerely offered a helping hand. 
 
Investing in families is also about investing in safe 
communities for them to live in. 
 
• My government will continue its work to implement a 

province-wide 9-1-1 system; 
 
• My government will implement a number of other 

important initiatives this session at the provincial level, in 
partnership with police officers and prosecutors, to help 
protect citizens from serious and violent offenders; 

 
• And my government will continue to speak for the people 

of Saskatchewan at the national level, pressing for reform 
of the young offenders’ system. 

 
Our watchword, in this area as in all others, is balance. 

The people of Saskatchewan expect us to maintain our common 
sense and our compassion, especially for children and youth 
who impetuously and impulsively do thoughtless things, but are 
willing to learn from their mistakes. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan also expect us to be — and my 
government will be — tough and determined about protecting 
society from repeat and violent offenders. 
 
• Among other measures related to this priority, my 

government will introduce The Correctional Services 
Amendment Act, 1998, The Enforcement of Judgments 
Conventions Act, The Automobile Insurance Amendment 
Act, 1998, amendments to The Wildlife Act, 1997, and The 
Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 1998 – all aimed 
at updating or strengthening elements of provincial law 
enforcement and corrections. 

 
INVESTING IN JOBS 
 
My government will invest in people, by investing in jobs. 
 
My government will continue to work on job creation with the 
same determination it applied to balancing the budget. 
 
So far, together, we have done well. 
 
Here is a simple fact: 
 
More people are working in Saskatchewan today than at any 
time in our history. 
 
A simple fact that speaks volumes for the determination of the 
people of Saskatchewan. They have overcome a dark period of 
our history, and inaugurated one of its brightest, in a few short 
years. 
 
My government will fulfil its role, as one of the partners to this 
success, in building on this success. 
 
The key to future job creation is innovation. My government 
will continue to support research and development. 
 
• A tribute to our success was the awarding of Canada’s only 

synchrotron research facility to the University of 
Saskatchewan. We will continue to work with the federal 
government to secure national funding for this project; 

 
• Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation will invest $15 

million in a new research and development park in 
Regina. 

 
World-class research and development leads to competitive, 
world-class products. Saskatchewan no longer competes on cost 
alone. We compete on quality. Innovative, high-quality 
products are the future for our whole economy, including our 
foundation industry – agriculture: 
 
• The On-Farm Quality Assurance Programs Act and 

amendments to The Animal Products Act will be 
introduced to help give Saskatchewan producers an 
important competitive advantage in export markets. 



March 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

Security permits innovation. 
 
• My government has contributed to reducing the cost of 

crop insurance for Saskatchewan producers by one-third 
over the past two years, in order to ensure as many 
producers as possible have protection against the risks of 
nature. 

 
Resource industries are leading the way in job creation all 
across rural Saskatchewan. Many of our communities are facing 
the kinds of problems they like to face these days: getting new 
housing built fast enough; working to find enough skilled 
workers to fill new jobs. 
 
• My government recently announced improvements to the 

province’s resources royalties – underlining its 
commitment to the future of our rural communities, by 
supporting jobs in resource industries. 

 
My government believes that economic strength in all local 
communities underpins our strength as a province. 
 
• There will be renewed support for Community Economic 

Development in the inner cities, and enhancements in the 
Regional Economic Development Authorities; 

 
• My government will continue working with the province’s 

co-operatives at the community level, continuing its 
efforts to support and strengthen this time-honoured 
system of creating wealth in the province -- and keeping it 
here. 

 
My government, acting on the advice of the Provincial Action 
Committee on the Economy, will market Saskatchewan more 
aggressively here at home and beyond our borders. 
 
Finally, my government will continue to implement the key 
recommendations of an extensive review of Crown 
corporations -- working to ensure these publicly-owned assets 
remain productive engines of our economy, and benefit all 
Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
INVESTING IN EDUCATION & TRAINING 
 
My government will invest in people, by investing in public 
education and training. 
 
It is not enough to have a growing economy. We must have 
growth that includes all our citizens, or our success is hollow. 
 
My government will make further efforts to extend our 
economic and social successes to our young people. 
 
The poet Emerson wrote that it is characteristic of young people 
to meet challenges by saying, “I can.” 
 
We believe our young people can and will. It is up to us to 
provide the opportunity. 
 
My government wants our province’s young people to have a 
future, and we want that future to be right here at home. 
 

The same is true of Saskatchewan’s aboriginal communities, 
with their limitless potential to be a powerful economic force, 
contributing to the well-being of Saskatchewan and the world. 
 
Saskatchewan has a unique opportunity to act, because 1998 is 
the year the federal government transfers responsibility for 
workforce training to the provincial government. 
 
My government will therefore build upon the success of the 
Saskatchewan Training Strategy, with its many fruitful 
partnerships among government, training institutions, trade 
unions, and employers. 
 
The key elements of our approach include: 
 
• Strengthening our universities and post-secondary 

institutions through partnerships with the community and 
industry; 

 
• Expanding JobStart/Future Skills; 
 
• Building on and renewing The Multi-Party Training 

Plan and The Aboriginal Employment Development 
Program; and 

 
• Reinforcing and broadening apprenticeships – a 

cornerstone of our plan. 
 
While we take these steps to deal with our training in the near 
term, we must also look further ahead, to prepare Saskatchewan 
young people for the challenges and opportunities of the 21st 
Century. 
 
The key is in our public education system. My government 
intends to continue its commitment to high-quality public 
education, and to life-long learning. 
 
• My government is working to support learning in the 

classroom. This year Saskatchewan announced a Math 
Action Plan to help educators improve math skills. 
Pre-kindergartens and special education are also priorities 
this year. 

 
• My government will introduce amendments to The 

Education Act, 1995, and will continue to provide the 
necessary leadership and support for locally determined 
school division restructuring of the kind we saw last year. 

 
INVESTING IN HEALTH CARE 
 
My government will invest in people, by investing in health 
care. 
 
With most of the hard work of reform behind us, my 
government will work with its many partners to move health 
care forward. 
 
The bedrock of Saskatchewan’s health care system is the people 
who work in it. My government is committed to a close, 
productive, and co-operative partnership with health care 
providers – in the common cause of building a stable, secure 
health care system, there when people need it. 



4 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1998 

• My Government has forged a renewed partnership with 
our province’s doctors this year. In the words of Dr. Rob 
Weiler, president of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, these agreements “. . . will help to achieve a 
more stable and secure working environment for 
physicians and also improve patient access to quality 
care.” 

 
• These agreements are only the beginning. My 

government is committed to a similarly close partnership 
with nurses, advanced clinical nurses, nurse-practitioners, 
homecare aides, x-ray technicians, lab technicians -- and all 
of the other world-class health care workers in our system. 

 
We have some of Canada’s best health care workers. They 
deserve to work in some of Canada’s best health care facilities. 
Much progress is being made. A few examples: 
 
• Across rural Saskatchewan, community-led health boards 

are tailoring regional facilities to meet local needs. For 
example, an eating disorders centre is operating in the old 
Milden Hospital. Residents of Wilkie and Macklin can 
now receive diabetes counseling in their health centres. 
And people in the community of Vanguard can see a public 
health nurse closer to home; 

 
• In Regina, the consolidation of facilities into two strong, 

effective 21st century base hospitals will serve the people 
of southern Saskatchewan for decades. The new Regina 
General will feature a new MRI unit, and state-of-the-art 
neurology and cardiology departments. 

 
New technology is part of health care’s future. 
 
• Our health system will move into the information age with 

the continuing development of The Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network; 

 
• My government will introduce The Health Information 

Protection Act to safeguard all personal health 
information. 

 
INVESTING IN TRANSPORTATION 
 
My government will invest in people, by investing in 
transportation. 
 
Our goal is a system that is ready for the increasing demands of 
the new century, particularly the need to get our goods to the 
global market. 
 
But our transportation system faces many difficulties today. 
 
Rail line abandonment and changes to the grain-handling 
system have meant increased loads on our highways. 
 
Federal de-regulation has led to decisions by the railways that 
pose a fundamental threat to our existing grain handling system 
and to the economic well-being of Saskatchewan grain 
producers – and offload traffic onto our rural road network. 
 
My government will vigorously assist the federal government to 

rediscover its responsibilities towards Canada’s national 
transportation system. 
 
In the meantime, our province will tackle this challenge OUR 
way. 
 
Faced with similar challenges in the past, the people of 
Saskatchewan built the Wheat Pool, the co-ops, the credit 
unions, and publicly-owned utilities. 
 
Faced with this challenge, the people of Saskatchewan are 
coming together to once again take charge of their own 
economic future. 
 
It starts with the roads. 
 
• My government will continue with its commitment to 

invest $2.5-billion over 10 years to maintain our roadways. 
 
It includes the rest of our transportation system. 
 
• My government will work in close partnership with the rest 

of our community – including farmers, local governments 
and councils, rural businesses and other concerned parties 
-- to wisely invest the funds we have, and to explore our 
alternatives – like short-line railways, alternative routes 
and corridors, and other strategies. 

 
OTHER INITIATIVES 
 
Finally, my government will invest in people in many other 
ways. 
 
• At a special session last December, this Assembly passed a 

unanimous motion speaking to the Unity of our country. 
My government will continue to speak clearly and 
energetically for the people of Saskatchewan, who 
expressed their views so clearly during public consultations 
on this issue last fall. The people of Saskatchewan want 
our nation preserved. My government will do everything in 
its power in that cause; 

 
• As further progress towards democratic reform, my 

government will introduce legislation to make the Chief 
Electoral Officer an officer of the Legislature, appointed 
through a non-partisan process; 

 
• In keeping with its commitment to the idea of community, 

and in response to the requests of representatives of 
Saskatchewan municipalities, my government will initiate a 
process to renew municipal legislation; 

 
• Workers expect and deserve safety in the workplace. My 

government will strengthen The Workers’ Compensation 
Act, 1979. 

 
• We must never lose sight of our responsibility to invest in 

the environment we will leave to our children. Last month 
my government announced the addition of 2.4 million 
acres to the representative areas network. Building on this 
initiative, my government will introduce The Parks 



March 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

Amendment Act, which will add land area to the provincial 
parks system. 

 
FINANCIAL COMMON SENSE 
 
All of these efforts, all of these initiatives, all of these plans, 
programs and proposals are possible because we will maintain 
our hard-won financial freedom. 
 
My government is determined that this province will never 
again return to the days of carefree fiscal irresponsibility. My 
government will not borrow from our children’s future. 
 
Together we are still managing a bitter inheritance from the 
recent past. The third largest expenditure of our provincial 
budget is still wasted on interest payments on inherited debt. 
 
But things are getting better. Thanks to the hard work and 
sacrifices of the Saskatchewan people, we are on the path of 
declining debt. 
 
Earlier this year, my government had the pleasant duty of 
consulting the people of Saskatchewan on how they would like 
the province to reinvest our modest projected future surpluses. 
My government has listened carefully, and will respond in the 
upcoming provincial budget. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Our province is sound and strong as we look forward into the 
year to come. 
 
And as we look out a little further, we can see on the horizon 
our province's 100th anniversary. 
 
That is a grand old age for any person, but it is young for a 
province. 
 
We are a young and growing province, vigorous and poised to 
take our place as a leader of our country and an example to the 
world that there is strength in community. 
 
In these next weeks and months, I expect all the Members of 
this House will engage in spirited debate on the matters I have 
mentioned here today and such others as may arise in the course 
of the year. 
 
As we chart our course into Saskatchewan’s future, we must 
recognize that our landscapes change, and we cannot steer by 
even our most sturdy landmarks. 
 
We must instead steer by the bright shining stars that have 
always been our truest guide: Our unvarying common values of 
compassion, common sense and community. 
 
Godspeed to you all. 
 
God bless Saskatchewan, God bless Canada, and God save the 
Queen. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:59 p.m. 
 

Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
a Bill respecting the administration of oaths of office be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I wish to introduce to you the 
pages for this session and I'll ask that the pages will stand as I 
introduce them: Barton Draper, Pamela Kovacs, Angela 
Smalley, Jason Trost and Cara Renkas. Hon. members, your 
pages for the session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 
prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Elphinstone, my seat 
mate, by leave of the Assembly: 
 
 That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Tuesday, March 10, 1998. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
hon. member from Saskatoon Idylwyld by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 
 That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 

printed after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, that 
he do appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but 
such as he shall appoint do presume to print the same. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the 
adjournment motion I have a few announcements to make. 
 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 1998 

First of all, I would like to thank all the guests and members of 
the public for joining us here today. There has also been a 
long-standing tradition to invite students from Saskatchewan 
schools to attend the opening of the Legislature representative 
of our future generations. Our students today are from Herbert 
School, Kipling High School and Dr. Martin LeBoldus High 
School in Regina. All of these students have participated in an 
essay-writing contest sponsored by the Saskatchewan Branch of 
the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. The subject area 
for the contest was Canada and the Commonwealth Today. 
 
In honour of Commonwealth Day which is celebrated today 
around the world, there will be a presentation to the contest 
winners later this afternoon at approximately 3:45 p.m. in the 
rotunda. I ask all the students to stand and be recognized. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I want also to welcome the University of 
Regina Chamber Singers. I will be calling on them to sing for 
us immediately following the adjournment. 
 
Following the choir selections I would like to invite everyone to 
join their Honours, the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, 
the Leader of the Third Party, and members of the Legislative 
Assembly at the Speaker's tea which will take place 
immediately following the ceremony in this Chamber. The tea 
will be in two locations — room 218 in the west wing and room 
255 in the east wing. 
 
It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I would now like to welcome the University 
of Regina Chamber Singers. The choir, under the direction of 
Kathryn Laurin, recently won first place honours at the 
International Musical Eisteddfod in Wales in the Chamber 
Choir category. The choir will sing two selections for us this 
afternoon — ."O Come Let Us Worship" and "Retorna." Ladies 
and gentlemen, the University of Regina Chamber Singers. 
 
(The choir sang.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On behalf of all of us here today, I would just 
simply like to express our pride that we share in your 
achievement and our appreciation of your performance this 
afternoon. And I'll ask everyone to show you appreciation one 
more time. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:05 p.m. 
 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE .......................................................................................................................................................1 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Pro Forma Bill 
  Romanow .......................................................................................................................................................................................5 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Pages 
  Speaker ..........................................................................................................................................................................................5 
TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
  Speaker ..........................................................................................................................................................................................5 
MOTIONS 
 Speech from the Throne 
  Romanow .......................................................................................................................................................................................5 
 Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
  Romanow .......................................................................................................................................................................................5 
 
 


