





























































Hansard: April 23, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 731 
 April 23, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
present petitions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review of the health crisis as we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Lampman, 
Bienfait, Glen Ewen, Carnduff areas of the province. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, to present 
petitions and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review of the health crisis as we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. The Chair is 
having some difficulty being able to hear the hon. member 
present his petition, and I will ask for the cooperation of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The petitions I’m 
presenting today are presented and have been signed by 
individuals from the Alameda, Oxbow, Bienfait, Carnduff, 
Storthoaks, and Frobisher areas of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Redvers, Kenosee, 
Manor, and Bellegarde. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the future of the Plains 
hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities, Lampman, Stoughton area. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, the 
prayer reading: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signatures on this petition come from the city of 
Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities such as Coronach, Scout Lake, Gravelbourg, 
and Assiniboia. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions this 
afternoon from people of Saskatchewan who are dismayed and 
perplexed by what the NDP (New Democratic Party) are doing 
to our health care system, and particularly the Plains hospital. 
Your petitioners this afternoon come from Weyburn, 
McTaggart, and Mazenod. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have today 
petitions from people in the south-west. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These all come from the town and community of Maple Creek, 
and I’m happy to present them today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
have The Workers’ Compensation Board Act amended to 
reinstate pensions for the disenfranchised 
widows/widowers of Saskatchewan; and petitioning the 
Assembly regarding the funding of the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; acting to save the Plains Health 
Centre; and putting a moratorium on the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
pleased to have with us today a very familiar and bright group 
of students from the Humboldt constituency. Seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, are 42 grade 8 students from the Bruno 
and Cudworth schools. And accompanying them are their 
teachers, Mr. Jake Jmaeff from Bruno, and Mr. Scott Linton 
from Cudworth, and along with them are chaperons Bonnie 
Hauber, Lucielle Reding, Eugene Kameneski, Brenda Weiman, 
and Linda Bassett. 
 
The students are in Regina today, Mr. Speaker, to observe 
question period but also, I believe, to visit and enjoy the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) training academy and the 
IMAX centre. 
 
So, students and teachers and parents, I look forward to our visit 
after question period and I ask the Assembly to please extend a 
warm welcome to these students from my home area. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems today I’m 
not the only one with special guests. But I would like to 
introduce to you and through you, 72 students who are no 
surprise to me. They’re wonderful students from Balgonie’s 
Greenall School, and they’re from grade 6 and 7. 
 
They’re accompanied today by their teachers, Mr. Dwight 
Fuhro, Ms. Sandi White, and Mrs. Loretta Jaworski. They have 
chaperons with them, Mrs. McFarlane and Mrs. Herbert. 
 
I’m looking forward to meeting with them following their tour 
and their opportunity to see a little bit of the action in the 
Assembly. And I’ll be available to visit with them and answer 
any questions they may have. 
 
I’m also, Mr. Speaker, no stranger to Greenall. Last evening I 
was there for the Optimist oratory contest, and I also will be 
there with our Minister of Finance in May. But for today I ask 
all members to join with me to welcome the 72 students from 
Greenall School. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the other 
members of the Assembly, a gentleman, a grade 12 student, 
Peter Larson, who is a student at Thom Collegiate who’s 
participating in a program sponsored by the Institute of Public 
Administration of Canada to give students an opportunity to 
examine what’s going on in various administrative roles. 
 
In this case, he’s working with the director of communications 
in the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs, who’s with 
him, Rob Cunningham. I ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming Peter and wishing him the best as he seeks a future 
career. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join my colleague, the member from Regina Wascana Plains, in 
welcoming the students from Greenall and I’d like to extend a 
special welcome to Loretta Jaworski, a colleague of mine. We 
both taught in Pilot Butte together for a number of years. It’s 
really nice to see her here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Special Librarians Day 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1934 the 
Spanish philosopher Ortega Y Gasset said, and I quote: 
 

“From now on the librarians must give attention to the 
book as a living function. They must become policemen, 
masters of the raging book.” 

 
That definition might be a shade bombastic, but at the same 
time librarians certainly have become masters of the raging 
book — and especially of the torrents of information which 
assault us from all sides. Without librarians we would all be 
living in an informational ‘Fibber McGee’s closet’. 
 
I mention this because this week is National Library Week and 
today is International Special Librarians Day. Special librarians 
are those information professionals who cater to a specific 
clientele — like our invaluable crew of intrepid legislative 
librarians led by Marian Powell. Without them our workload 
would be magnified and our effectiveness would be reduced. 
 
Each of us asks of our library staff for anything from telephone 
numbers in Labrador to statistical data on environmental 
changes in Borneo. And the amazing thing, Mr. Speaker, is that 
regardless of what we ask, we get it, get it quickly with no 
questions and no guffaws. They are discreet, they are 
polymaths, and they are good. And as some of their literature 
says, our librarians might even turn us into fast trackers — if 
that’s legal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motto for this year’s special . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member’s time is 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

100th Birthday Congratulations 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Jennie Bell Gibson was born on April 23, 1898 in Battle Creek, 
Michigan, U.S.A. (United States of America). Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, today she celebrates her 100th birthday. 
 
She was born of Irish descendancy to the Jordan family. In 
1917, she married and moved to Melfort where Jenny resides 
today as a resident of Parkland Regional Care Centre. A very 
important part of her life has been her family, which consists of 
6 children and 13 grandchildren. 
 
Jennie’s past hobbies and interests include her involvement in 
the Vaughn district homemakers, her role as a farm wife, 
playing piano for social occasions, and is known for pettipoint 
jewellery she has created over the years. 
 
Would the Assembly please join me in congratulating Jennie 
Gibson on this very special occasion and to wish her continued 
years of health and happiness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Holocaust Remembrance Day 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sundown today 
begins a solemn day, Yom Hashoah — Holocaust 
Remembrance Day. It was on this day that we formally 
remember the 6 million Jews murdered between 1939 and 1945. 
 
There are no words to describe the horror of these dark days of 
human history. Over 1 million Jewish children were singled out 
because of the faith of their ancestors and were stripped of their 
innocence, of their basic humanity, and of their lives. 
 
Elie Wiesel once wrote, “If I spent my entire life reciting their 
names, I would die before I finished the task.” This is a tragic 
truth of our history. We therefore vow with collective 
determination, never again. Not in Europe, not at home, not in 
Bosnia, Indonesia, or Somalia. Never again anywhere can we 
tolerate the hatred of human beings. 
 
The lesson of the Holocaust is somewhere in all of us and it’s 
the seed of racial hatred. We cannot allow this seed to flourish 
again. Nor can we allow ourselves complacency, to turn our 
backs and hide our faces from crimes against humanity. 
Between 1939 and 1945, 6 million Jews, 1 million of them 
children, were murdered. 
 

Meeting Health Care Needs 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I heard some very 
troubling news during the noon hour, concerns which I am sure 
that all members of the Assembly will share as it may have a 
devastating impact on health care in the city of Regina. 
 
The media is reporting that hotel workers at the Howard 
Johnson Hotel in Regina have served strike notice. Obviously 

this is a concern because the Howard Johnson has become the 
hotel of choice when there are no hospital beds available in the 
city. And that, as we all know, is far too often. 
 
Mr. Speaker, aside from stepping into this dispute, there is one 
solution available to the Minister of Health which would help 
resolve the bed crisis and take Howard Johnson’s off the hook. 
This NDP could simply decide they want to properly invest in 
health care and ensure there is a third hospital to serve the 
people of Regina and south-west Saskatchewan. 
 
As it happens there is a piece of land that is just off the 
Trans-Canada Highway which would serve as the perfect 
location as it would provide the accessibility that residents of 
southern Saskatchewan need. And wouldn’t you know it, a 
building happens to sit on that land, a building which could 
serve as the trauma centre, and is only 25 years old. What better 
investment to meet the health care needs of our people. 
 
And I’ve only given a little thought to this; we might think of 
calling this facility the Plains Health Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shakespeare’s Birthday 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, William Shakespeare was 
born 434 years ago today. 
 
His five greatest works were Hamlet, Macbeth, Julius Caesar, 
Othello, and King Lear. Any writer who had the genius to write 
only one of these plays would have enjoyed literary 
immortality. Shakespeare wrote all five. 
 
My purpose today is to acknowledge the enormous impact that 
he had on the English language Every day we all use words and 
phrases that he invented. 
 
For example, he might have said of some of us that we are 
ill-tempered or hostile or quarrelsome or hot-blooded or 
soft-hearted. 
 
He might have asked if we liked puppy dogs or ever received a 
love letter, or if our bedroom was upstairs. In the case of each 
of these and hundreds of other words, Shakespeare was the first 
to use them. 
 
He coined dozens of phrases: a foregone conclusion, neither 
rhyme nor reason, strange bedfellows, vaulting ambition, wild 
goose chase, passing strange, the past is prologue — quoted in 
the throne speech. 
 
English is the predominant language in the world today in part 
because it is so flexible. Shakespeare deserves great credit for 
this. He showed how new words could be shaped to express 
thoughts and ideas with startling clarity and originality. We 
who use his words and phrases every day in our way of 
speaking owe him much. 
 
Please join me in wishing happy birthday to the Bard, William 
Shakespeare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

Proposed Improvements to North Battleford 
Highway Entrance 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I launched 
petitions for improvements to the eastern entrance to the city of 
North Battleford. I was pleased that the hon. member from 
Redberry also attended the news conference. 
 
Presently we have several different highways all converging at 
one spot. The result is an entrance to our city which is 
confusing and dangerous. There have been two fatalities in the 
past two years. 
 
There are a number of changes we are seeking. The first is that 
Highway 40, which comes from Prince Albert, be moved to the 
present intersection a few kilometres east, to land donated by 
the city. This will relieve some of the congestion. 
 
Other changes we are looking to is a safety barricade on the 
pedestrian walkway on the bridge across the North 
Saskatchewan, and a second bridge. I will be pleased to exert 
pressure on the federal government to participate in the 
twinning of the Yellowhead. 
 
One last point, Mr. Speaker. NDP members from the north-west 
say I should be embarrassed that my Liberal colleagues in the 
south have been pushing for improvements to the 
Trans-Canada. I am not; I congratulate my colleagues. I simply 
say that we in the north-west must be just as vocal in making 
our needs known to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canada Book Day 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Canadians are 
a fascinating people and ours is a richly unique country. After 
all, what you can say about one nation that produces Bill Van 
Der Zalm and Tommy Douglas, Nellie McLung and Margaret 
Trudeau? 
 
To call attention to our uniqueness, and to encourage Canadians 
to think and buy Canadian, today is Canada Book Day — a day 
in which we are encouraged to, “buy one, give one, read one.”  
 
And there are Canadian books — good Canadian books — by 
the truckload, starting with many of the best Canadian writers 
living right here in our own province, in this city. 
 
In fact tonight at the Hotel Saskatchewan there is a reading, 
open free to the public, of three of those writers: Maggie 
Siggins, Guy Vanderhaughe, and Andreas Schroeder, the latter 
not from Saskatchewan. 
 
Canadian books, Mr. Speaker, are like peanuts: you cannot stop 
at one. And I encourage all people to try one. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Economy Improving 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have some good news for all of us here today; some statistics 
that will tell us that the Saskatchewan economy is humming 
along very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, new motor vehicle sales increased by 37.6 per 
cent in 1997 over 1996. Building permits in Saskatchewan 
jumped by 15.5 per cent over the same period. Manufacturing 
shipments rose by 15.4 per cent; retail sales grew by 9 per cent; 
farm cash receipts increased by 8.5 per cent; and housing starts, 
Mr. Speaker, for the first two months of this year rose by 21.2 
per cent over last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Sergeant Joe Friday was oft-heard said on the 
old TV show, Dragnet: just the facts ma’am; just the facts. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Comparison Between Saskatchewan 
and the United Kingdom 

 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we are talking 
about Shakespeare’s birthday today, I saw this little letter that 
came from London, England. And I’d like to read you some of 
it, please. 
 

As you wander the streets of this booming city, you feel 
proud that in key aspects of life Saskatchewan beats the 
United Kingdom hands down. 
 
Not that London isn’t trying hard to follow the credo of its 
favourite heroine, Princess Diana — to be beautiful, 
with-it, and humane. 
 
But here’s where Saskatchewan pulls ahead. 
 
Last month, Labour Chancellor, Gordon Brown, brought 
down a budget, that, despite cries from some old lefties for 
more spending, hewed to the spending targets of the 
previous Conservative government; spared the middle 
class, and promised a balanced budget by the year 2000. 
 
That’s where Saskatchewan races ahead. Last month NDP 
Premier Roy Romanow’s government also tabled a budget, 
but it was the province’s fifth straight balanced budget. In 
1994-95 the province was the first in the nation to balance 
its budget. 
 
It did this despite the fact a wild Conservative 
administration left it with the highest per capita debt in 
Canada. 
 
Is it too much to say that the world is following 
Saskatchewan’s lead? In his recent budget, federal Finance 
Minister Paul Martin promised to balance his budget in the 
fiscal year ending March 31 . . . (the first balanced budget 
in 23 years) and that’s in the two subsequent years. 
 
All . . . (the) Canadian provinces now have balanced 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

budgets . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member’s time is 
expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Possible Strike at SaskPower 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is to the minister responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Minister, the employees of SaskPower must have been very 
impressed with the Sask Party’s mail-in vote because now 
they’re holding one of their one — only they’re deciding 
whether or not to go out on strike. Mr. Minister, what are you 
doing to prepare SaskPower for a strike? What are you doing to 
ensure that there are no interruptions of service to SaskPower 
customers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I appreciate the question from the 
member from Souris-Cannington, and I want to say to him that 
I can assure you that the management team at SaskPower is 
reviewing all of the options. But most importantly, and 
obviously what is going on is a lot of discussion, talk, trying to 
deliver up a contract that will be in the best interest of the 
thousands of men and women who run, what I would argue as a 
result of the tabling of the annual report today, the best power 
company in Canada. 
 
I would say to you, I would urge you, rather than to try and play 
politics with the situation where the men and women who work 
in the corporation are working towards the conclusion of a 
contract, that you bear with us, and I’m sure that this will work 
out in the best interest of the Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well we’ve 
certainly seen the management style of Channel Lake and 
SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’d like to let the minister know that we support the 
government trying to hold the line on public sector wage 
increases, but when you see the way that SaskPower is being 
run these days you really can’t blame the employees for being 
upset. SaskPower is making huge profits, not through good 
management but by gouging the customers. So SaskPower 
customers are unhappy. SaskPower workers are unhappy. The 
only person that’s happy is Jack Messer, who can mismanage 
the company and still get $300,000 pay-off. 
 
Mr. Minister, what kind of signal does this send — of 
mismanagement and political pay-off — send to SaskPower 
employees who are now on the verge of strike action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 
the member again when he talks about the Crown corporations 
and the men and women of Saskatchewan — thousands and 

thousands who make their living in these corporations — who 
deliver two very important fundamentals to the families of 
Saskatchewan: one, service that’s uncomparable to utilities in 
any other part of the world . . . And you need only ask the men 
and women who live in this province whether the service is 
great. And it’s great, and it’s better than Alberta or Manitoba, 
and I would argue it’s the best service in Canada. 
 
When it comes to the rates, if you read your budget document 
you will know that when it comes to utility rates in the province 
of Saskatchewan, they’re lower, when you put them in a bundle, 
than any other province in Canada. And when you stack them 
up against Alberta, it’s $725 a year on average less for utilities, 
including auto insurance, than it is in Alberta. 
 
So why don’t you come clean with the public. Why don’t you 
come clean with the public. Admit that the men and women 
who run the corporations are doing a good job and that makes 
you very angry because it doesn’t meet your philosophical 
view. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Reconstruction Charge 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions as well 
are for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year when the NDP tabled its Crown 
corporation annual reports, the most interesting thing was what 
wasn’t in those reports. For instance, SaskPower hid $14 
million collected from its customers and refused to record this 
money as profit. Mr. Speaker, SaskPower did it in direct 
defiance of the advice of the Provincial Auditor. The NDP then 
launched a bitter attack on the auditor for even raising this 
issue. 
 
To the minister: Mr. Minister, is the reconstruction fee in this 
year’s annual report or are you going to hide it again so 
Saskatchewan people can’t see how bad you’re gouging them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member opposite I think uses 
very much exaggerated words when he talks about gouging the 
public through utility rates. He will know if he’s being truthful, 
that the SaskTel rates in this province are as low or lower than 
any other province with the exception of Manitoba. You know 
that. That is not gouging. 
 
You will know that the SaskEnergy rates for gas are the second 
lowest in 1997 of any province in Canada. You will know that 
auto insurance is by far the lowest, in Saskatchewan, of any 
other province. 
 
So when you say that they are gouging, that the men and 
women who run our Crown corporations are gouging, you are 
not only exaggerating, you are fibbing, and you should 
apologize to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Now the minister will recognize that he’s 
used non-parliamentary language and I’ll ask him to withdraw 
his remark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would remove the 
terrible word fib from the record, please. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the minister will 
also recognize that it is improper to be bringing comment 
regarding the conduct of the Chair, and that includes from his 
seat. And I will ask him to withdraw his remark and apologize. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would apologize for the comment 
I made. 
 
The Speaker: — And I ask the minister to withdraw the remark 
as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — And, Mr. Speaker, withdraw the 
remark. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well 
over the past few weeks we’ve heard the minister talk about 
Channel Lake and tell how he’s learned his lesson. I think he’s 
kind of a slow learner because I don’t think he’s learned 
anything. 
 
The question is, has he learned anything from what the auditor 
has said last year or is he going to keep gouging SaskPower 
customers by continuing to hide the reconstruction charge and 
attacking the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question is, will the reconstruction charge be 
properly accounted for in this year’s annual report or are you 
going to still hide it, hiding the full extent of how the 
SaskPower gouges its customers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again to the member opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure you understand the exaggeration the 
member is using when he talks about the gouging of 
Saskatchewan consumers as it would relate to utility fees. 
 
I want to ask him this. Are you saying that an 18-year-old who 
would register their vehicle in Saskatchewan as compared to 
Alberta is being gouged when they pay about one-third of what 
they would pay in Alberta? Is that the gouging you’re talking 
about? 
 
Are you talking about the delivery of gas, the delivery of gas to 
almost all of the communities in the province, at the lowest 
rates, if not the lowest rates . . . Mr. Speaker, if you could get 
some control of the member from Moosomin we might be able 
to carry on here. 
 
But I say to him, when he uses the words gouge as it relates to 
the Crown corporations, he is wrong. It’s false for you to say 
that. 
 
As it would relate to the accounting format on the 

reconstruction fee, you will know that the private sector 
auditors have said this is proper auditing. The Provincial 
Auditor is saying that he would like to see a different style of 
auditing. What I would urge you to do . . . as you know, the 
Crown Corporations Committee is dealing with this issue. It 
will come up again for review but you will know that issue is 
being dealt with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporation Losses 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
SaskPower reconstruction charge is not the only thing hidden in 
last year’s annual report. There was only a passing reference to 
the fact that SaskTel lost $16 million in the NST fiasco. When 
we asked the minister about it she said, because of the write-off 
occurred in 1997 there would be a full accounting of NST in 
this year’s annual report. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, is it there? Are we going to see a full 
accounting of how you blew $16 million on NST or are you 
going to hide it again in this year’s report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just in checking with the Chair of 
Crown Corporations Committee, she indicates that that will be 
one of the issues when the report comes up that will be dealt 
with in a great deal of detail. 
 
And so I say to members opposite, if he’s patient and when the 
review of that particular Crown comes up, you will understand 
that that issue will be dealt with. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s interesting is that in the line of 
questioning, in the line of questioning you will know that the 
big picture as it would relate to Crowns, whereby the Crowns 
are functioning and functioning extremely well, delivering 
extremely qualified, quality service to the people of the 
province at the lowest rates in Canada, for you people to malign 
the thousands of men and women who deliver the service in our 
utilities is irresponsible. You know it. And you’re doing it for 
philosophical reasons to try to destroy the Crowns so you can 
privatize them. 
 
That’s your agenda. Everyone knows it. Why don’t you come 
clean and just stand up and say, we’re going to privatize the 
Crowns if we’re elected. That’s what you want to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
think right now you’d have a hard time convincing the 
Saskatchewan public that SaskPower is running well. I think 
they have a different opinion of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing that was conveniently left out of last 
year’s annual reports was the mention of how STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) lost three-quarters of 
a million dollars in freight bills. I guess they lost that page of 
the report the same place they lost the freight bills. 
 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

Once again, Mr. Minister, we’re really looking forward to 
seeing this year’s report. Are we going to see a complete 
accounting of how STC managed to lose three-quarters of a 
million dollars in freight bills, or did you manage to lose that 
page again this year and hide the losses from Saskatchewan 
taxpayers? Will we see these losses in this year’s report, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again to the member opposite 
as it would relate to STC, I know that your new leader, Mr. 
Hermanson, is committed to privatizing and selling off the bus 
company. During the leadership race, that was a common theme 
of the member from Melfort, the leader, Mr. Hermanson, who 
said . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s a common theme of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, it is not a common theme of the 
people of Saskatchewan. The member from Souris Cannington 
says the public wants to privatize. How little you have learned 
from the big debate that took place that defeated, in part, the 
Devine government where they tried to privatize SaskEnergy. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Private enterprise can do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well he says private enterprise can 
do it. There’s no problem with that. But if you are honest, get to 
your feet and make the commitment that if you’re elected you 
would privatize the Crowns, instead of shouting from your 
seats, which is allowed in this House obviously. You shout, you 
howl about privatization, but you don’t have the nerve, you 
don’t have the nerve to get up and call for privatization because 
you know you would be defeated again on that item. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Workloads 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seven years ago the 
Leader of the Opposition, our current Premier, summed up the 
state of health care in the province. He told this House, doctors 
and nurses and other care-givers are worried about intolerable 
working conditions and difficulties of stress. 
 
Today the level of sick and stress leave in our health districts is 
eight days per year, far above the national average of five days. 
The Saskatoon Health District says workloads for registered 
nurses in that city are 50 per cent higher than their counterparts 
in Vancouver and 30 per cent higher than in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you considered conditions intolerable then, how 
in the world can you defend what your government has done to 
the health care system in this province since you came to 
power? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, first 
I want to say to him that we acknowledge, and have on many 
occasions in this House, that the working environments for 

many of the people who work within the institutions, the health 
care institutions and in community services, is higher than we 
like it to be. And as a result of that, this budget again this year 
reflects us addressing some of those issues. 
 
This year in the $1.72 billion budget that we provided to 
Saskatchewan people we’ve included in that, Mr. Speaker, 
opportunities for the district health boards to provide 
enrichments to staff at the front lines to ensure that we can 
relieve some of the pressures that they’re experiencing in the 
acute care centres, in their work in the home care side, and in 
their work in the long-term care side. 
 
That’s the commitment that we made to Saskatchewan people 
today. And in this year’s budget we provided that kind of an 
injection to begin to address the pressures that the member 
raises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe that’s the 
first time in this House that I’ve heard the Minister of Health 
admit to the guilt of the wrongdoing that they did when they 
started on the wellness model in 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seven years ago the Premier questioned: what in 
the world has caused all these bed closures and professionals 
leaving and communities on edge? That statement is more 
applicable today, Mr. Speaker, than at any time in the past and 
perhaps you should explain why, Mr. Premier. 
 
Is it because you have slashed more than 1,000 hospital beds? Is 
it because you’ve eliminated more than 500 long-term care 
beds? Could it be because waiting-lists are at an all time high? 
 
Is it that 600 fewer nurses are taking care of our health care 
needs, or perhaps the 48 per cent rate of physician turnover in 
rural Saskatchewan in the past four years, Mr. Speaker? — is a 
level not seen since the medicare crisis of the 1960s. 
 
Mr. Premier, take your pick — or can you? Because you know 
there are concerns with every facet of health care in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis I’ve stood in 
the House and responded to the member opposite about the 
kinds of injections that we provided for the health care system 
over the last six years, and advise the member again that this 
year we put an additional $1.72 million into the budget and 
remind the member opposite that we put money into rural 
positions, into rural technology to assist rural Saskatchewan to 
better provide those services. 
 
I’ve been at three public meetings of which the member 
opposite was at as the Liberal member at a Liberal meeting. 
And he heard me say on an ongoing basis that we understand 
the pressures that are there, we understand the pressures that are 
there, and that we’re prepared, Mr. Speaker, to put some 
additional resources into those areas — as we have. 
 
But the member opposite didn’t hear, Mr. Speaker, because he 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

was too busy, too busy at those meetings browbeating the 
public and saying to the public that what we have is . . . going 
to have a reduction of beds in Regina, that we’re going to lose 
the number of physicians that we have in the province, that 
there’s no parking spaces. So rather than listening to the facts, 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has been too busy, too busy 
fearmongering around what’s happening within the health care 
system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporations Review 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, when the Crown corporations of 
this province were initially set up by Liberal governments, they 
were set up to serve the people of Saskatchewan. Now they 
appear to be going into quite different mandates. We understand 
that the board of SaskPower is presently reviewing the mandate 
of its international investment arm since the termination of the 
president of SaskPower Commercial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whether the Crowns are to be used for back-door 
taxation or international adventures, are not policy issues that 
should be determined behind closed doors. They should be 
determined by public debate of the people of Saskatchewan 
who we are told are the owners of these Crown corporations. 
There should be a full debate in this legislature of the people’s 
elected representatives on the direction we want our Crown 
corporations to take. Will the minister facilitate that debate 
occurring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure where 
the member has been in the last two years, but in 1996 the 
biggest review, the largest review of our Crown corporations 
that was ever held took place under the leadership of the 
member from Rosetown and the staff at CIC. 
 
They held many meetings across the province. They reviewed 
the Crown corporations. And the conclusion that the public 
gave to us shouldn’t surprise us, but in general they went along 
the lines that the people believed that the Crowns delivered 
excellent service at reasonable price. That came through loudly 
and clearly. 
 
They believed that the Crowns should not be privatized and 
they also said that we should look at doing investment, project 
management, and consulting outside the border of 
Saskatchewan. Now I’m not sure, because these meetings 
weren’t organized by the Liberal party that they don’t have 
legitimacy with you, but I want to say that that review took 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that I have been holding 
meetings over the last three weeks in many communities on the 
future of Crowns — Lloydminster, Watrous, Humboldt, and a 
number of other areas. We’ve either had meetings or will have. 
And I say to the member opposite, you can share your views 
here in the House, give speeches, and we’ll take them into 
consideration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, we had our view, we talked 

about a new era. The people told us they wanted our Crowns 
concentrating on core activities but that’s not what they got. 
They got Uruguay, they got Guyana, they got Chile, they got 
the Philippines, they got El Salvador. 
 
Is the Deputy Premier telling us that the people of 
Saskatchewan asked for this? I don’t think they did. There 
should be a resolution before this House debated and approved 
before we launch into any more costly, hare-brained 
international ventures. That has not happened; that should 
happen. Will the Deputy Premier undertake to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member is wrong and he’s 
deceiving the members of the Assembly. I have here the 
minutes from the Crown Corporations Committee dated 
December 11, 1997 where a number of the members are quoted 
— I won’t give their names, but you will know the names 
because you have members on the committee — talking about 
the Saturn investment. Talking about the Saturn investment and 
debating it. 
 
And I want to quote Dale Bassen, the president of SaskTel 
International, and he said: 
 

So I appreciate the point but I think if you look at the 
overall industry it’s not atypical for start-up companies to 
lose money in the first years of operation. 
 

And these were questions being asked by the members. It was 
debated. 
 
There was no motion put at that time by any member not to do 
that deal. Not one of you raised a motion not to do that deal 
when it was reported to a committee of this legislature. And for 
you to say there has been no debate and that you haven’t had 
involvement is false. It’s false. 
 
It’s been debated here in the House, it was debated in 
committee. You and your colleagues did not raise a motion not 
to do the investment. You approved the report. You approved 
the report. And you know you’ve been involved and given 
approval. How is it now that your back . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the three pages apparently 
ripped out and substituted in the Channel Lake sale agreement 
after it was signed by our officials involves a significant 
potential liability to the people of Saskatchewan. That is the 
change to 7.1. 
 
We were, we were told that SaskPower has not done the 
calculation as to what that potential liability can be. Can the 
Deputy Premier shed any light today on what is our potential 
liability; how much more could we be on the hook for to clean 
up the Channel Lake mess? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I said to the member opposite 
yesterday and I’ll say again today, the member should ask all of 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

those detailed questions in the committee. I would also 
comment on . . . and quote from Mr. Priel, who told you 
yesterday. He says that: 
 

My remarks this morning are directed . . . (at) all . . . 
members of the committee . . . this committee does have 
responsibilities. And those responsibilities include 
allowing witnesses to make a full answer and explanation 
of . . . their actions . . . 
 

Well you’re in the middle of the discussion with various, with 
various members of the staff of SaskPower and they will be 
answered. 
 
But I know that at another issue you talk about the losses in 
Saturn and how terrible they are. I want to quote from a letter 
that I sent, I sent to the committee which you and your caucus 
are a member of. And I said this: 
 

Saturn is a start-up company and as such it will incur 
losses for the first few years. This will result in a negative 
impact on SaskTel’s net income. The impact on SaskTel 
for the next six months of 1997 and the year ’98, for 
example, in terms of reduced income, will be 
approximately 4 million Canadian and 9 million 
respectively. 
 

You were at the committee with your members. You voted for 
this in the House when the report came back to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, next question. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nursing Home Funding 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, allow me 
to cite to you an example of how this NDP government treats 
the sick and elderly of Saskatchewan. Eighty-eight-year-old Mr. 
Zurevinsky, a cardiac patient, spent 21 days in hospital. He was 
then released and in dire need of placement in a nursing home 
because of his precarious and weakened state of health. 
 
An assessment of the level of care needed was undertaken and 
he was told he did not qualify for nursing home care. He was 
told he would have to go into a private, for-profit home which 
would cost him about $1,300 a month. Now, Mr. Speaker, how 
a very frail 88-year-old cardiac patient does not qualify for 
nursing home care begs for an explanation. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is time for you and your government to honestly 
acknowledge that you have devised a strategy to cut publicly 
funded nursing home beds so that seniors are forced to pay for 
private care. And you cannot, in good conscience, say that you 
are the saviour of publicly funded health . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, if you disagree with me I ask . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order, order. Now the 
hon. member is being extremely lengthy in her preamble and I 
ask her to go — order, order — I’ll ask her to go directly to her 
question now. 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, if you feel 
I’m wrong I ask you to intervene on Mr. Zurevinsky’s behalf 
and see that he is admitted to a publicly funded nursing home. 
Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to 
indicate to the member opposite that I appreciate her bringing to 
my attention the issue as it relates to Mr. Zurevinsky, and I 
want to also say to the member opposite that I appreciate that 
she assists in confirming a number of things to the Assembly 
today. 
 
First of all, for the last 25 or 30 days we’ve had the members 
opposite standing up in the House here and saying that people 
don’t stay in hospitals very long. Today you’ve confirmed that 
we have somebody who’s been in a health care centre for 21 
days. And I appreciate, ma’am, that you were able to bring that 
to our attention. 
 
In respect to the particular individual, I want to say that in each 
of the health districts we have what we call district assessment 
coordinating committees. On these committees sits a team of 
individuals who serve as health care professionals: doctors, 
nurses, home care workers, orthopedic . . . optometrists, 
physiotherapists, occupational therapists — a team of seven or 
eight people. And at the end of the day they make the decision 
as to whether or not somebody stays in the health care centre, 
whether they go to a long-term care centre, or whether they 
must go into a private centre or private home. That decision is 
made by a team of health professionals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder about an 
assessment system that determines that an extremely ill and frail 
88-year-old man does not qualify as level 3 or 4 for placement 
in publicly funded nursing homes. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, don’t try to pass the responsibility onto the 
shoulders of the health district and front-line staff. It is your 
department, it is your department that sets the guidelines for a 
health care assessment and it is becoming apparent that your 
guidelines and policies are designed to divert as many seniors 
as possible from publicly funded nursing homes to private, 
for-profit homes. 
 
Mr. Minister, why won’t you simply tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that the underlying intention of NDP health 
reform is to usher in privatized health services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m getting the feeling here 
that the member opposite is planning on making a move. 
Because she’s beginning to talk, Mr. Speaker, about the 
importance of a privatized health care system in the province. 
And maybe she’s making a decision, Mr. Speaker, to move 
back in a different direction. I don’t know what she’s going to 
pick, but it seems to me that she’s warming up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, I want to say to the 
member opposite that there is no intention, there is no policy, 
there is no government direction, and certainly the health 
department or the people of Saskatchewan will never tolerate a 
privatized health care system. 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

And today, as I said earlier, Madam Member, that in this 
province we’ve included an additional $1.72 million in our 
budget to ensure that we can provide excellent, efficient health 
care services across the province. 
 
And I want to say to you that if you have an objection with the 
work of the DACs (district assessment coordinator) in each of 
the districts around the province, then you need to go to the men 
and women who are working on the ground in the communities 
providing the best health care services that we can receive. 
 
And if you want to play politics with it, you should go back and 
have that discussion with your members in your community, 
who serve you and others very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 32  The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 32, The 
Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998, No. 2, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Provincial Court Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 33, The 
Provincial Court Act, 1998 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I have here the answer to 
question 50, and by leave of the Assembly I’d also like to table 
the answers to questions 51 and 52. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip requests leave to 
respond to all three at the same time. Is leave granted? Leave is 
granted. The answers are provided for questions no. 50, 51, and 
52. Those are tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Telecommunications Access for all Canadians 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today to address this particular issue. It created a bit of a 

stir yesterday in the House when the government brought 
forward this motion. And fact is, Mr. Speaker, members of the 
opposition thought there was something a little bit fishy about 
this particular motion. 
 
And today we found, Mr. Speaker, that the proof was indeed on 
our desks — that there was something fishy about this 
particular situation. We had some concerns that perhaps these 
weren’t goldfish, Mr. Speaker, but rather that they were perhaps 
bathtub sharks. We were glad to find out though, Mr. Speaker, 
after a closer review of the situation that this wasn’t necessarily 
the case. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, some of the issues we were concerned about 
on this particular Bill was whether or not this was going to 
result in an increase in fees for subscribers to 
telecommunications. It’s still a concern, Mr. Speaker, and we 
will be watching very closely to determine whether or not a 
change to provide funding from the telcos to provide universal 
access to communications will indeed result in an increase in 
price. 
 
When we look at some of the other initiatives that this 
government has implemented dealing with the 
telecommunications industry, such as 911, most of the province 
is still waiting for 911, Mr. Speaker, but we’re paying the costs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those are the kind of things that we were very 
sensitive to, that the people of Saskatchewan are very sensitive 
to, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to any fiddling with the 
telecommunications system. 
 
We have seen a decrease, Mr. Speaker, in the cost of long 
distance over the last number of years. Now the government 
greatly feared this reduction in costs through competition, 
believing that SaskTel would no longer be generating the 
revenues that it had once done. 
 
What it found last year was that people used the telephone more 
because it cost less. At the end of the day there was actually a 
net increase in the profits made by SaskTel long distance 
because of the increased usage. So, Mr. Speaker, sometimes 
lowering the price actually benefits both the customer and the 
corporation involved; although when you look at things, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to the telcos, perhaps it is time to take a 
very serious look at privatization. I know that that word is not 
popular amongst the members opposite, but even some of their 
appointed Crown officials, such as Mr. Messer, is saying that 
there is a role for privatization. 
 
I attended the Talking about Crown corporations seminars that 
were held across the province over a year ago. I attended the 
one at the university where Mr. Allan Blakeney was one of the 
guest speakers. And even he, Mr. Speaker, felt that there was a 
time to have a look at the Crown corporations to make a 
determination as to whether or not they should be privatized. 
 
One of the other areas that Mr. Blakeney brought forward, that 
in this particular motion I think would have some value, Mr. 
Speaker, was the idea of a Public Utilities Review Commission. 
He expounded that idea at that particular meeting. And I note 
that the government members want to quote from some of his 
comments at the university that day but they seemed to forget 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

some other things that he said, such as the need for a public 
review process. 
 
A public review process, Mr. Speaker, would be one of the 
avenues by which scrutiny could be given to the funds that the 
government is proposing be put in place to provide access to 
people across, particularly northern and rural areas, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some of the other things that we’ve seen happen with the telcos 
in a very short period of time is larger exchanges. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, there isn’t a single person in Saskatchewan who is 
opposed to the idea of larger exchanges, except perhaps the 
people involved with SaskTel and the minister of Crown 
corporations. Everyone else is in favour of expanding those 
exchange areas so that they can phone the school where their 
children are going; they can phone the local health care 
services; they can phone their RCMP without it always being 
long distance, Mr. Speaker. So that is some of the access that 
the people of Saskatchewan want their telco to provide for 
them. 
 
Now this proposal is to provide a subsidy for access in rural and 
remote areas, but part of that access, Mr. Speaker, should also 
include larger exchanges and being able to access larger 
numbers of telephones. If you happen to be a telephone 
subscriber in Regina or Saskatoon you could contact greater 
than 200,000 telephones. If you happen to be a telephone 
subscriber on my home exchange of Alida you’re lucky to 
contact 200 telephones without long distance. And the cost, Mr. 
Speaker, is not that much different, not that much different. 
 
But the people in Regina get 100 times more telephones to 
contact than somebody in an exchange such as Alida. And 
Alida, Mr. Speaker, was one of those areas that was not added 
to another area. It remained the same even though, even though, 
Mr. Speaker, the additional $6 has been added to our bills. 
 
One of the areas, Mr. Speaker, that I’m hoping the government 
will take a look at with a subsidy program, would be access to 
satellite technology. We currently have cellular telephones, 
hand-held telephones, that do not need to access the local 
network. They access a satellite in the sky and can 
communicate any place in the world. It’s still fairly expensive, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
A year ago costs for such a telephone was $3,000 and 
approximately $5 a minute. That cost has dropped down to 
about a $1,000 for the telephone and about $3 a minute — still 
very expensive, Mr. Speaker, but hopefully in the near future 
that technology will become more accessible. The cost will 
decrease, as we have seen other costs in telecommunications 
decrease, and it will become accessible to those people in more 
remote areas; so that it won’t be important for a telco to actually 
run a land line into that remote area, but they can have access 
through some other technology. 
 
One of the things that we’ve seen happen with this government 
since they’ve took power and took over control again of the 
telco, SaskTel, has been a very dramatic increase in the cost to 
install a new telephone service. And fact is, that cost in rural 
areas has increased to $200 a mile, Mr. Speaker. 
 

(1430) 
 
So it’s not necessarily how long or how much wire they have to 
put in the ground in addition from the last point to the next 
point, but rather it goes all the way back to the exchange centre. 
So while your closest pedestal may be a mile away, so it would 
cost you, you would assume, $200, you may be 20 miles from 
town so the cost has now gone up to $4,000 because it’s 
measured from the point of exchange to the new telephone 
system rather than simply just the amount of wire that has to go 
in the ground. 
 
Perhaps this is what some of the things that can be direct . . . 
this fund could be directed to, is reducing this cost back to a 
more manageable level, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What this particular motion does, Mr. Speaker, is it’s delivering 
a social policy. Mr. Speaker, it’s not the role of the Crown 
corporations, or any corporation for that matter, to be delivering 
social policy. That, Mr. Speaker, is the purview of the 
government and of the legislature — to determine what social 
policy is going to be and to deliver that policy. Now the Crowns 
may be used as a vehicle to deliver that policy, but that policy 
decision has to be made on the floor of this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. And then the government can then turn around and 
provide that subsidy to the corporation who will be delivering 
that program. 
 
So in that vein, Mr. Speaker, it’s my hope that if this fund is 
formed and put in place, that the funds won’t simply be directed 
through SaskTel in Saskatchewan. But rather they would be 
available as a general program to be delivered through any other 
service delivery system that wants to provide 
telecommunications service in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So let’s say Manitoba Telephones was about to deliver some 
telephone service into Creighton. Creighton’s on the 
Saskatchewan side of the border, Flin Flon on the Manitoba 
side of the border. If they’re going to supply some telephone 
service into Creighton then this kind of a subsidy, Mr. Speaker, 
should be available to Manitoba Telephones to deliver the 
service in Saskatchewan. It simply shouldn’t be just locked up 
by SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to that end I would like to propose an 
amendment to this motion that would indicate that this fund is 
available to northern residents and rural residents and that it’s 
not simply limited to SaskTel, but is available to all service 
delivery people no matter where they are from. And indeed this 
program is designed, not just for Saskatchewan, but indeed for 
Canada as a whole; so it should not matter where they live in 
Canada for the accessibility to this particular program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the 
member from Melfort: 
 

That all words after territories be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 
To create a national rural and remote service fund in order 
to sustain universally accessible telecommunications 
access for all Canadians regardless of where they reside. 

 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise this afternoon to move second reading of An 
Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation Act. This Bill 
improves benefits for working people and ensures greater 
accountability of the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
As the hon. members will know, a committee of review must be 
established every four years to review and report on all matters 
relating to The Workers’ Compensation Act. The 1996 
committee completed its review and presented its report to me 
on December 31, 1996. 
 
About half of the committee’s recommendations dealt with 
policy changes, and work in that respect is going on at the 
Workers’ Compensation Board now with respect to 
implementing of those recommendations. 
 
Other recommendations require more consultation with the 
interested persons and organizations and with the Workers’ 
Compensation Board prior to any further action being taken. 
 
There were however a number of recommendations of the 
committee of review which found consensus among the various 
interested organizations who are concerned about Workers’ 
Compensation. It is in those areas where amendments to the Act 
have been prepared and it is to those areas that I wish to speak 
this afternoon. 
 
The amendments improve benefits for Saskatchewan workers in 
a number of ways. Firstly, a benefit-of-the-doubt clause has 
been added to ensure an issue is resolved in favour of the 
worker where everything else is equal. This clause states, and I 
quote, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

Where the evidence in support of the opposite sides of an 
issue is approximately equal, the board shall resolve the 
issue in favour of the worker. 

 
I think this is extremely important, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
workers have earned and deserved the benefit of the doubt when 
it comes to compensation claims. 
 
The definition of injury has been expanded to include 
occupational disease. For the purpose of this Act an 
occupational disease is defined as: 
 

. . . a disease or disorder that arises out of, and in the 
course of, employment and that results from causes or 
conditions that are: 

 
(i) peculiar to or characteristic of a particular trade, 
occupation or industry; or 

 
(ii) peculiar to a particular employment. 

This clarifies that occupational disease is compensatable under 
the Act. 
 
The minimum lump sum annuity payment limit has been 
increased from $5,000 to $20,000 to give injured workers more 
retirement options. It will also, Mr. Speaker, simplify the 
administration of the board. 
 
Pension contributions will be provided to surviving dependent 
spouses who are currently receiving benefits, and survivor 
benefits are being extended to dependent common law spouses 
regardless of the length of the relationship if they are the natural 
or adoptive parents of a child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most common issues raised during the 
public meetings and consultations conducted by the committee 
of review was the question of the Workers’ Compensation 
Board’s accountability to its stakeholders and to the public at 
large. 
 
This same issue arose during consultations which were held in 
connection with the development of the legislation that is before 
the Assembly and arose again during the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour’s recent series of public meetings on 
Workers’ Compensation. 
 
In addition to the other improvements it makes, this Act also 
includes measures to increase the accountability of the board. It 
contains provisions which require the board to hold one general 
meeting a year for all of the organizations who have an interest 
in its operations; separate meetings will no longer be held for 
labour and for business. It will provide for a consultation prior 
to the reappointment of board members; the consultation being 
again with organizations who have an interest in Workers’ 
Compensation matters. The legislation also prohibits the Chair 
of the board from acting as the chief executive officer and chief 
administrative officer of the board. 
 
In addition this legislation encourages a cooperation between 
the board and the occupational health and safety division of the 
Department of Labour by requiring the two to consult with each 
other and share information. This is a subject which has been 
the matter of some controversy in the past. On the whole it has 
worked well, but for the first time the requirement for the 
consultation and the sharing of information will be embedded in 
the statute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m especially pleased to be able to report to this 
Assembly that these amendments are not likely to result in any 
increase in the Workers’ Compensation premiums paid by 
Saskatchewan employers. An independent study by Price 
Waterhouse states that the Workers’ Compensation Board 
surplus and reserves should be able to absorb most of the 
increased costs resulting from the amendments. 
 
I think it is equally important to note that these amendments are 
based on the recommendations of a committee of review and 
follow extensive consultations with the public and with 
representatives of both the labour and business communities. 
 
The committee of review held public meetings and received 
more than 180 written submissions. Department of Labour 
officials held numerous meetings with representatives of 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

organizations such as the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, 
the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, and the Workers’ 
Compensation Board itself — all of whom made significant and 
meaningful contributions to the amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like at this point, if I may, to commend and 
thank the Department of Labour officials who made the extra 
effort and took the extra time to conduct these consultations and 
to ensure the legislation we are considering today is the result of 
consensus. 
 
While these amendments improve benefits for workers, we 
must remain vigilant and continue to make every effort to 
prevent accidents in the workplace. To this end I’d like to 
mention a new initiative of the Department of Labour. 
 
The recent provincial budget contains funding for a new 
prevention unit at the department. This unit will devote all of its 
time and energy to educating Saskatchewan workers and 
employers about our labour standards and occupational health 
and safety laws, as well as about the services we can provide to 
prevent work stoppages and disruptions. This unit will build on 
the already substantial effort the department’s occupational 
health and safety division is making to help workers and their 
employers take every step possible to prevent workplace 
accidents. 
 
Saskatchewan workers are our province’s most valuable 
resource. We have led the world in the area of occupational 
health and safety, and we will continue to do so. We continue to 
work with business and labour organizations and with working 
people across the province to prevent accidents and injuries in 
the workplace. 
 
Preventing accidents before they happen is better than even the 
most perfect compensation program. Even one death in a 
Saskatchewan workplace is one too many, and even one injury 
too grievous. Until we achieve that ideal though, we have a 
responsibility to take care of workers who are injured on the job 
and to help their families in the unfortunate event of a tragedy. 
That’s what this Act is intended to do, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
it goes a long way towards doing so. 
 
I move second reading of Bill No. 29, The Workers’ 
Compensation Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to hear some of the improvements that the minister is 
talking about, and I note he has a press release yesterday as well 
in regards to the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that this is an area that needs 
revamping. Over the past number of years I found in my 
dealings as a legislator that there are . . . Workers’ Comp is one 
of the issues that seems to be continually on my desk; concerns 
that people have. And I guess the unfortunate part as legislators, 
we all face the individuals who seem to fall through the cracks. 
And I’m hoping that as we go and look at this Bill, that this Bill 

will indeed address some of the concerns. 
 
The minister talks about improved . . . well not necessarily 
saying improved benefits, but the fact that the benefit of the 
doubt in some cases will be given to the worker. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, as you look at the piece of legislation, and 
just listening to the comments the minister has made, it seems 
that on many occasions and what I found . . . and I thank the 
minister as well — just recently I had the pleasure to deal with 
his office on a certain claim. 
 
And I can say that it’s unfortunate, I think some of the times 
that some of the problems that workers face is there’s just an 
inability to, if you will, communicate properly, or communicate 
with the workers at the Workers’ Compensation Board itself. 
There seems to be a lack of understanding of some of the 
problems that workers face. 
 
And there’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that we see problems that 
are arising that workers are facing that aren’t as cut and dried as 
maybe the Workers’ Compensation Board would lay them out, 
or maybe the regulations or the rules have laid out in the past. 
And what it has done is created, if you will, almost a 
confrontational mode of dealing with the board in regards to 
legitimate claims. 
 
One of the concerns I think that is raised, and that I’ve heard on 
many occasions, is the fact that personal physicians, and even 
specialists that workers have gone to or have been referred to, 
seemed to be . . . their opinion seemed to be disclaimed by the 
board itself and by their professional . . . or the specialists or 
their medical professionals. And this is an area that we look 
forward to discussing with the minister in assessing how this 
piece of legislation gets around that, or deals with that problem 
that has certainly come up and continues to come up. 
 
I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we recognize the fact 
that when a worker has a problem, or an individual is injured, 
and I guess some of the issues that come to the forefront — the 
problems that arise, some of the problems that arise don’t 
necessarily happen immediately when a person has received a 
bit of an injury on the job. 
 
Some of the areas of major concern deal with lower back 
problems and back pain, and what have you, and in many cases 
some of these issues show up maybe two or three or four days 
after the fact. And I’ve talked to individuals who are at the point 
where they really can’t go back to work because of the 
complications that have arisen. They kind of sloughed it off in 
some cases for a little while thinking, well it’s just a backache; 
it’s going to go away. Then they find themselves with a major 
problem, and they have a very difficult time trying to relay to 
the board what even their personal physician and a specialist are 
informing them about the types of conditions. 
 
And so the fact that this Act is before the Assembly, that we’re 
going to have to deal with . . . The ministers talking about some 
improvements and changes. We’re looking forward, Mr. 
Speaker, to indeed sitting down with the minister and talking 
about looking at where the improvements . . . the changes that 
are being suggested by the Act, and bringing forward some of 
the concerns that individuals have brought to our attention. 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

And I know the minister is aware of this because personally 
I’ve had the privilege of dealing with his office and with the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on a number of these issues. 
We’re hoping that as we go through the Bill and the legislation 
before us, that we’ll be able to look at it very carefully and see 
whether or not the Bill does indeed address all of the concerns 
and the issues and the questions that are out there. 
 
I think it’s imperative, Mr. Speaker, that we look at this Act 
very carefully because there are so many people that are looking 
towards the legislation and looking towards us as legislators 
trying, at least, addressing the concerns and making sure that 
the board and Workers’ Compensation is indeed meeting the 
needs of individuals out there. 
 
Now as I stand here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I don’t stand 
here saying that we just open the Act wide open; that we’re not 
standing here to say that everyone who complains about an 
injury should indeed receive compensation and may be 
compensated for ever. We’re not saying that, Mr. Speaker. 
What we’re saying is, let’s be fair, let’s be reasonable. And I 
think that’s what the minister is trying to do with the piece of 
legislation before us today. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think as I take a quick perusal of this 
piece of legislation, this is one of the pieces of legislation on the 
order paper right now that I believe is going to give us an 
opportunity to get into legislation in a little more depth 
compared to some of the other pieces of legislation. 
 
There’s a lot of material here, some information we need to 
look at very carefully before we move on and move into further 
debate. Therefore at this time I will move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
before we proceed to the next second reading, I would like to 
pass a motion which would — ask the House to pass a motion 
— which would send the transcript of the debate on the motion 
that was passed regarding telecommunications to Minister 
Manley in Ottawa. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Telecommunications Access for all Canadians 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, therefore by leave of the 
Assembly, I move: 
 

That a copy of the motion and transcript of the debate on 
the motion passed today regarding telecommunications and 
a national rural and remote services fund be transmitted to 
John Manley, minister responsible for the CRTC 
(Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission), on behalf of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998. This Bill 
repeals the current Tobacco Tax Act and replaces it with a new 
Act, along with consequential amendments to The Revenue and 
Financial Services Act. 
 
The current tobacco tax legislation was implemented in 1965 
and many of the administrative and enforcement provisions 
require updating. This new legislation accomplishes that. In 
addition, the new legislation will more properly authorize the 
method by which tobacco taxes are collected and administered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tobacco tax is imposed on consumers when 
they purchase their tobacco products at the retail level. For 
administrative simplicity however, tobacco wholesale dealers 
are required to pre-collect and remit the tax on the tobacco that 
they sell to the retail dealers. All provinces collect tobacco taxes 
in a similar manner. 
 
It is important to ensure that the tax is considered a direct tax 
not an indirect tax; indirect taxation is outside of provincial 
jurisdiction. The new legislation will accomplish this, clearly 
establishing the collection and administrative provisions of the 
tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, four years ago the federal government lowered the 
excise tax on tobacco products by $5 per carton of cigarettes 
and offered to match further provincial tax cuts up to $10 per 
carton. As a result, all provinces east of Manitoba, except for 
Newfoundland, lowered their tobacco taxes. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we chose not to lower our tobacco taxes. 
We based this decision on the health risks associated with 
smoking and the concern that lowering the tax would encourage 
increased consumption of cigarettes, especially by young 
people. 
 
Unfortunately, the federal differential tax structure across the 
country has created a large incentive for individuals to smuggle 
tobacco from eastern Canada to western Canada. We’ve been 
working with the other western provinces to deter this and we 
will continue to do so. However a price differential of about 
$16 per carton with eastern Canada is a powerful incentive for 
smugglers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one way to combat smuggling is through what we 
refer to as marking programs. In 1994 most provinces, 
including Saskatchewan, introduced marking programs to help 
detect packages of tobacco that are marked for sale in one 
province but sold in another. Up until now the provisions for 
our marking program were contained in the regulations. Many 
of these provisions are now being moved to the new Tobacco 
Tax Act that I am asking the Assembly to consider. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the enforcement provisions are being 
updated to comply with the Canadian Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms. Also the fines for persons found guilty of tobacco 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

smuggling are being increased to bring them more in line with 
fines imposed in other provinces. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will mean more effective 
deterrents to smuggling. It will also mean clarification of the 
collection and administrative provisions respecting tobacco 
taxes. I believe this makes it a Bill worth supporting. 
 
So I am pleased to move second reading of an Act to introduce 
The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments before I move adjournment on debate on this motion 
because I think this is an Act that we’d want to take some time 
to look at in a little more depth, especially when it comes to 
taxes, Mr. Speaker, and the intent of the legislation that is 
before us. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleague from . . . the member 
from Saltcoats is not going to agree with me when I would 
suggest that, as many people would suggest, that maybe strong, 
higher taxes would be more of a deterrent rather than lowering 
taxes or just . . . I believe the minister is talking about in this 
case administering fines to try and control the areas of 
smuggling in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
tobacco and the problems that arise as a result of the sale of the 
products, I can appreciate what the minister’s talking about. 
Because certainly if we’re going to maintain the tax in this 
province, as we have in recognition of the problems that arise 
from tobacco, and the medical problems that arise, and certainly 
the cost to the taxpayer, and the fact that by trying to maintain 
that, letting people know that it is a burden on the health 
system, we also are aware of the fact that if it we’re a little 
higher, certainly people are going to go outside of the province 
to buy or purchase their product, and then it creates a problem 
in regards to the . . . (inaudible) . . . that may take place. 
 
So the fines that are being levelled, whether or not they’re 
enough and sufficient, I don’t know, but I think it’s something 
that we need to look at a little more closely. I believe this Bill as 
a piece of legislation is something to take careful note of and 
certainly is one that needs to be reviewed and looked at a little 
more carefully. 
 
And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I would therefore move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1500) 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Error in Wording of Government Motion 
 
The Speaker: — Before continuing, the Chair would like to 
bring to the attention of the Assembly an error that the Chair in 
fact contributed to in dealing with the previous motion moved 
by the Government Whip regarding the forwarding of the 

transcript. I’d just like to advise the House of the error and be 
guided by your direction. 
 
The actual wording in the motion forwarded to the Chair 
finished with the phrase, “on behalf of this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker.” I believe that the Whip meant to include the words, 
“on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker.” And interpreting 
the intention as being a salutation, not a direction, in reading the 
motion into the record, I left off the phrase, “Mr. Speaker.” 
 
If it is acceptable to the House, I will simply direct that the 
record indicate that the motion end with the words “on behalf of 
this Assembly by Mr. Speaker.” Is leave granted? 
 
Leave is granted and the motion will be directed to be recorded 
as such. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions 
Act/Loi sur les conventions sur l’exécution de jugements 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions Act. 
 
This Bill is a product of the Uniform Law Conference of 
Canada and is intended to be introduced in each of the Canadian 
territories and provinces. Its purpose is to facilitate the 
implementation of international conventions on enforcement 
and recognition of judgements which are concluded between 
Canada and foreign countries. 
 
Rather than passing new legislation in Saskatchewan for each 
country with which Canada has entered into such a convention, 
this uniform Bill sets out a generic implementation process for 
these conventions. Under this process, as Canada completes 
new conventions with additional countries, the regulations 
under the Act can be used to bring the convention with that 
particular country into force and effect in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of a recognition and enforcement of 
judgements convention is to provide a process whereby civil 
judgements that have been made by the courts in one country 
may be recognized and enforced in another country without 
requiring the parties to re-litigate the matter in its entirety. By 
allowing for the registration of foreign judgements and their 
enforcement in Saskatchewan, international business and 
personal relations gain greater certainty. Saskatchewan 
residents can avoid the high costs of having to restart litigation 
simply because the other party has left the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first expected application of this Bill will be to 
assist in the implementation of the convention between Canada 
and France on the recognition and enforcement of judgements 
in civil and commercial matters, and on mutual assistance in 
maintenance. 
 
The Canada-France convention is somewhat unique in that in 
addition to recognition and enforcement of civil judgements, it 
extends to mutual assistance in maintenance matters. Under this 
convention, officials in Canada and France undertake to assist 
each other in the enforcement of maintenance orders. This is an 
important avenue of cooperation between common law 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

provinces such as Saskatchewan and the civil law system in 
France. 
 
Prior to this convention, in most cases it would be financially 
impossible to seek to pursue a spouse who was avoiding 
maintenance by moving to France. With the assistance of this 
convention, it will now no longer be necessary to recommence 
litigation in France simply to enforce a judgement which has 
already been rendered in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the ever-increasing contact between 
Saskatchewan residents and foreign nationals, the Government 
of Saskatchewan is committed to facilitating international 
relations in a cooperative and rational way. By recognizing and 
enforcing judgements that comply with these conventions, 
Saskatchewan residents can avoid the duplication or 
multiplication of costs that pursuing a judgement in foreign 
countries can entail. 
 
Through this general application legislation, the Uniform Law 
Conference of Canada has provided a mechanism to bring 
enforcement of judgements conventions into force in 
Saskatchewan without requiring new Saskatchewan legislation 
for each new country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
Conventions between Canada and Designated Countries 
providing for the Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few comments in 
regard to the piece of legislation, The Enforcement of 
Judgments Conventions Act. And I will not attempt to give the 
French version of the legislation. I’ll leave that up for the 
member from Regina Centre, I think. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the piece of legislation 
before us, I think what the minister is saying is, and what I’m 
hearing him saying, it opens up the doors for agreements 
between provinces or between provinces and international 
countries. And certainly when it comes to maintenance and 
maintenance enforcement, I can appreciate what the minister’s 
talking about, because I would think the minister would even 
agree — even though we’ve been working together to come . . . 
draw up interprovincial agreements — there are still a number 
of problems that arise when it comes to following through on 
maintenance agreements . . . as I say, we start to work 
interprovincially. 
 
And the fact of working . . . if we’ve got problems 
interprovincially, the problems just are compounded when you 
started working across international borders and boundaries. 
And certainly this piece of legislation just expands some of the 
discussion and debate that has taken place over the past few 
years in regards to other agreements with other international 
partners and certainly countries and states in, even as we see 
here, in the United States of America. 
 
I think I can appreciate where the minister’s coming from and I 
can agree with a number of the suggestions and the intent of the 
piece of legislation — what we’re hoping to achieve. 
 

At the end of the day I guess, Mr. Speaker, I would also, and we 
hope to and we look forward to addressing this as we, as we 
proceed in debate on the piece of legislation and certainly in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
While there is . . . while we acknowledge where the legislation 
is going, the intent of the legislation, there is still some concerns 
as to how we certainly put together the mechanisms needed to 
pursue and to follow through on the intent. I think what the 
minister is saying, the fact that . . . this is a first step I believe, 
when you look at even the agreement with the nation of France 
at this time. This is a first step. There’s a lot to be 
accomplished. But certainly it addresses one of the major 
concerns and that’s costs in trying to pursue . . . and this opens 
up and frees up that area of debate. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are still a number of questions in the 
area of maintenance and maintenance enforcement that need to 
be addressed and we look forward to addressing those concerns 
with the minister as we get not only into debate on the piece of 
legislation, the maintenance and enforcement Act . . . or The 
Enforcement of Judgments Conventions Act that we have 
before us, but certainly as well when we get into estimates and 
get discussing some of these issues with the minister and his 
department officials when they’re here before us. 
 
However, in order to allow us to take a little more time and to 
review the legislation before us in a little more depth, I at this 
time move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 20 — The Election 
Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the second 
time in three years we’re debating amendments to The Elections 
Act. If you throw in last year’s debate on The Constituency 
Boundaries Act amendments it’s, I guess, three years out of 
three that we debated legislation having to do with our electoral 
system. One of these years I actually do hope that we get it 
right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whenever we make changes to the electoral 
system of this province, we have to make those changes with 
the goals of fairness being the utmost in our minds. Without a 
system that is seen to be completely fair by the people who are 
governed under it, respect is soon lost for the entire electoral 
system and then for the system of government itself. In a 
democracy we simply can’t afford to have that happen. 
 
Despite what people may think of the jobs we’re doing as 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) or what their 
perception of politicians is in general, we must guard against 
having the people lose trust and respect for the system that 
brings us together in this Assembly. That’s why it’s so 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

important that we do take a look at the electoral system once in 
awhile to ensure that it continues to operate in a way that is fair 
to all who participate in it — those of us who are chosen to put 
our names forward as candidates and for those who exercise 
their right and cast a ballot in provincial elections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the main intention behind The Election 
Amendment Act, 1998 was certainly born out of good 
intentions, intentions that we can support to a large extent. Of 
all the people in this province who should be freed of political 
interference, one would hope it would be the Chief Electoral 
Officer. After all this is a person who is in charge of making 
sure that elections in this province are run fairly and above 
board and reproach at all times. 
 
He or she is charged with ensuring that no one political party 
has an unfair advantage over the others and that no candidate 
has an advantage over any other candidate. The Chief Electoral 
Officer is a person who is responsible for deciding if all rules 
have been met by all political parties and of all the political 
candidates. 
 
For these reasons it should come as no surprise that for some 
time now there has been a concern in Saskatchewan over the 
fact that the Chief Electoral Officer in Saskatchewan is not an 
independent officer of this legislature. Instead, the holder of the 
office is at this point an employee of Executive Council, the 
Office of the Premier. 
 
Not many members of the Saskatchewan public know this, Mr. 
Speaker, and certainly I didn’t know it until I became a member 
of this Assembly. But that’s the way it is. Saskatchewan is 
currently the only province in Canada where this is the case. 
And at the federal level, the electoral officer is completely 
independent from the government of the day, as it should be. 
 
And so now, after years of delay, the Saskatchewan government 
is getting on the same page. With this Act, the Chief Electoral 
Officer will become fully independent from the Premier’s 
office, and of course, Mr. Speaker, we support this fully. 
 
The government has contended all along that the Chief 
Electoral Officer has been independent for many years — in 
fact, if not in theory. And it may be true that all Chief Electoral 
Officers in the past have conducted themselves completely 
above board in all cases. I don’t know. I haven’t been in politics 
long enough to make that determination. 
 
However I do know, Mr. Speaker, that in the eyes of the public, 
perception is often the reality. And when you have a person 
listed as an employee of the Premier’s office, the perception is 
that he or she is beholden to the Premier and to the government 
for that job. 
 
Clearly this is inappropriate and it puts the Chief Electoral 
Officer in a bad position, because even if he or she is absolutely 
professional in how they carry out their duties, at any time they 
can be accused of favouring the government because of their 
status as a member of the Premier’s staff. This has got to 
change and this Bill intends to do that. 
 
With the passage of Bill 20, the Chief Electoral Officer will in 
fact become an officer of this legislature, appointed through 

resolution of this legislature. This puts this position on par with 
the Legislative Clerk or Legislative Counsel in that they are 
completely independent from the whims of the government, and 
so we are completely on board with this aspect of this Bill. 
 
(1515) 
 
What we do have something of a concern with is with the 
process that will be put into place for the selection of the new 
Chief Electoral Officer and future electoral officers, because 
there is nothing in the Bill that guarantees input from anyone. 
We are not told in this legislation how the resolution that is put 
before this House comes about. 
 
Now I understand that the Minister of Labour has had 
discussions with both opposition parties about putting together 
an all-party committee to actually put the process in motion for 
the selection of the new Chief Electoral Officer. This 
understandably has to be done in the near future, given that the 
next election may not be all that far away. 
 
And while we’re pleased that it does appear that meaningful 
consultation may be taking place with all the parties in the 
House this time, there is nothing in the legislation that 
guarantees that this will always be the case. It’s quite 
reasonable to assume that there could be a circumstance in the 
future, near or far, that a resolution regarding the appointment 
of the Chief Electoral Officer is put before the legislature with 
no consultation with opposition members at all. 
 
Again while this doesn’t appear to be the case at all this time, I 
don’t see anything in this Bill that would prevent that from 
happening sometime in the future, and so that is a concern for 
us. 
 
However, beyond that, we have another, far more critical 
concern. The government and the Minister of Labour say they 
want to go out of their way to make sure that the electoral 
system in Saskatchewan is absolutely above question in quality 
of fairness. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t appear to us that they have gone 
all the way. Because while they’re finally willing to transform 
the Chief Electoral Officer into an officer of the legislature, the 
provincial cabinet will still exercise an undue influence on the 
electoral system. This is because the cabinet will continue to 
control every other appointment within the electoral system 
outside of the electoral officer and the assistant electoral officer. 
 
The cabinet will continue to appoint the returning officers in 
each constituency directly, and indirectly control who is 
appointed deputy returning officers, elections clerks, and poll 
clerks — will also indirectly control those appointments. If the 
government truly wanted to remove all politics from 
Saskatchewan’s electoral system, why would it chose to retain a 
tight fist around these appointments? 
 
These jobs are traditionally . . . have been handed out by 
governments as rewards for party loyalty, not for any particular 
organizational skills those who are appointed might have. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, when we are talking about something as 
fundamental as the electoral system, perception can often 



748 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

become reality. What should the public think about the electoral 
system when they see fervent supporters of the government 
given these jobs almost exclusively. What are people to think 
when they know that these positions haven’t been publicly 
advertised, but instead given out as partisan rewards. 
 
It’s true these aren’t high-paying, all-powerful positions like 
heading up Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, but they are 
viewed by many party activists as plums that belong to them. 
Given the NDP’s expertise in the area of patronage, these 
positions may be looked at as small potatoes compared with 
some of the other rewards the government has become famous 
for handing out. 
 
But given the NDP’s current wish to take out some of the 
perceived partisan bias in our electoral system by making the 
electoral officer an officer of the legislature, their decision to 
keep control over all other jobs in the system is hypocritical to 
say the least. 
 
And it’s not like these are unimportant positions. During the 
election period it is critical that we have people in place who 
can perform their duties adequately and to the benefit of all of 
those running and all voters. 
 
I’m sure there are members in this House today who have had 
at least some experience with an electoral officer at the local 
level, be it a DRO (deputy returning officer) or enumerators or 
others, who really weren’t up to the task assigned to them. Yes, 
many handled their roles in the election very well. However, 
others haven’t. And this, at least in part, is because they weren’t 
hired because of any kind of skill they brought to the job, but 
rather because of their loyalty to the party in power. 
 
In all fairness it’s not only in Saskatchewan that we see this. At 
the federal level, once again, nearly every election officer hired 
in the riding are hired because of their loyalty to the 
government. 
 
It’s time that Saskatchewan set the example and took the 
politics out of every aspect of the electoral system. I challenge 
the government to do this extra step and hand the appointment 
of those electoral officers to the discretion of the now 
soon-to-be independent Chief Electoral Officer. I can’t believe 
that the government will be able to give us one good reason 
why this can’t be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other issue I wish to speak on today before I 
move to adjourn debate, speaks once again to the whole notion 
of fairness to all political candidates and all political parties in 
Saskatchewan. Currently, two of the three political parties on 
the scene today have the advantage of political tax credits. 
That’s because they filter their donations through the auspices 
of their federal cousins in Ottawa. Saskatchewan is only one of 
two provinces in Canada who operate this way. Donations that 
are intended for political parties are sent first to Ottawa and 
then sent back to Saskatchewan, thereby making them eligible 
for federal tax credit. But if you are an independent party that is 
not beholden to federal interests, you don’t have that option. 
 
Yesterday we saw a new political party formed in 
Saskatchewan, a new left-wing alternative. They may shortly 
meet all the requirement, to become a full-fledged political 

party of Saskatchewan. Yet unlike the old-line . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now fortunately there will be plenty of 
opportunity to enter into debate on this if members choose. And 
I would encourage all hon. members, if they want to have their 
remarks be understood, to put them on the record and not shout 
them across the floor. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s obvious that 
members opposite are very concerned about the fact there could 
be a new political party on the left that will indeed split the 
votes on the left instead of on the right. And so we could 
actually see some interesting developments in Saskatchewan 
politics. 
 
However, they may shortly meet all the requirements to become 
a full-fledged political party of Saskatchewan. Yet unlike the 
old-line parties, they won’t be able to offer their contributors a 
single tax credit. And, Mr. Speaker, if I’m not mistaken, another 
new political party, filled with fresh thinking and new ideas, 
that was formed last August, is in the same boat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons . . . one of the results of 
filtering these donations through federal parties is that the two 
old-line parties are able to easily hide the identities of their 
contributors. They’re able to circumvent the disclosure 
requirements here in Saskatchewan. I know the member from 
Melville in particular will be appalled by this practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two years ago the government majority pushed 
through the new Election Act. Within that Act was the 
provision for provincial tax credits for provincial political 
parties. It was passed by the government so I assume it was 
supported by those members over there. Yet two years later this 
provision hasn’t been proclaimed. Why, I wonder. 
 
I don’t think that’s too hard to figure out, Mr. Speaker, because 
the system as it now stands, entrenches a bias into the system 
that works to the advantage of the two old parties and works 
against citizens of this province who want to begin new 
movements — such as those who announced the new Green 
Alliance Party yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the electoral system is seen to be fair, all parties 
and all potential parties must be on an even playing-field. If the 
government doesn’t wish to proclaim this provincial tax credit 
provision that’s fine, but then to keep the system fair it must at 
the same time bring forth legislation that stops political parties 
from filtering their donations through Ottawa for the purposes 
of collecting the tax credit and hiding the identity of their 
donors. If some parties aren’t allowed to offer tax credits, no 
party should. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know members of the legislature will want to 
take some time to consider what I’ve said very carefully and to 
see the wisdom of my remarks, and so with that I would like to 
move to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 10 — The 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Amendment Act, 
1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
speak for a few minutes on this Bill since the whole topic of 
economic development is of prime concern to the people of my 
constituency. 
 
For the most part, Mr. Speaker, this government’s economic 
development plans for the province have been a failure. While 
they constantly state that there are more people working in 
Saskatchewan today than when they took office, what kind of 
jobs have they created? — primarily low-paying, low-skilled, 
service industry jobs. 
 
And we must remember, Mr. Speaker, that all across this 
country in the last number of years there’s been a tremendous 
growth in the job market in Canada, and I actually believe if we 
took the comparisons between Alberta, B.C. (British 
Columbia), and Manitoba, and Saskatchewan we’re falling far 
behind our neighbours. The kind of jobs that usually come with 
a mop and a paper hat are the ones we’re creating, Mr. Speaker. 
There is no way to build for the future of this province doing 
that. 
 
We are heading into a time when it’s going to become harder 
and harder to sustain the programs and services we have in 
Saskatchewan. Our population is getting older very, very 
quickly. And we are not attracting and keeping high-skilled, 
well-paid workers that are absolutely necessary if we are to 
have a high tax base sufficient enough to ensure important 
government services are protected. 
 
Now the government says that it is trying to overcome this 
problem by investing so heavily in research and development 
parks, the type of which we see in Saskatoon and which we’ll 
soon see in Regina. And if these parks are successful and do 
attract more high-tech industries to our province, this is 
certainly a positive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what has the government done in order to make 
Saskatchewan more attractive to these types of businesses and 
industries in the first place? What have they done to make 
Saskatchewan a more attractive place for high-skilled workers? 
Not much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our taxes are still nearly the highest in the entire country. The 
recent 2-point drop in the Saskatchewan basic tax is simply a 
drop in the bucket. We are still miles behind our neighbours in 
Alberta. 
 
If you had to choose between a job in Alberta and a job in 
Saskatchewan, where would you really want to raise your 
family? In a province with low income taxes and zero PST 
(provincial sales tax), or in Saskatchewan where the 
government virtually taxes everything that moves and many 
things that don’t move. The choice seems obvious. 
 
If this government were truly committed to economic 
development, why doesn’t it at least acknowledge that its high 
tax policies are the single most detrimental thing when it comes 
to economic development in the province. And an example, Mr. 

Speaker, would be Maple Leaf Foods that happened to bypass 
Saskatchewan on its way to Manitoba just because of high 
taxes. 
 
When will they realize that when they begin to leave money in 
the pockets of the taxpayers, the economy is sure to become 
stronger. The people of Saskatchewan, and not the government, 
know best how to spend their own money. And if you think 
otherwise, I have just two words for you — Channel Lake. 
 
In terms of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I find it strange that when the 
government first unveiled SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation) as a replacement to SEDCO (Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation) in ’94, one of the primary 
differences between the two was that SOCO would not have a 
properties division. This change was seen as a positive by the 
business community since SEDCO frequently competed with 
private developers in selling space in their bloated property 
portfolio. 
 
Now they’re whistling a new tune. This Bill gives SOCO the 
freedom to go full bore into capital construction projects. The 
minister promises us this provision has only been put into the 
Bill to take into account highly specialized buildings like an 
R&D (research and development) park. When SEDCO was 
alive, one of its biggest money-losing divisions was its 
properties division, Mr. Speaker, since rental space is perhaps 
the most vulnerable area when the economy takes a downturn. 
 
And that’s when the government will essentially be here, Mr. 
Speaker, it will be the landlord. 
 
We have not been told of any commitments for tenants in the 
new development in Regina. It’s going to take more than just a 
building to attract these people here, and the government’s 
commitment for attracting high-tech industry to Saskatchewan 
seems to stop with the pouring of the concrete. Once again it 
goes back to the overall economic atmosphere in this province, 
and Saskatchewan has an atmosphere that is costly, and it is 
also stagnant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1530) 
 
And if the truth be told, Mr. Speaker, if Saskatchewan were an 
attractive place to do business, private developers would be 
stepping up to the plate and developing the R&D parks. 
 
Developing property and renting out office space is a job for the 
private sector. I get a little worried when this government, or 
any government for that matter, gets too involved in business. 
We’ve seen that in the Channel Lakes thing, we’ve seen it in 
Guyana, we see it in the NST fiasco. But you know, no matter 
how hard the NDP tries to paint itself as a fiscally conservative 
government, their roots still show through. 
 
Last year we learned they want to develop the potato industry in 
Saskatchewan. And there’s certainly nothing wrong with that, 
except of course they had to set up a Crown corporation to 
accomplish this. Once again they simply couldn’t let the private 
industry and the farmers who know the industry best, do their 
own thing. Instead we got SPUDCO, which of course is in 
direct competition with the private potato farmers which 
already we had in Saskatchewan. 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

Once again it comes back to my point, Mr. Speaker. The 
government should keep its nose out of things, step aside and 
let the private sector do its thing. Let the people who know what 
they’re doing create the jobs in this province. The government’s 
role is to create an atmosphere where they can afford to do that, 
and so far the NDP has been a miserable failure in this regard. 
 
I at this time then, Mr. Speaker, would like to adjourn debate. 
Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1998 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials before we get started, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today 
is Jim Brickwell, senior policy analyst for the Department of 
Municipal Government. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and good 
afternoon, Madam Minister. I’d like to welcome your officials 
here this afternoon. I only have a few questions, Madam 
Minister, on this Bill. 
 
Clause 3, amending the preamble. This change inserts the words 
“research and development” into the preamble to reflect the role 
of the University of Regina. And correct me if I’m wrong, but 
the Wascana Centre Authority is basically a park management 
board like the Meewasin Valley Authority. What public benefit 
is there to inserting the words in the preamble? And how, if at 
all, will this change the operations and mandate of the 
Authority? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I appreciate the opportunity to explain 
what the purpose of the land assembly is. Really what this is, is 
three partners deciding to assemble their land together so that, 
as they undertook development, there would be consistency of 
signage, of landscape, of development profiles within the area. 
 
So it’s not a park in the sense of a park; it’s more like a land 
assembly where people have agreed that for the sake of 
common identity and common purpose, to try to keep as much 
attractive park land within that land assembly . . . But it’s really 
three partners bringing all their developments, their buildings, 
and their lands together to create an area that has an identity. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In clause 
4(1), amending subsection 4(4). Originally this section made 
reference to the University of Saskatchewan. The explanatory 
notes describe this as a transitional provision. Presumably the 
transition referred to is the University of Regina change from a 
campus of the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) to a 
separate university. 
 
However, that all took place over 30 years ago, Madam 
Minister. I'm kind of wondering why it is just being changed 
now. Will this change or enhance the influence of the U of R 

(University of Regina) on the Wascana Centre? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Generally when legislation is changed, 
one uses the opportunity created by needed changes to clean up 
other things that have been sitting around in the Act for a long 
time. We usually don’t bring Acts forward just to clean them 
up. It’s if there’s something that’s of substantive importance. So 
because other things of substance were coming forward, it was 
decided to clean up all the old loose ends in the Act at the same 
time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Clause 6, 
amending section 9. This section allows the Authority to 
delegate its powers to any officer, employee, or committee. And 
this begs the question, Madam Minister, does this mean that the 
Authority does not have to meet or make any decisions at all? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No. The kind of things that quite often 
occupy some of the time of the Authority are for example 
approving where a particular stop sign will go or approving the 
height of a curb. And we feel that there are certainly people 
within the bureaucracy of the Wascana Centre that are quite 
able to do those kinds of things and we’d prefer to keep the 
board onto discussing matters of policy, the direction of the 
centre, the development plans for the centre rather on the 
details. 
 
So this is really just an ability to give the people that are 
professionals there to handle the decisions that are clearly 
within the policy framework. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Madam Minister, really though, doesn’t 
this go too far in removing the Authority from the 
responsibilities that it has? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can go through in detail all the 
various different things it might be, but the whole Authority 
would have to pass a resolution in order to delegate any of its 
authorities, and certainly there would be no thought of 
delegating authority that went beyond existing policy or 
regulations. It would only be in the areas where the rules are 
very defined and where the answer would be fairly 
straightforward that we would think of delegating that authority. 
 
I can go through the list if you want. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Maybe if you could. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay. The Authority may: 
 

(c) co-ordinate or control the use, development, 
conservation, maintenance and improvement of public 
lands in accordance with the master plan; 
 

So all of these things are first of all agreed to in a master plan 
before they’re actually implemented. We can: 
 

(d) accept donations of funds from the public and acquire 
property by gift, purchase or any other manner; 
 
(e) hold or administer property or acquire by lease, licence 
or otherwise the right to occupy and use property; 
 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

We can: 
 

(f) sell, grant, convey, lease or otherwise dispose of 
property; 

 
(g) construct, maintain or operate any park, square, 
improvement or service facility; 
 
(h) subject to the provisions of this Act relating to 
landscape maintenance, service maintenance, landscape 
construction and service facilities: 
 

(i) maintain, develop or improve, or build on, any 
authority land; 
 
(ii) with the consent of a participating party, or of its 
agent or representative, maintain, develop or improve, 
or build on, any public land, other than authority land, 
owned by that participating party; 

 
(i) without limitation to the powers contained in section 
65, upon the request and at the expense of a participating 
party, maintain, develop or improve property owned by a 
participating party and situated outside Wascana Centre; 

 
(j) on authority land, establish, maintain and operate, or 
grant concessions for the operation of places of 
entertainment, amusement, recreation or refreshment or 
other places of public interest or accommodation 
 
(k) invest for its benefit all or any sums of money 
belonging to it and available for investment in: 
 

(i) public securities of or securities guaranteed by 
Canada or any province of Canada; 
 

So those are our powers. But again, I would say that it wouldn’t 
be our intention to delegate powers where there isn’t a very 
clear policy or regulation that outlines how a certain thing is to 
be done. And the problem we’re really trying to deal with here 
is the problem of things like parking signs and fairly 
straightforward things, not any kind of policy matters. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and I might 
have missed this, but how actually will the employees be held 
accountable for the decisions they make on behalf of the board? 
Is there an accountability set up in there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s probably one of the strongest 
accountability frameworks because we have a master plan that’s 
developed, and once that plan is adopted, no change can made 
to the plan without a motion of the board. So that would really 
be, I think, the main way of doing it. And the board does meet 
on a regular basis and there’s a report to the board on any 
movement on the master plan, or any request to change the 
master plan, or any request that come forward from the 
community for an event to be held in the park, or those kinds of 
things. 
 
So I think that the board is actually very involved in all of the 
decisions and it’s our goal really just to get rid of some of the 
very straightforward stuff on our plate. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How does 
this compare with the provisions of the Meewasin Valley 
Authority? Are they comparable? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the main difference between 
Meewasin and the Wascana Centre is a slightly different 
relationship in each instance with the partners, but the general 
powers and provisions and intention is pretty much the same. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Clause 7, 
amending subsection 12(1), this clause allows the Authority to 
extend its territory through agreement with neighbouring 
municipalities. Are any such expansions being contemplated at 
this time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think you’ll like this one. What this is 
all about is, we used to have the power essentially to 
expropriate to add land to the Authority, and now we would 
need the permission of the RM (rural municipality) in order to 
do that. Let’s say they decided they’d like us to add a watershed 
or something into the urban wetland area of the park; that would 
have to be done with their approval. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m sure the 
municipalities are somewhat glad to hear that. 
 
Clause 18, adding new section 53, and I believe that probably, 
Madam Minister, this is the meat and bones of this Act. It 
changes the funding formula for the Authority from an 
assessment based one to straight grants. The same change is 
being made to the Meewasin Valley Authority, I believe, so we 
have many of the same questions under that Bill. 
 
We support this long overdue change, and the old assessment 
based formula was clearly deficient. This was evident by the 
fact that it had to be amended every year to maintain adequate 
funding. However, I wonder how the old reassessment would 
have, you know, would have changed the old formula. What 
would the Authority have received from each of the partners 
this year under the old model? Do you have any idea what that 
would have been? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In a general way I can say it would 
have been more. One of the reasons why we weren’t able to go 
with the assessment based funding was that every year it would 
have required us to add more money into the Authority. And 
during a time when money was tight, although the park is very 
important, we held the line on spending in the park. So the 
purpose of this is really to say that there’s a budgeted amount of 
money, and so that when assessment is done it doesn’t keep 
increasing the costs and the money that has to flow to the park 
to operate it. 
 
If you want the actual figures, we’ve got them here. What we 
actually gave from ’93-96 was 782,000, the province; 426,500, 
the city; and 213,300, the University of Regina. And in 1997 
the assessment formula would have moved it from 782,000, as 
an example, for the province, to 1.156 million. So you can see it 
would have been quite a dramatic difference. 
 
And as much as the Wascana Centre Authority would have 
appreciated having those increased operating funds, that wasn’t 
where the decision was to spend the money. 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Yes, exactly. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
The new section also allows the participating parties to cover 
budget overruns proportionately. What has been the Authority’s 
record for staying within budget? Has it been fairly good to this 
point? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. I would say that they have a very 
excellent record of managing their budget and taking action if it 
looks like they can’t manage with what they’ve got. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That’s all the 
questions I have at this time. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. I’d just like to thank Jim 
Brickwell, our official, for joining me here today. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to reintroduce the 
official before we start. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. I’ll 
reintroduce Jim Brickwell of the Department of Municipal 
Government, who is the senior policy analyst there. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just 
looking at this piece of legislation, and it seems to me, Mr. 
Minister, a question I’ve got on the top on my mind that I’d like 
to get off my chest first of all, is we go through this process 
almost every year. And what I’m wondering and the question 
I’m going to ask you, Mr. Minister, is, as far as the full intent of 
the Bill, is there any way of maybe addressing some of the 
issues that we tend to do on an annual basis? Is there a way of 
simplifying the process? 
 
Do we need to have the Bill, a review of the Bill, a 
reassessment appear every year? Or can we find a way and a 
mechanism that indeed puts in place the tools that are needed 
for Meewasin Authority to continue to function without having 
to appear before the Assembly for basically, in many cases, just 
minor changes to the way the Authority acts? And in 
specifically regarding the funding, so that the Authority knows 
exactly what it’s got to work with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, that is, I 
say with respect, a very, very good question because that’s 
exactly what we’re trying to accomplish here. We’ve had to 
come back year after year because, as in the case of the 
Wascana Authority, the funding formula produced results that 
were beyond our fiscal ability to carry. So we came back and 
amended it year by year. And what we’re trying to do here is 
get away from that. 

So we’re trying to . . . we’re moving away from the assessment 
based formula and we’re moving to a commitment to pay a 
specific sum of money on behalf of the government. At the 
same time we’re defining the obligations of the city of 
Saskatoon and the University of Saskatchewan, with a provision 
that those amounts would be reviewed every five years. And 
that would mean that so far as funding is concerned, if there 
was a review that suggested there should be more money 
payable, then we’d perhaps amend it after five years, but we 
won’t have to come back year after year any more. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman; thank you, Mr. 
Minister. I appreciate those comments because it seems in many 
cases what we’re doing is somewhat tedious. And I’m sure for 
the Authority as centres themselves, both Wascana and 
Meewasin, this is just somewhat a little inconvenient for them 
as well. Just knowing that they’re already facing their fiscal 
year, they’ve had to make some plans assuming that they’re 
going to have access to X number of dollars but not specifically 
aware, other than directives coming possibly from municipal 
governments saying that we’re hoping to achieve that same area 
of level, but when we move the legislation forward we will 
indeed have that. 
 
So I guess in addressing that concern and certainly moving it 
from the assessment management area, the other question I 
would have, you talked about a review every five years. Are 
you saying, Mr. Minister, however, we would still, if there was 
a request for further funding, that there would be an amendment 
to the legislation that would be brought up in any specific year. 
Or are you proposing another means of addressing that so we 
don’t have to wait for the process of legislation to address that 
question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The answer is that we are seeking to 
build into this amending Bill a capacity to pay additional 
amounts to the Authority if it’s considered appropriate in any 
year. So it’s simply be a matter of budgeting the money as far 
as the province is concerned, and pay additional amounts 
without having to come back and amend the Bill. 
 
And the review that I mentioned earlier is to take place at least 
once every five years. It could be done before the expiration of 
five years. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. So, Mr. 
Minister, what process are you going to go . . . or how are you 
going to go about putting this in place? Are you going to have a 
dollar figure that allows the Authority or allows . . . or who are 
you going to allow to make that decision? I guess what I’m 
saying, number one, is it going to be a dollar value that they 
would be able to work within over and above at a certain level? 
And then who would be responsible to make that decision and 
how would that decision be arrived at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The base level will be set out in section 
56 of the Act as it will be amended if this legislation is passed. 
And the base level for the government is $740,169 in each 
fiscal year. And the amount for the city and the university is 
also set out in subsection (1) of the proposed section 56. 
 
Whether amounts in addition to that would be paid would be the 
result of a consensus being reached between the partners — the 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

government, the city, and the university — that additional 
money should be put into the Authority. No such discussions 
have taken place and we, at the moment, don’t anticipate any. 
 
But circumstances change and the flexibility is there to put in 
additional amounts without us having to go through the 
procedure we’ve been going through for the last, I think, five or 
six years. So we’re trying to get away from that and establish a 
more flexible approach to it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
understand in clause 3, we talk about . . . I believe you made 
some comments about modernizing some of the language. And 
what I’d like to know, exactly what you’re talking about. I think 
we’re talking about changing some of the words from he . . . 
changed to he or she and chairman to chairperson, and how 
many times does this occur in the Bill and what specifically is 
the reasoning for it? 
 
It seems to me that may be some waste of time in those minor 
changes. I think the expressions of he, generally in most cases, 
is still taken as meaning either gender. And I would wonder 
specifically why we’re talking about these changes and the 
extra costs that would be incurred in just going through the 
legislation to make those changes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We of course wouldn’t open the Act 
just to change that kind of language and make it gender neutral. 
But when an Act is opened in the manner that’s happening here, 
then it is automatic these days that the draftsperson will make 
the changes to make gender neutral various words like chairman 
and other . . . and that kind of language. So it happens 
automatically. I couldn’t tell you how many times it occurs in 
the Act, but wherever it does occur, it becomes the chairperson 
and vice-chairperson. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, as well I believe in clause 4 we see 
the Authority having a quorum of just six members. Mr. 
Minister, how many members are on the Authority? And I 
believe if . . . what the clause is saying that you need six 
members in order to make a decision. First of all, how many 
members are on the Authority and have, in the past, we found 
that the Authority has operated under the guidelines of the 
legislation about the fact that six members must be present 
whenever a decision is made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There are 12 members of the . . . on the 
Authority. As we understand it, they are operating according to 
what we propose in the amending legislation. So it may be that 
they haven’t always been acting in accordance with the existing 
legislation. We just don’t know. It’s never been a big issue and 
it has not ever been raised I think as a problem. 
 
But here we thought we would give them a more flexible 
regime in which to operate and set the quorum and then allow a 
majority vote of that quorum to decide matters, as happens in 
the case of I venture to say all boards or most boards. 
 
This request to make the legislation conform with the long 
practice of the board was requested by the board, and we’re 
accommodating that because we think it’s reasonable. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, at the end of the day who is the 

board responsible to — is it Municipal Government that 
Meewasin Authority board is responsible to? 
 
(1600 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The board has to answer to three 
partners — the province, the city, and the university. I happen 
to be the minister responsible, having been so appointed by the 
Premier. But the budget for the Authority is contained within 
the Department of Municipal Government. It’s not always the 
most convenient arrangement but we’ve managed to make it 
work, and that has been the case for some 25 years now or so. It 
works. And so if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess one of the reasons for the question — 
when you introduced your official as being from Municipal 
Government and recognizing your portfolio of Labour, I wasn’t 
quite sure how the two mixed and mingled other than you 
coming from Saskatoon, and that might be appropriate. So 
that’s one of the reasons for the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have in clause 5 setting out quorum for an 
appeal board of two, and I believe the appeal board is made up 
of representation of the city, province, and the university. Of 
course, it would be appropriate if you’ve got three — at least 
you would have a majority available for an appeal. 
 
What I would like to know, Mr. Minister, is what specifically 
does the appeal board deal with, and what types of issues may 
be brought to the appeal board or questions that may be brought 
to . . . or raised for the appeal board to address? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The board, the appeal board is a 
three-person board consisting of one member appointed by each 
of the partners, and we are proposing that a quorum be any two 
of those. 
 
The jurisdiction of the board is set out in the existing legislation 
in section 29.2. And the board is the authority to which you can 
go if you feel that the Meewasin Valley Authority has 
misapplied the development plan in relation to the application, 
or if anyone feels aggrieved with respect to any terms or 
conditions which were attached to an approval by the Meewasin 
Valley Authority on an application that is affected by the 
development plan. The appeal board then hears those appeals 
and decides them. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So, Mr. Minister, do I understand then that when 
you talk about the appeal board and representation from the 
city, province, and university, this board is separate from the 
board or the Authority. And if there is a grievance, if someone 
comes to the board with a grievance that they’re actually 
dealing with if it’s referred to this appeal process, they’re 
actually being referred to individuals who are separate from the 
Authority or the Meewasin Valley, the Authority board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, the answer is yes, they are 
separate from the MVA (Meewasin Valley Authority) board. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I understand as well that in clause 6 
it streamlines setting up dates for appeal hearings. In the 
original Bill the appeal board itself set the date. This has now 
been given to the chairperson or the chairperson’s designate. In 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

what way do you see this speeding up the process of 
administration and certainly the hearing of appeals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Under the old Act the board was in the 
unfortunate position of having to call a meeting in order to set a 
hearing date, and it just seemed to be unnecessary and wasteful. 
And so the changes simply allow the Chair to set the date. No 
doubt the Chair will do it in consultation with the other 
members of the board to ensure that there will be a quorum 
when the appeal board meets. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So basically, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Minister, what 
you’re saying is the Chair still has and consults with . . . just 
saves another process of calling a meeting to set that date, but in 
consultation the Chair can determine what’s most appropriate 
for the other board members in getting together. 
 
Clause 6(4) I believe requires the appeal board to render a 
written judgement within 60 days. Before that, no time limit 
was stipulated. Has this flexibility been abused in the past? 
Have you found, Mr. Minister, that some of the decisions have 
been delayed further? Is this something that comes from the 
Authority and from the appeal board itself as a means of 
guaranteeing that the process is managed and handled and 
appeals are dealt with quickly and fairly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We are not aware of any situations 
where decisions have been inordinately delayed. As far as we 
are aware, this will not impose any onerous obligation on the 
board. In other words, they’re doing it now. 
 
But in reviewing the Act, when we knew we were going to have 
to amend it, we saw, our officials saw that there was no 
requirement as to when the decision would be introduced. So 
there almost always is with respect to this type of board, so they 
introduced this just to ensure that it doesn’t happen that 
decisions are inordinately delayed. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I certainly agree. Now 
is the time to do it while we’re debating it, coming back to my 
original question rather than finding next year oh, we maybe 
should have addressed this area and we’re back into the full 
debate on that. So I thank you for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we look at the funding formula and the fact 
that we’ve . . . that this piece of legislation is moving from an 
assessment based one to a straight grant, if it were left under an 
assessment based formula, first of all, what would that have 
cost us, based on the assessment? Or are assessments set, based 
on what the assessment of property is — I guess you would say 
the mill rates. How were the mill rates set prior to, and if this 
was continued to operate under the assessment process, how 
would that have affected the funding for Meewasin Valley 
Authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — In Saskatoon, if we had not frozen the 
funding as we have been doing over the past several years, we 
would be paying about a million dollars more to the Meewasin 
Valley Authority — almost exactly a million dollars more. That 
would be split between the three partners. But that would be the 
effect of it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I have a question that needs to be 

asked. Does this set a precedent for other agencies, especially 
with this whole question and debate over assessment when you 
. . . for some Authorities, like in the case of Meewasin, 
Wascana, where we’ve set a specific grant level because of the 
fact that with the changes to the assessment formula and going 
by mill rates, if you were to try and address them fairly, then 
you would have to have separate mill rates for each institution 
— or in this case the Authorities here or otherwise — like you 
say, yes, you’d have been facing major increases. 
 
As a result of the changes here, do you see this being used by 
other large groups, organizations, or parks in addressing some 
of their concerns in suggesting that maybe we should have a 
specific grant, a level grant level as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I’ve heard no discussion about that at 
all, so as far as I’m concerned no consideration is being given to 
anything like that. 
 
We were moved here by the fact that we’ve been coming back 
year after year after year with these small, non-controversial 
amendments. We were not moved by wanting to get away from 
an assessment base. In other words, if there’d been lots of 
money around I suppose that the original formula would have 
continued and indeed there would be the kind of increases we 
spoke about a moment ago. 
 
But we were just trying to get away from this — your word was 
“tedious” — repetition of the same kind of Bill every year, and 
not really worried about the assessment part of it at all. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in regards 
to — and I don’t disagree with the fact that we’ve gone to . . . 
(inaudible) . . . I think most taxpaying public certainly would 
look at it; number one, they appreciate what the Meewasin 
Valley has done for the city of Saskatoon, and certainly 
Wascana Authority here in Regina. 
 
I think when you talk to the public, it certainly enhances — 
both cities are enhanced as a result of the two Authorities and 
the different functions they provide — the area for not only 
picnics but recreation, and just preserving some of our heritage 
and some of the natural heritage. Certainly along the river bank 
in Saskatoon is an excellent . . . I’ve seen it myself. 
 
I just think that’s really excellent that we are doing that. 
Otherwise there’s no doubt that as the city expands a lot of that 
would be eaten up by development, and just takes away from 
some of the beauty that enhances the city of Saskatoon. 
 
A question I would have, have there been periods where 
Meewasin has come back to, back to government or to 
Municipal Government as far as overruns? Have you had any of 
those concerns in the past? If there have been overruns, how 
were they dealt with in the past and how will they be dealt with 
in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The Meewasin Valley Authority has an 
excellent record of operating within its budget; so that they 
haven’t had to come back to us and to our partners for increased 
funding in order to get through a year. Naturally they have 
petitioned us from time to time to increase the funding. We 
haven’t been able to do that; we’ve been quite firm about it. 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

From time to time also they have special projects. The 
acquisition of a parcel of land becomes possible and they will 
ask us if we could provide money to them for that purpose and 
we have not been able to do that; we’ve said so, but that is the 
normal course, course of things. The Meewasin Valley 
Authority, like most organizations, are short of funds and they, 
they will ask for increased funding and hopefully someday 
we’ll be able to do that, but not right now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess 
the fact that we’re working to achieve a mechanism whereby 
the Meewasin Valley Authority continue to function without 
having to wait for the legislature to address its funding all the 
time, what . . . have there been any checks put in place that 
makes sure that the Meewasin Valley still continues to at least 
be responsible to the Legislative Assembly? Or what body 
would they be responsible to and accountable to in regards to 
their funding or any of the funds that they would receive? 
Would that be the three major partners? And how are the 
reports handed out or made available to us, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The Authority provides an annual report 
pursuant . . . as required by their legislation, to the Assembly, 
which I table every year. And in a similar way, and with the 
same report, they report to their other partners. 
 
In addition to that, I personally am a member of the Meewasin 
Valley Board and that is set out in the legislation. I can’t 
appoint anybody else to attend in my place. My chair is vacant 
if I’m not there, so they maintain close contact with the 
government as a result of that. 
 
As well the president of the university and, up until very 
recently, the mayor of the city of Saskatoon made it a habit of 
attending all of the board meetings. So there was quite 
high-level representation at meetings of the board; so that the 
reporting relationship and accountability is really very, very 
satisfactory. It’s probably a model. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And the fact that we 
have three major authorities responsible in having membership, 
I’m sure they would all, as you’re putting funds in, you would 
want to make sure you’ve got a close eye on how the funds are 
being expended in regards to the requests that would come your 
way. 
 
Clauses 13 and 14, I understand, update the boundaries of the 
Authority in light of new mapping information. And I am struck 
by how extensive this list is. Can you explain why there is such 
a discrepancy between the old maps and the digitized computer 
maps that are now being followed. And what implication would 
this have for other land registry throughout the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, it looks a 
lot worse than it is. With the digitilization of the system, if I can 
use that term, all these things just popped right up. For example, 
there are quite a number of situations where the original 
description is still correct except there have been changes that 
have occurred over the last 30 years with the establishment of 
new plans or subdivisions or amendments to the legal 
description as it appears in the Land Titles Office. So the 

description was correct when the Bill was originally drafted but 
is no longer correct, and so we’re changing them in this Bill. 
 
It is a great deal . . . it looks a lot more complicated than it 
actually is. A lot of people spent a lot of time on this and 
they’re now satisfied that they’ve got the descriptions correct. 
And I think we just have to accept their word that they are 
correct. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, those are 
basically the questions I have for this afternoon. I want to thank 
you and your official for having a response to questions. And 
we look forward to working with this piece of legislation and 
seeing how it’s going to work. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Minister, as you pointed out, we have access to 
the annual report as well to follow up. And if indeed the Bill 
addresses some of the concerns and takes away some of the 
tedious process of what we’ve had to go through the last few 
years, and that allows more flexibility for the board to do their 
job, I think it’s certainly a worthwhile piece of legislation. 
Therefore I’m prepared to move forward on the Bill before us. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I’d like to take this opportunity to thank 
Mr. Brickwell for his assistance to the committee, and to me in 
the preparation of this Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24  The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
The Chair: — Before we start, I would ask the minister to 
introduce his staff please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
today Sandra Morgan, sitting beside me, who is the deputy 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

minister; Cheryl Hanson, an assistant deputy minister sitting 
behind Ms. Morgan; and Sharon Little, the manager of budget 
and operations who will be seated behind me. 
 
I have also in the Assembly sitting in these seats at the back: 
Mr. Fayek Kelada, who is the director of health and safety 
services, in the occupational health and safety division; Eric 
Greene, who is the assistant director of labour standards; John 
Boyd, the director of planning and policy; Doug Forseth, a 
labour relations analyst; and Dawn McKibben, who is the 
director of human resources and administration. 
 
(1630) 
 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to welcome your officials here this afternoon. 
Mr. Minister, the first issue I’d like to deal with this afternoon, 
I’d like to send you some material so — I’m sure you’re very 
familiar with it— but just so, if you want to refer to it, you 
could. 
 
I’d like to go through, Mr. Minister, some background 
information that we have here so that you can understand the 
issue that we’re dealing with today. In discussions with two of 
the middle managers let go from SaskPower in ’95 as part of 
the mass termination of approximately 80 employees, they 
informed us that the corporation did not follow section 44.1(1) 
and 44.1(2) of The Labour Standards Act. 
 
After their termination, they wrote a series of letters to the 
Department of Labour. In their correspondence they finally got 
them to say that the corporation did defy the Act but that they 
assured the Department of Labour they would not do it again. 
The point is not that these individuals want their job back, 
although the Act has the authority to do that. But if the 
government doesn’t follow its own laws, why should anybody 
in the private sector. 
 
And I’d like to just to go through 44.1 just for both familiar . . . 
we’re both familiar with what we’re talking about. 
 
Section 44.1 (1) and 44.1 (2) of The Labour Standards Act deals 
with a notice of group terminations and states: 
 

44.1 (1) In addition to the requirements of section 43 and 
43.1 but subject to subsection (3), an employer who 
intends to terminate the employment of 10 or more 
employees in an establishment within any four-week 
period shall give written notice of that intention, in 
accordance with subsection (2), to each of the following: 

 
(a) the minister; 
 
(b) each employee whose employment will be 
terminated; . . . 
 

(2) The written notice required by subsection (1): 
 

(a) must specify: 
 

(i) the number of employees whose employment will 

be terminated; 
 
(ii) the effective date or dates of their terminations; 
and 
 
(iii) the reasons for the terminations; and 
 

(b) must be given within the time prescribed in the 
regulations. 

 
According to the letter from Eric Greene and the assistant 
director of the Saskatchewan Labour on October 31, 1995, 
Carole Bryant informed the Minister of Labour that 99 
out-of-scope employees have been terminated or retired as of 
that day of the letter, October 31, and 18 more would be 
terminated or retire in the next six months. 
 
Furthermore the employees were not given any advance 
warning of their terminations. In other words, Ms. Bryant 
informed the department after the fact and was clearly not in 
compliance with the Act. The Act includes penalties for 
offences to the Act of $2,000 per offence so that there are some 
stakes for the government admitting the Crown corporation was 
wrong. 
 
Furthermore, had SaskPower complied with section 44(10) and 
provided notice to the employees and the minister at the time 
when it began giving out termination notices, the last days or 
dates of employment for those affected would likely have been 
different and as a result wages owing and subsequent pension 
calculations would have been affected if employees had been 
able to work for a longer period of time. 
 
Mr. Minister, now I’d like to question you on that if I may. If an 
employer terminated a hundred employees all at one time and 
did not inform the minister until after the fact, would this be a 
violation of The Labour Standards Act under section 44.1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, sorry to 
take a few moments. The member will know that this situation 
did not occur on my watch, if I may say that — it happened 
under a previous minister. And so I took a few moments to just 
be reminded or to be told about the situation. 
 
But the member poses a hypothetical situation but based on the 
example that you gave where a hundred people have been laid 
off and the notice that is required by section 44.1 was not given. 
And your question was, is that a violation of the Act; and my 
answer is yes, that would be a violation of the Act. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I understand 
that you were not on the watch at that time and I appreciate that, 
and I have no problem with taking your time to understand what 
we’re talking about here. 
 
If that is a violation then, what is your understanding of what 
the penalties should be under this clause? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I will answer the member’s 
question immediately. I just want to draw attention to the fact, 
however, that there are . . . there are regulations that also apply 
to that section which prescribes the length of notice which is 
applicable depending on the number of employees. If there are 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

more employees, the period of the notice is to be longer and 
also sets out a number of situations in which an employer will 
be exempted from giving the notice. 
 
One of the features of these group notice provisions, from their 
very earliest enactment in most of the jurisdictions in Canada, 
has been that there really is none of the enforcement procedures 
surrounding them that you would find in other parts of the 
labour standards legislation. 
 
And the decision then is whether or not the employer will be 
prosecuted. It is a violation of the Act and there are penalties 
prescribed for violations of the Act and procedures involved, or 
at least prescribed, where the employer may be charged with an 
offence and taken to court. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. But section 
85(1), and if I’m reading the right part of the Act here, it states 
that any violation of the Act bring with it a penalty of $2,000, 
and $5,000 for a second offence within six years, and $10,000 
for a third offence, Mr. Minister. 
 
In the case that we have talked about, would each termination 
be classed as a separate offence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, my advice is that it would be 
treated as being one contravention of the Act; not a hundred 
contraventions of the Act, but one in respect of the group 
termination. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Have there been 
any past occurrences where a private company or I guess for 
that matter a government department have been found in 
non-compliance of this section of the Act? And if so, were any 
of these organizations fined or penalized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There have been a small number of 
situations in which the required notice has not been given. I’m 
advised that there were three or four or five such situations. 
And we have worked with the employer and the employees 
involved to resolve them. No prosecutions have resulted from 
any of those situations. This has been in the law since I think 
1995, early 1995. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d 
like to get more specific now to the SaskPower experience that I 
talked about before. When SaskPower terminated a large group 
of out-of-scope employees in ’95, did the corporation give the 
Minister of Labour appropriate notice of these terminations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The answer is no. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, according to a letter 
written by Saskatchewan Labour on October 31, ’95, Carole 
Bryant informed the Minister of Labour that 99 out-of-scope 
employees had been terminated or retired as of the day of the 
letter of October 31, and 18 more would be terminated or retire 
in the next six months. This clearly states that the corporation 
did not inform the Minister of Labour until after the 
terminations. 
 
Given that SaskPower was in violation of the Act, what were 
the consequences? Was the corporation fined at that time? 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — SaskPower was not charged and 
therefore was not fined. Might I enlarge on that answer? In all 
of the work that the department does under The Labour 
Standards Act, the department relies upon the Department of 
Justice to advise us as to whether or not a situation should be 
prosecuted. 
 
There are countless violations of the Act that occur all the time 
and we are always uncovering . . . we’re always, very often 
uncovering these and we settle almost all of them. Only in 
extreme cases do we prosecute under The Labour Standards 
Act. And we always proceed in accordance with advice from 
the Department of Justice. I think that some of the 
correspondence that you passed to me indicates that that was 
the situation in this case. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a letter 
here I’d like to read from — and I believe you may have it there 
if you want to look at it — from Graham Mitchell, the executive 
director of Saskatchewan Labour to Mr. Jack Shepherd, who by 
the way is one of the managers terminated after 35 years of 
employment, stating that in his opinion, reinstatement was not 
appropriate response to SaskPower’s apparent breach of the 
Act. 
 
He went on to say that it may be of some interest to you that 
SaskPower has, since your termination, affirmed that it will, by 
complying with its obligations under The Labour Standards Act 
basically assured that although they broke the law when they 
fired this man, they will not do it again. 
 
Further correspondence between Mr. Shepherd and the 
Department of Labour and the Department of Justice clearly 
indicated that although there was a violation of the Act, that 
prosecution of SaskPower was not appropriate because of legal 
fees, etc. And I believe, Mr. Minister, we’ve heard this before. 
Instead they chose to use their resources educating the employer 
of their obligations. 
 
Mr. Minister, should our Crown corporations and government 
departments not be very informed of their obligations under The 
Labour Standards Act? And if they plan to terminate over a 
hundred employees, would they not check with the Labour 
department to ensure they follow the proper procedures. Mr. 
Minister, will you tell us whether there was any contact with the 
department to discuss the obligations prior to such 
terminations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There was no contact at all between 
SaskPower and the Department of Labour prior to these 
lay-offs. The notice from Ms. Bryant that the member has 
referred to was our first official knowledge that this was taking 
place. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Is it your 
understanding then at this point, is SaskPower, as far as you 
know, are they up to speed now? If this happens again, will this 
same problem arise again or do they understand what they’re 
doing now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well I would hope so. They certainly 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1998 

understand what the law is now. And I would hope and expect, 
and we would all expect that they would comply with these 
provisions if this situation were to happen again. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess, and I agree 
with you, I would hope they’d know what they’re doing and I 
think for everybody’s benefit they’re up to speed. But I guess 
this what to me resembles a number of things we saw happen. 
And if you remember back a GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) judgement where it went to court and a judge ruled 
that in the best interests of the public we will not benefit the 
farmer from his transaction. 
 
And I would also say it resembles somewhat if I bought fire 
insurance on my house, it would be to the benefit of the people 
out there that if my house burnt down, that if the company I was 
insured with didn’t pay me, it would be to the benefit of 
everybody else that carried insurance through there. And I don’t 
think that happens. 
 
And I think maybe — and I don’t know what your comment 
would be on this, Mr. Minister — but I believe these people 
really, probably have an obligation of still . . . or should be 
maybe — correct me if I’m wrong — maybe four weeks pay 
and then the holiday pay and the pension plan and everything 
else would come into effect here. So I think really these people 
that were caught in this are somewhat short-changed, are they 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I thank the member for that question, 
Mr. Chair, because it gives me an opportunity to talk about the 
group termination provisions. I had the advantage, if you’d call 
it an advantage, of at one point in my career working for the 
federal government. And I was involved with the enactment of 
the first group termination provisions that existed in Canadian 
legislation through the federal Canada Labour Code. So I’m 
comfortable in answering, in giving you the information that 
I’m about to give you. 
 
The public policy that underpins this kind of provision is not 
intended to give, to confer rights upon individual employees in 
the sense that they, that they, as a result of the enactment, have 
a different or larger right than they had in its absence. The 
public policy underpinning these provisions is that the 
government ought to have an opportunity to respond in some 
situations to large terminations. 
 
Let us say that in the town of Saltcoats, which I think is your 
home town or near your home town in any event, if there was a 
. . . Let’s take Esterhazy for an example — probably even a 
better example — and say the potash mine there suddenly laid 
off 200 people. Well that would be a huge blow to the economy 
of Esterhazy, which is still a small town . . . or it’s a small town. 
Let’s call it a small town; I don’t mean to offend them but a 
lay-off of 200 people would be very significant for them. 
 
And the provision for group termination is there to give the 
government and the community an opportunity to respond to 
the situation, first of all by trying to get the potash mine to 
change its mind and maybe not lay off anybody or not lay off 
that many, or do something else. 
 
But in any event to give us an opportunity to consider what 

options there are for the employment of those 200 people: is 
there something else that could be revved up in the community 
where they would . . . so they could continue to live there and 
work there, earn an income there? Is there any opportunity for 
one of our retraining programs to move in there and give some 
assistance? Is counselling necessary or advisable? 
 
In other words, what I’m saying is that it gives the government 
the opportunity to do something about these mass lay-off 
situations. I repeat, it was not intended, and if I may say so, this 
section was not intended to confer rights on individuals that 
they don’t otherwise have. It was not intended to give them a 
larger claim for severance, for example, than they would 
otherwise have. 
 
I take advantage of the member’s question to lay that 
background on the record. And I repeat again I was there when 
this first provision came along so I feel in a position to say with 
some confidence the things I have said concerning the public 
policy underpinning these provisions. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I 
appreciate your answer, but I somewhat feel for where the 
people that were caught in the middle here, and because the 
rules were not followed, do you not though agree that maybe 
that these people were not treated fairly in this situation, and the 
four weeks pay maybe should have been paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — It’s my impression that the people who 
were affected, who were laid off, were all . . . they were all out 
of scope, first of all. I think that’s correct. They were . . . 
certainly if not all, most of them were out-of-scope people. 
They would therefore be, for the most part, management 
people. 
 
And I can tell you on the basis of my experience, they would 
have a considerable claim for severance. It would depend upon 
their position — you know, where it was in the organization 
chart, how responsible a position it was. It would depend also 
upon their years of service. And in my private practice of law, I 
handle many, many such cases. They would have a fairly 
significant claim for severance. It would far outstrip any right 
they have under The Labour Standards Act. 
 
I think in the case of . . . that we’re talking about, the 
SaskPower case, the employees did in fact receive a severance 
package. I don’t know what the details of that were; I could get 
them. But I would hope it was a fair package that took into 
account the matters that I mentioned. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I also have 
another concern here I’d like to bring to your attention, and you 
may already be familiar with it. And I’d just like to read it, but I 
will send you a copy over so you could maybe follow along. I’d 
like to read you the concern. It’s on behalf of my colleague 
from Cannington. 
 
And the letter goes on to read, and this letter was sent to you, 
Mr. Minister: 
 

I’m writing this letter on behalf of Natalie Kleinser of 
Estevan who has experienced a great deal of difficulty with 
respect to disability benefits from SAHO. Ms. Kleinser 



April 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

was a nurse’s aid and was hurt on the job in 1989. She was 
on Workers’ Comp for a short period of time until SAHO 
began paying her for long-term disability. She has severe 
fibromyalgia and has not been able to work since 1989. In 
1992 she was cut off SAHO benefits and told she needed a 
reassessment from a doctor of SAHO’s choice. At this time 
she cooperated fully and was reinstated. 

 
On July 9, 1996, SAHO informed Ms. Kleinser in writing 
that they believed she could return to the workforce in 
some capacity and consequently would be cut off benefits 
in August of 1998. Ms. Kleinser does not believe her 
condition has improved at all and maintains she cannot 
return to the workforce. Her view was supported by an 
outside organization, Northern Rehabilitation, hired by 
SAHO to assess the situation. 

 
Despite all these hurdles, SAHO has told her that another 
representative from Northern Rehabilitation must assess 
her condition. Ms. Kleinser has become frustrated with 
these constant assessments. Because of her frustration, 
SAHO is now saying she is being uncooperative and plans 
to cut off her benefits altogether. 

 
I would ask that you contact Ms. Kleinser directly and 
determine whether anything can be done to assist her with 
her conflict with SAHO. She can be contacted at her home 
in Estevan. Thank you in advance for your attention to this 
very serious matter, the member for Cannington. 

 
Mr. Minister, Natalie has severe fibromyalgia, as I have said, 
and was on long-term disability, as we have talked here before, 
and through SAHO. And she previously worked as a nurse’s aid 
but simply can’t return to work because of the severity of her 
condition. Recently Natalie has experienced several obstacles, 
which have been mentioned in the letter, leading to the 
termination of her benefits. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if the minister . . . or if you could 
tell us whether your department has looked into this situation 
and update us on any of the developments since you received 
this letter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — My recollection is that I signed a 
response to the member from Cannington yesterday but it was 
not a very positive response as I recall it. It had been prepared 
by the department, of course, for my signature and I approved it 
and signed it. 
 
As I recall it, the letter said that the disability plan that SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) has is their 
plan — it’s not a government plan — it’s their own plan and 
there really isn’t any basis on which I can intervene or get 
involved in the thing. 
 
That’s a pretty easy answer I will admit. It’s a correct one. And 
you having raised it here today, I think that it would only be fair 
that I have my staff at least call SAHO and discuss the 
circumstances with them and obtain an explanation — perhaps 
even try and influence the result — because I certainly have a 
great deal of sympathy for Ms. Kleinser. She was . . . it’s been a 
long-standing claim and I know it’s a great burden to her. I’m 
sure it is. I don’t know her personally, but I’m sure it is. So 

perhaps I’ll reconsider and have one of my staff follow through 
with SAHO. But I do have to say that there is no formal basis 
on which we can intervene. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................731 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................731 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................731 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................731 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................731 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................731 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................731 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................731 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................732 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................732 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................732 
  Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................732 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................732 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Special Librarians Day 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................732 
 100th Birthday Congratulations 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................733 
 Holocaust Remembrance Day 
  Whitmore...................................................................................................................................................................................733 
 Meeting Health Care Needs 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................733 
 Shakespeare’s Birthday 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................733 
 Proposed Improvements to North Battleford Highway Entrance 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................734 
 Canada Book Day 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................734 
 Saskatchewan Economy Improving 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................734 
 Comparison Between Saskatchewan and the United Kingdom 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................734 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Possible Strike at SaskPower 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................735 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................735 
 SaskPower Reconstruction Charge 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................735 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................735 
 Crown Corporation Losses 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................736 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................736 
 Health Care Workloads 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................737 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................737 
 Crown Corporations Review 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................738 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................738 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................738 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................738 
 Nursing Home Funding 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................739 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................739 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 32  The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................740 
 Bill No. 33 — The Provincial Court Act, 1998 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................740 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................740 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Telecommunications Access for all Canadians 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................740 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 29 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................742 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................743 
 Bill No. 30 — The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................744 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................745 
 Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions Act/Loi sur les conventions sur l’exécution de jugements 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................745 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................746 
MOTIONS 
 Telecommunications Access for all Canadians 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................744 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Error in Wording of Government Motion 
  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................745 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 20 — The Election Amendment Act, 1998 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................746 
 Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................749 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 24 — The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1998 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................750 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................750 
 Bill No. 28 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................752 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................752 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 24  The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................755 
 Bill No. 28 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................755 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Labour — Vote 20 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................755 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................756 
 
 
 


