





























































Hansard: May 28, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1431 
 May 28, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very pleased today to present a petition on behalf 
of residents of the communities of Carrot River and Arborfield 
concerned about the decision of the North-East Health District 
— the impending decision — to close the hospital in Carrot 
River. I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition, and this petition is urging the government to reconsider 
its decision to close down X-ray services in Melfort. And I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and that priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners that have signed this petition come 
from the communities of Melfort, St. Brieux, Star City, and 
Weldon. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to put 
an immediate halt to all investments in foreign countries by 
all Saskatchewan Crown corporations and instead invest 
Crown corporation profits in Saskatchewan. 
 
As is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Watson and 
Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition signed by people from the Gainsborough and 
Carnduff areas. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to put 
an immediate halt to all investments in foreign countries by 
all Saskatchewan Crown corporations and instead invest 
Crown corporation profits in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about adequate funding to support 

a regional radiology service in Melfort. The signatures on this 
petition, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the community of Melfort, 
are from St. Brieux, Arborfield, Carrot River, Kinistino, and 
Saint Front. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today on behalf of the good people from Pleasantdale and 
Melfort: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure the required level of service in 
radiology is maintained in the North Central Health 
District, and that priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present to the 
Assembly this afternoon dealing with the issue of Crown 
corporations and the view of many people that there should be 
an immediate halt to investments in foreign countries by Crown 
corporations. This petition comes from the Kamsack area of the 
province and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud today to 
rise again on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to present a 
petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
community of Ponteix. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition I 
believe are primarily from Eastend, and I so present. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are concerned about the 
closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1998 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Ponteix. A number of them we expect to be here 
at the legislature tomorrow . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member of course will want to avoid 
engaging in debate while presenting petitions. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens with respect to the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people, the good citizens who have signed these 
petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Melville, Regina, and 
Yorkton. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions from citizens concerned about deteriorating health care 
and specifically about the impending closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. Your petitioners this afternoon come from the 
communities of Ituna and Ponteix. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today and bring forward petitions to prevent the 
closure of the Plains hospital. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 
Aneroid and Ponteix areas of the province, and I look forward 
to seeing them tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
petitioners who wish to present the following prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 

Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998 
and set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, from the communities of Golden Prairie and 
Maple Creek and Fox Valley. And I’m happy to present it on 
their behalf today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order two petitions regarding the Carrot 
River Hospital presented on May 27 have been reviewed, and 
pursuant to rule 12(7) they were found to be irregular and 
therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed, 
and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to reverse the decision to remove pay 
phones in Pelly; to reach necessary agreements to fund the 
twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; to save the Plains 
Health Centre; to halt investments in foreign countries by 
Saskatchewan Crown corporations; and to take action to 
ensure required level of service in radiology is maintained 
in north Central Health District. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Clerk: — Mr. Johnson, as Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills, presents the seventh report of the said 
committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered Bill No. 302, The 
Fondation Fransaskoise, 1998. Pursuant to rule 68, the 
committee held public meetings to hear witnesses for and 
against the Bill and received written submissions. The 
committee wishes to thank all those who participated in 
this process. 
 
Your committee has agreed to report Bill No. 302 without 
amendment. 
 
Your committee recommends under the provisions of rule 
66 that fees be remitted, less the cost of printing, with 
respect to this Bill. 
 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Saskatoon Northwest: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills now be concurred in. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Monday next move first reading of a Bill, the highway 
fatality marker Act. 



May 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 59 ask the government the following question: 
 

Of the Minister in Charge of SaskTel: what reasons are 
given by SaskTel for placing pedestals in farmers’ fields 
when they, the farmers, have specifically asked to have 
these obstructions placed on road allowance, hub lines or 
in tree rows; what is the department’s interpretation of an 
ohm; is there any variation in the number of ohms on a line 
that varies with the length of the line or the placement of 
the pedestals; is the policy of allowing property owners the 
right to pay SaskTel to move pedestals off of property to 
other locations, i.e, road allowance, hub lines still in place; 
who determines where SaskTel lines run; what criteria is 
used in considering changes to planned routes. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Monday next move first reading of a Bill, an Act to 
reduce the pay of MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
who go on strike down to the same rate of pay received by other 
working people who go on strike. Short title, the MLA’s 
strike-pay Act. 
 
And by leave, Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on 
Monday next move first reading of a Bill, an Act to require 
members of the Legislative Assembly to return to work and 
stop wasting taxpayers’ money. Short title, the MLA’s back to 
work Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have two introductions if I may have your concurrence and that 
of my colleagues. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you and to the 
members of the House, a very special guest seated in your 
gallery. And I would ask Ms. Erin Nordgulen of Assiniboia to 
stand please — Erin. And to advise the members of the House 
and you, Mr. Speaker, that she is the reigning Saskatchewan 
high school rodeo queen. Erin won her . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Erin won her title last June in 
Melville, and since that time has had a busy time representing 
Saskatchewan and the great and challenging sport of rodeo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides countless events around Saskatchewan, 
Erin has been introduced to 50,000 rodeo fans at the Calgary 
Stampede, participated in the national finals rodeo in Pueblo, 
Colorado, I’m told the Super Bowl of rodeo competition. She’s 
participated in the Cheyenne, Wyoming Frontier Days in which 
she was the only Canadian to take part, and spent hours signing 
autographs there. And she also met with Wyoming Governor 
Jim Geringer. 
 
Erin’s reign as rodeo queen, Mr. Speaker, comes to an end next 
month, and it will be my pleasure to meet with her briefly after 

question period. She’s joined in the gallery today by her father, 
Norm; her mother is unable to attend. Erin’s brother, Cody, 
would be here with us as well but — wouldn’t you know it? — 
he broke a leg, and quite naturally, at a rodeo event. 
 
In the meantime, I’m glad to have the opportunity, Erin, and to 
ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming her and her 
family, this very distinguished young Saskatchewan personality 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Also and to 
the members of the House, Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 
you and through you to the colleagues of this House, some 
young Canadians who are working very hard to prepare 
themselves for their future and for the future of this great 
nation. 
 
M. le président, je voudrais vous présenter, et par votre 
entremise, présentez à mes collègues, un groupe de jeunes 
Canadiens et Canadiennes qui travaillent avec acharnement 
pour préparer leur propre avenir et l’avenir de cette grande 
nation. 
 
(Translation: Mr Speaker, to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the House, I would like to introduce some young 
Canadians who are working very hard to prepare themselves for 
their future and for the future of this great nation.) 
 
These very special people are guests seated in your gallery, 44 
students from grades 5 and 6 of the Saskatoon French School. 
The students are accompanied by two teachers, Lucien Deux 
and Marie-Pierre McGregor as well as five chaperons, Judy Ng, 
Ken Babich, Barry McEwen, Donna Nagy, Sylvia Van der 
Hurk. I hope I have those names right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon French School, which is in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale, accepts students from all 
over Saskatoon in French immersion programs through grade 8. 
The program allows children from predominantly 
English-speaking backgrounds to acquire fluency in Canada’s 
other official language. This will surely prove to be a valuable 
asset for them in their futures, and I dare say for the future of 
our nation as we continue to build bridges to our friends and 
neighbours in Quebec. 
 
The students are in Regina today to have a tour of the 
Legislative Building including a few moments observing these 
proceedings. Mr. Speaker, as if these proceedings were not 
entertaining enough, they have seen one IMAX film already 
this morning and will see another one this afternoon as well as 
taking in the exhibits of the Saskatchewan Science Centre. 
 
M. le président, j’aimerais féliciter ces élèves pour l’application 
qu’ils démontrent dans leur apprentissage et de la langue 
française, leur souhaiter un succès continu dans la poursuite de 
leurs études et accueillir chaleureusement chacun d’entre eux à 
l’Assemblée législative ici aujourd’hui. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate these students for their 
dedication to their studies of the French language, to wish them 
continued success, and to welcome all of them to the House 



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1998 

here today. 
 
And I ask all members in welcoming these students, teachers, 
and parents to Regina. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted today 
to introduce the first group of students this year to come in to 
my . . . from my constituency. This group is from Wadena. 
There’s 30 grade 4 students in the east gallery. Wadena of 
course is the home of the very popular shore bird festival. 
 
With the students are teachers Mr. Glennie, Mrs. Nelson, Brian 
Stasuik, Kathy Christianson, Marilyn Cannon, and also Earl 
Desjarlais, Tina Kostuik, and Patti Flanders. 
 
And we’ll be meeting with them afterwards and I hope you 
enjoy your time here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
member from Yorkton I’d like to introduce to you and through 
you to other members of this House some special guests seated 
in the west gallery. And I’d ask each of them to stand as I 
introduce them. 
 
We are joined today by Rachel West from Wollongong, 
Australia, who I had the pleasure of meeting earlier when I was 
in Yorkton recently. And she’s been visiting Saskatchewan for 
the past five weeks. She’ll be leaving here shortly to tour 
eastern Canada and from there will be going to the United 
States to work in a children’s art camp. 
 
And I might add for the interests of the members, Mr. Speaker, 
that Rachel is fascinated by daily question period here in the 
legislature and she watches it every day. And so I hope the live 
version will be as entertaining as the TV version. 
 
And joining her, Mr. Speaker, is her good friend Jennifer 
Williams who’s from Yorkton. And I’ve also had the pleasure 
of meeting Jennifer when she’s been visiting the legislature 
before, and she’s a student in the master’s program in audiology 
at the University of South Dakota. 
 
And last but not least I’d like to introduce Shirley Williams who 
is Rachel’s host in Yorkton. And Shirley, as some of my 
colleagues will know, is also a hard-working constituency 
assistant in the MLA office in Yorkton. 
 
And I know that all members in the Assembly will want to join 
me in wishing Rachel well in her travels, and Jennifer in her 
studies, and Shirley in the hard work she does on behalf of the 
people of Yorkton. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 27 grade 
6 students from the Redvers School seated up in the east 
gallery. Along with these students are their teacher Diane Dubé, 
and chaperons Sharon Jacobson, Lilly Carlsen, Jan Hoff, 

Caroline Martel, Anita Boutin, and Cheryl Alexander. 
 
I would like to welcome them here today and I’m looking 
forward to meeting with them right after question period. And 
while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to welcome 
Mr. Glennie from Wadena who used to be a member in my 
constituency. I’d like to welcome all these people today and ask 
the Assembly to do likewise. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
the members of the Assembly today, two people seated in your 
gallery all the way from Union Bay, British Columbia, which is 
up island on Vancouver Island. Seated in the gallery is my aunt 
and uncle, Hazel and Harry Nixon, who are on their way to 
Winnipeg to the annual general meeting of the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) vets. 
 
Hazel is my mother’s sister and Harry is a veteran of the RCMP 
and retired from the North; spent 22 years in the North because 
of their love of the North; retired as the chief superintendent 
from the Yukon. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to greet them as they 
rise to be welcomed by the Assembly in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in your 
gallery and in the west gallery we have 42 students from the 
Hartley Clark Elementary School in the community of 
Spiritwood. They travelled yesterday some 450 kilometres to be 
here today. I hope that the chaperons and the teachers were able 
to get some sleep last night while they maintained order with 
this group. 
 
The grade 5 and 6 students, Mr. Speaker, are here with teachers 
Mr. Jenner, King, and Goodfellow; chaperons Mrs. Ledinski, 
Maczei, Heisler, Thomas, and Mr. Neilson. Their bus driver is 
Mr. Baptiste. 
 
And I’d ask through you to the Assembly that we welcome 
them here today and wish them an interesting tour of the sights 
in the city of Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join the 
member in regards to the students from . . . welcoming the 
students from Spiritwood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have in Spiritwood Mr. Hugh Jenner who used 
to teach up in northern Saskatchewan, so I’d like to give him a 
special welcome. And also with due respect to Ms. Thomas and 
the Cree speakers, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say in greetings 
in Cree you usually say, how are you, and of course with the 
French students here we also say, ça va, and in Cree we say, 
tansi. 
 
Now I guess, Mr. Speaker, in Cree tradition I would also like to 
say tawow to all the visitors of the legislature today. 



May 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just on behalf of 
the Liberal caucus, I’m not sure where Mr. Jenner is, but I also 
want to say a big hello to him from the past students of the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse School. I can’t recall if he taught me because I 
spent many of my hours in extra time for some of the classes I 
couldn’t pass and also in the gym. So, Mr. Jenner, wherever you 
are, a big hello from a former student of Ile-a-la-Crosse, and 
welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Cost of Bell-Ringing 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the cost of ringing the 
legislative bells is $28,000 a day. What’s most unfortunate 
about this waste of taxpayers’ money is to suggest it’s being 
done in the name of saving health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know what $28,000 a day will provide for 
in the health care system? It would pay for one person on 
Betaseron for a year and a half; it will pay for a nurse for eight 
months; 1,494 routine office visits to a family doctor. 
 
It would pay for one day of chemotherapy for all patients in the 
province who receive chemotherapy; one person’s dialysis 
treatment for over six months; 13 baby deliveries; three hip 
replacements; 13 cataract operations; 10 air-ambulance trips; 
325 mammograms; 114 MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) 
scans; 254 CAT (computerized axial tomography) scans. 
 
It would cover the transplantation and treatment costs of a 
person receiving a kidney transplant for over two years. And, 
Mr. Speaker, it could pay for the operation of over 350 special 
care home beds for a day. Sadly for the Tories, this exercise in 
bell-ringing isn’t about saving health care, it’s about them 
trying to save face. 
 

Renal Dialysis Now Available in Tisdale 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In cooperation with 
the Department of Health, three health districts, a number of 
community groups, and individuals have been working hard for 
the past several months to make an important upgrade to health 
care in north-east Saskatchewan. I was extremely pleased to see 
the fruition of this cooperative effort yesterday when the grand 
opening of the Tisdale satellite dialysis was held. 
 
For people in the North Central Health District, the North-East 
Health District, and the Pasquia Health District, it means those 
who need this vital service no longer have to travel to 
Saskatoon for renal dialysis. It means less travel time, less 
waiting, and a better quality of life for our residents. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, the Tisdale Satellite Dialysis Centre is 
part of a network of centres which includes Saskatoon, Regina, 
Prince Albert, and Lloydminster. Staff are also undergoing 
extensive training in Yorkton as it is the location of the next 
centre. 
 

Under the old system, Mr. Speaker, patients could only receive 
these services in Saskatoon and Regina. The renal dialysis 
satellite network is just one example of how health care renewal 
will better serve the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Closure of Plains Health Centre 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Party believes it is the duty of every member of 
this House to speak and vote on behalf of their constituents. 
That’s why they sent us here — to represent their wishes, 
including on the future of the Plains Hospital. 
 
Unfortunately the other parties in this Assembly do not share 
this feeling. They ignore the wishes of their constituents on the 
floor of this Assembly. I can understand the NDP’s (New 
Democratic Party) reluctance to bring the Plains issue to a final 
vote. As we’ve seen from this government over and over again, 
the NDP caucus doesn’t really care what the people think and 
the NDP cabinet doesn’t care what the caucus thinks. 
 
What I find bizarre however is the third party, the Liberals, also 
oppose the idea of a free vote on the closure on the Plains. But I 
think the member from Thunder Creek told us why they were 
opposed yesterday. It’s because the Liberals are more worried 
about who gets the credit. For them the issue isn’t saving the 
Plains, it’s saving the Liberals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue is not who gets the credit. In fact any 
credit should go to the people of Saskatchewan, not to any 
member of this legislature. The issue here is allowing members 
of this legislature to stand in their places and vote freely on 
whether they truly believe this hospital should close. 
 
This legislature is now the only body that can save the Plains. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan Neuroscientists 
Receive Funds to Probe Paralysis 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members will 
recall that we were visited by Rick Hansen last year. Rick has 
been an extremely active fund-raiser for research regarding 
cures for paralysis. 
 
U of S (University of Saskatchewan) neuroscientists recently 
received $50,000 to probe paralysis from the Rick Hansen 
Institute. Doctors Andrew Gloster and Gillian Muir will use the 
grant to fund a two-year study of neural precursor cell 
transplants. 
 
The major stumbling block to finding a cure for paralysis has 
been that neural precursors cannot be regenerated on a severed 
spinal cord. The two U of S researchers however have found 
that neural precursors in the nose are similar to those found on 
the spinal cord. 
 
The two will attempt to isolate, grow cultures of, and transplant 
those cells into the spinal cord in the attempt to bridge severed 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1998 

areas of the spinal cord and thus reconnect the spinal cord as a 
neural passageway. 
 
This is extremely exciting news for those who suffer from 
paralysis and is also evidence that research going on in 
Saskatoon is of a world-class calibre. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Students Win Science Honours 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today with a great deal of pride to recognize two young 
inventors from St. Dominic School in Humboldt — Courtney 
Saliken and Bridget Kurysch. 
 
Courtney Saliken, along with science teachers Peter Pavelich of 
Humboldt, and Garry Sibley of Bruno attended the 
Canada-wide science fair in Timmins, Ontario, held May 11 to 
16. Courtney displayed a scaled-down version of his 
Springtacular Cattle Oiler. The oiler, which was originally 
invented by Clifford Luther, was redesigned by Courtney to be 
more efficient. Mr. Luther was happy to hear that Courtney had 
done so well and intends to include him in his advertising. 
Courtney brought home a bronze medal from Timmins. 
 
Bridget Kurysch’s project, a potash mill reproduction, was one 
of six provincial projects chosen by Saskatchewan Mining 
Association for display at the Saskatchewan Science Centre in 
Regina from May 11 to 17. 
 
Congratulations, Courtney and Bridget, on your innovative 
projects. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pharmacists Like Pasqua Expansion 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand on behalf 
of the people of southern Saskatchewan, with great news 
coming from the May 24 Free Press where the headline reads: 
“Pharmacists delighted with Pasqua expansion.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the General Hospital staff of pharmacists is being 
upgraded from 10 to 16, and the Pasqua’s from nine and a half 
to twelve, and part of the process is there are going to be 
pharmacists out on the wards and dealing with patients, taking 
drug history and that sort of thing. 
 
The director of pharmaceutical services for the Regina Health 
District, Murray Wolfe says, and I quote: “There’s absolutely 
no doubt that patients will benefit from this consolidation.” And 
he goes on and explains the many benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am delighted on behalf of all users of the two 
hospitals in southern Saskatchewan with this great improvement 
in the pharmaceutical care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal Campaign Office Break-in 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there must be one very disappointed thief somewhere in 
Saskatoon today. I understand someone broke into Jim 
Melenchuk’s campaign office yesterday. After getting by all the 
white flags that are stored there in that office, the crook or 
crooks found Mr. Melenchuk’s computer and apparently 
walked off with it. This was probably unnecessary, Mr. 
Speaker. If the culprit was looking for the current Liberal 
membership, I understand all three names were written on the 
computer screen with magic marker. And one of those, Mr. 
Speaker, was whited out. But if the culprit was looking for the 
past Liberal membership list, they could have simply asked us, 
because it closely resembles the membership of the 
Saskatchewan Party. We now have most of their members. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Melenchuk has stated second 
place is satisfactory, and this at least gives Mr. Melenchuk yet 
another excuse when he finishes third on June 24. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding to Enhance Programs against Family Violence 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to inform you that 
last week the Minister of Justice was in Battleford to present a 
cheque for $40,000 to enhance the programs against family 
violence to the Kanaweyimik Child and Family Services of 
Battleford. 
 
This funding is part of a provincial initiative which is providing 
$350,000 in total for programs that work to stop the cycle of 
family violence and abuse in this province. Kanaweyimik Child 
and Family Services, along with seven other organizations in 
the province, received start-up funding in 1997-98. This 
funding will enable Kanaweyimik Child and Family Services to 
hire an additional counsellor who will provide individual 
therapy and facilitate men’s teaching circles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, violence and abuse in any form is unacceptable. 
This announcement is another example of how our government 
is continuing to work in partnership with communities, families, 
and individuals to foster family relationships that are free of 
violence and abuse. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Free Vote on Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan 
Party is calling for a free vote on the future of the Plains 
hospital. What a radical idea — actually expecting MLAs to 
stand in their place and vote according to the wishes of their 
constituents. Wouldn’t that be something? 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, this is the only 
body in the province that can stop the closure of the Plains 
hospital. After the letters, after all the rallies, after all the 
petitions, the only way that this decision can actually be 
reversed is if the men and women in this legislature stand in 



May 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

their place and vote on behalf of the people they represent. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you allow that to happen? Will you allow a 
free vote on the future of the Plains hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, there have been free 
votes all along on this issue. The freest vote of all was the 
election in June, 1995 where the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan re-elected this government. I recall full well 
campaigning in that June 1995 election campaign where there 
was a rally that our governing party was sponsoring in support 
of the government and a rally by those that had expressed 
concerns about the Plains. It was an election issue raised at that 
time by the then leader of the Liberal Party who today’s 
questioner so unceremoniously knifed and stabbed in the back 
and now tries to talk to us about conscience. 
 
I simply would draw this editorial opinion from the Nipawin 
Journal which simply answers the question. The date of it is 
May 13, quote: 
 

If for several weeks now opposition MLAs have been 
beating the issue to death (referring to the Plains) now 
they’re calling on the provincial government to call a free 
vote on whether the ageing health facility should be 
allowed to close. If the health of Saskatchewan people 
weren’t such a precious commodity, the posturing by the 
representatives would be laughable. As it is, their actions 
are reprehensible. 
 

And they are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Proposed Investment in Guyana 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the minister responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Minister, the bill for Guyana just keeps getting bigger. First 
you tell us your botched Guyana deal cost $800,000, then we 
find out it’s actually $1.4 million. Then you give Jack Messer, 
the author of this hare-brained scheme, a $300,000 severance 
package. Then we find out that Guyana is suing you for another 
$3 million. And now you forked out about $180,000 in 
severance for two more of the managers you fired over the deal. 
It’s getting to be quite a bill for all this activity where we 
shouldn’t have been in the first place. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to stop throwing money 
down the drain over Guyana? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the easiest money we 
could save would be the $28,000 a day it’s costing us to ring the 
bells while those members opposite, while those members 
opposite refuse to work. 
 
And the House Leader for the Liberals, the member from 
Canora, hollers from his seat about credibility. I say to him, 
where’s the credibility of yours, sir, the member who left the 
Liberal Party after dumping the leader who had taken that party 
to official opposition status, dumped her out, and now stands 
here as a Conservative and won’t work, and costing the 

taxpayers $28,000 a day. 
 
The easiest money we could save for taxpayers is simply by 
going back to work today. And I ask the member from Melfort 
if he will make the commitment that he will save $28,000 a day 
by doing some work today as soon as we get past orders of the 
day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Labour Negotiations 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
seems to be a sliding scale here. Jack Messer loses $5 million 
and he gets a $300,000 severance package. SaskPower 
Commercial loses $2 million and its two managers get a 
$200,000 severance package. 
 
Meanwhile all the other employees at SaskPower who are doing 
their jobs effectively are talking about going on strike. You 
really can’t blame them for expecting your government to 
reward competence. After all, they see the way you’re 
rewarding incompetence. 
 
Mr. Minister, SaskPower’s union is making an announcement 
this afternoon. Do you expect them to be giving you strike 
notice? And what plans do you have in place to ensure 
SaskPower service is not interrupted in the event of a 
SaskPower strike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that the 
member ought to concern himself unduly about a strike at this 
point. The collective bargaining process is continuing today. 
 
And I think as we speak the parties continue to meet under the 
mediation, under the mediation of the Department of Labour. 
And we’re content to let the process continue to work and to try 
our best not to interfere with it. And I would suggest that the 
hon. member take that advice to heart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister — thank you, Mr. Speaker — 
Mr. Minister, SaskPower has cut back on the number of 
out-of-scope employees over the past few years, which leaves 
us wondering: does SaskPower have the managers left with 
enough experience to operate the power grid in the event of a 
strike? 
 
Mr. Minister, since the last SaskPower strike in 1976, 
SaskPower has added Poplar River, Boundary dam no. 6, 
Shand, Nipawin. These are all very sophisticated generating 
stations requiring hands-on experience to run properly. This is 
not a criticism of SaskPower’s managers; they simply are not 
trained to do this job. And they’ll be in a very difficult position 
if there is any kind of a sudden problem during a strike. 
 
Mr. Minister, what contingency plans are you using, in the 
event of a possible strike, to safeguard the safety of the system 
for SaskPower residents? 
 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m advised that such 
plans exist. Of course I would not know the detail of those 
plans, and I don’t think the hon. member would like to, would 
expect to, hear those plans publicly discussed in this Assembly. 
 
I’m a strong believer in the collective bargaining process, as I 
know are all members of the House. And I think we just simply 
allow that process to continue. The parties are close together. 
We all know that. The differences are not large and I would 
expect that the collective bargaining process would bridge 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Estey Report on Grain Transportation 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, some very disturbing 
comments have come from Justice Willard Estey this morning. 
Willard Estey is to submit the first phase of his report on the 
grain transportation system to Liberal Transport minister, David 
Collenette, this weekend. 
 
But Mr. Estey is doubtful his work will lead to any changes, he 
says. He says that the issue of grain transportation is 
tremendously important in western Canada — and he’s 
certainly right — but attracts little interest east of the Manitoba 
border, he reports. 
 
Seeing as how most Liberal MPs (Member of Parliament) come 
from the East and as how Ralph Goodale doesn’t seem to be 
doing much good for Saskatchewan, Justice Estey has every 
reason to be concerned. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you contacted the federal government? Are 
they going to act on the recommendations of the Estey report or 
are farmers’ interests going to be ignored by the federal Liberals 
once again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I’d like to thank the member for the 
question. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the interests of farmers have been neglected 
by the federal Liberal government for some time now. But I can 
tell you that on behalf of farmers, that we have been working 
diligently to accomplish what has to be accomplished, and that 
is true competition in the rail system to determine what lines are 
viable. 
 
We have seen the Estey process carried forward. We are 
concerned that nothing may happen but we are letting the 
process develop and it’s going to be developing throughout the 
end of the year. 
 
I appreciate your concern. But if you want to do something too, 
with the Liberal opposition over there, we would get all on the 
phones, as we have been doing, telling the federal Liberal 
government that in order to sustain agriculture in Saskatchewan, 
in order to get the highest, best returns for our producers, we 
should go to joint running rights and let the railways act like 
everybody else in the telecommunications field and have true 

competition to establish viability. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my final 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, I think farmers are 
sick of hoping the federal government and the federal Liberals 
like Ralph Goodale will protect their interests. The only way 
there is going to be meaningful changes to the grain 
transportation system, the only way the federal government will 
act on the Estey report, is if the Prime Minister puts it at the top 
of his priority list. 
 
Mr. Premier, have you spoken to the Prime Minister about this 
issue? Will you call him and demand immediate action on the 
Estey report and in . . . pardon me, move to improve the western 
grain transportation system which is so desperately needed for 
farmers in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the government has 
raised this issue at the political level and at the bureaucratic 
level with the federal government. I can say, speaking for 
myself, that I’ve discussed this with the Prime Minister and in 
fact have written to him on the importance of grain 
transportation and the importance of the Estey report. 
 
With respect to this morning’s developments the hon. member 
alludes to, I have not had an opportunity yet to get this in my 
office and analysed. I can tell you that we generally endorse and 
have been advocating, I might remind the member from 
Kindersley, the position that he here has stated today. We’ve 
taken this position right from the beginning. And the Minister 
of Highways and the Minister of Agriculture are working 
jointly on behalf of the government on a four-provinces — 
western provinces — strategy to put as much pressure as we can 
to solve this problem to the benefit of our farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like it or not the 
Premier is the only person who has the power to save the Plains 
hospital. Like it or not the cone of silence that sits over the 
entire NDP caucus is not going to be lifted — vote or no vote. 
And like it or not this is a decision that can only be reversed if 
we continue to pressure the government to address the real issue 
in this debate — the escalating bed crisis in Regina and 
southern Saskatchewan, and the concerns many rural people 
have about accessibility. 
 
Mr. Premier, only you have the power to reverse this decision. 
Will you make that statement today? And will you stop the 
closure of the Plains hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, in 1993 the government 
and subsequently the district health boards announced that as 
part of health care renewal, there’d have to be adjustments 
made to the hospital system involving the closure of the Plains. 



May 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

We fought an election on that and other issues in 1995, and we 
were re-elected with a mandate to proceed. Now within the next 
three or four months, the Plains hospital will close. 
 
In closing, it will have 250,000 square feet more in Regina than 
you have on the current situations involving three hospitals. It’ll 
have the best renal, the best cardiac care, MRI, and modern 
technology. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, as I close my remarks, what the Nipawin 
Journal has said on this issue, closure of Plains — it says: 
 

Is anyone else as sick and tired of hearing about the Plains 
hospital in Regina as we are. (Nipawin Journal writes). 

 
And then they say this, talking about the Liberals: 
 

Why has there been minimal public outcry about the 
closure of the Holy Family Hospital in Prince Albert and 
transfer of all health services in that city to Victoria? Is the 
reason behind all this Plains brouhaha the ready exposure 
to the issue-starved media in the capital of Regina? 

 
That’s basically where it stands. The hospital is closing and 
we’re moving on to better health care for the future in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, I have a document here from 
one of those media-starved papers in the city. I’d like to table 
this and I’ll quote from it: 
 

But what made Romanow’s comments truly ironic was that 
in nearly the same breath, he accused the Liberals of 
planning to cut 1.3 billion from the Health budget and 
support a $900 health care premium, both of which were 
patently untrue and bordering on fabrication. 
 

Quoted from the paper, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would anybody believe this Premier in this 
province. In ’95 he campaigned on the promise that the hurt 
was over — no more pain, no more suffering, the hurt is over. 
His candidates ran around the province campaigning on no 
more hurt, no more pain. 
 
Three of his Health ministers since then have all said, no more 
bed closures, no more facility closures, no more cuts, Mr. 
Premier. Mr. Premier, tell us: how can anybody believe what 
you have to say? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it has been my honour to 
have been elected the head of my party and to have been elected 
with my colleagues to represent the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan in two general elections — 1991, ’95 — and with 
that, given the mandate to govern in the areas of health and 
other concerns that face the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I repeat again, Costa Maragos of the CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) asked Jim Melenchuk where they, 
the Liberals, would find $1.3 billion. His first answer was, in 
health care. When Maragos said, where’d you get the number, 
Dr. Melenchuk said he didn’t know because he didn’t have 
access to the books. When Maragos said, then how can you say 
that the money exists, he said, I’ll have to check the books. 
 
But then he went on to say, I do know you can find savings in 
health care. His words were “inefficiencies in health care.” That 
is in black and white. 
 
It’s correct to say that later on in the interview he said he could 
find the 1.3 billion by attacking the oil companies as well, by 
the way, suddenly which has been ignored — that is the truth. 
And I am asking you and I am asking Jim Melenchuk, since he 
is a doctor and he knows the inefficiencies, where do they 
exist? Liberals, stand up and tell us where the inefficiencies 
exist and what else you would cut. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway 13 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It sounds like the 
Premier is a little ashamed of his actions here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if a picture tells a thousand words, a photo of 
Highway 13 near Admiral clearly shows how this route 
resembles a war zone more than it does a highway. 
 
I recently received a letter from Fern Bonnell of Ponteix who 
had a first-hand experience on Highway 13. Broken pavement 
punctured a hole in the gas tank of her van; the damage to the 
vehicle totalled almost $600. I advised her to submit the bill to 
the Highways department. She did so and has been advised that 
the cost to these damages would be covered. 
 
I’d like to send a copy of this picture now over to the Madam 
Minister. Madam Minister, Highway 13 is part of what is called 
the Red Coat Trail, but why are you allowing it to deteriorate to 
a point where it will once again be just that — a trail? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said 
previous times in the legislature here, we are addressing that we 
needed more dollars in highways and road conditions. We 
recognized that and we put more dollars in. We put $30 million 
more last year, $20 million more this year. That’s part of the 
plan that we need to work on these. 
 
The second part of it is to work on the different areas — to also 
help set priorities on the number of pressures and conditions on 
these. I’ve certainly had some experience in driving on 
Highway No. 13. I’ve met with a number of the communities in 
that area and we certainly are addressing the issue. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, perhaps you 
would like to table a list of the projects and how you are 
addressing those problems that you’re finding out there today, 
because we are hearing from those communities you’re doing 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1998 

nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the minister is accepting 
responsibility for the damage claim I talked of, but I have 
another bill to submit today on behalf of a Gwen Coburn of 
Shaunavon, who recently tried to drive a section of Highway 37 
just north of Climax. I say try to, because her vehicle suffered 
almost $900 worth of damage after a piece of broken pavement 
flew through her grill, left a hole in the radiator, and punctured 
the power steering and air conditioning hoses. 
 
Madam Minister, I want to send you a copy of that bill today 
and I would like to know, are you prepared to take care of this? 
Can you tell us the total number of claims received by your 
department this year, the total cost of those claims, and what 
immediate action you’re taking to make the public aware of 
exactly what your department is prepared to do when their 
vehicles are damaged by your highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, here we have it, they’re 
back at it again. The Liberals are back at it again. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in the United States of America, in the 
United States of America — a federal form of government 
much like Canada, where there’s Washington and where there’s 
Ottawa, and where there’s states and where there are provinces 
— you know what they do in the United States? Up to 90 cents 
on the dollar for construction of interstate highways comes out 
of Washington budgets — up to 90 cents. 
 
You know how many cents the Liberals in Ottawa put out in 
our federal state? They put out zero — zero cents, Mr. Speaker 
— zero. And not only that, but the federal government charges 
10 cents a litre and they spent 4 cents or less on the highways in 
general; they take out $200 million a year from Saskatchewan. 
 
And these Liberals get up and they’ve got the gall to ask that 
question. Why don’t you get some credibility and some honesty 
in your questions and stop yelling from your chair because 
obviously truth hits you in a very, very bad way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, where is 
your SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information Network) 
legislation. It’s now day 55 of the session and it has still not 
been introduced. 
 
You have $20 million budgeted for SHIN in this year’s budget. 
Some of that money is now going toward new nurses, but what 
about the rest of it? If you’re not proceeding with the SHIN 
network this year, Mr. Minister, then why not take the rest of 
this money and put it toward keeping the Plains open and the 
hiring of more nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, will you be introducing the SHIN 
legislation this session? And if not, will you use the money 
budgeted for SHIN to address the ongoing health care crisis? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker — on the process towards 
building the SHIN network in our province — we’re working, 
as the member well knows, with the broad base of 
Saskatchewan people: the health districts, the SMA 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association), and so on. And as that 
work progresses, it’s being done carefully so that we ensure 
when that SHIN system begins in this province, we’ll have the 
finest medical technology, information-sharing technology, that 
you can find anywhere in the world. 
 
Now the member says we need to cut here to find money there. 
Well I’ll tell the member one of the problems this government 
has. Every morning the Minister of Finance gets up and writes a 
$2 million cheque — 2 million straight out of health care, 
straight out of Education, straight out of Social Services — to 
do what? To pay the interest on the debt that you people ran up 
— $2 million every day. Now if we had that $2 million, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a lot of stuff we could do in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find it a 
little ludicrous that the minister would suggest that they have no 
responsibility for debt. We just take a look —Guyana; will you 
take a look at Channel Lake; take a look at . . . where a number 
of areas that the NDP have raised debt. You take a look at the 
other debt they’ve created, some of the debt that was left in 
1982. But, Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister was 
regarding the SHIN program, not about spending more money. 
 
But, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Minister, you don’t have a SHIN 
network yet; you don’t have the SHIN legislation. Where is the 
SHIN legislation? If you’re not going to bring forward the 
SHIN legislation, Mr. Minister, you do have a SHIN board and 
your hand-picked NDP candidate Judy Junor is on the SHIN 
board. 
 
Mr. Minister, as far as we know the NDP candidate of 
Saskatoon Eastview is still on the SHIN board. Can you 
confirm that Ms. Junor is on the SHIN board or if you’ve asked 
her to step down from the SHIN board while she’s a candidate 
in Saskatoon Eastview? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the 
member, we’re working with the whole community of 
Saskatchewan in building the SHIN network and as that work 
progresses the appropriate steps will be taken. 
 
But I think, as I visited with some of my constituents in Moose 
Jaw this morning, the question wasn’t about SHIN, it was about 
the antics of what’s going on in this legislature. They say will 
these people, will these people who sit in opposition quit 
playing politics with health care. 
 
We’ve got the Liberals. They get up here in December and they 
have a free vote in the House; we have a vote in December. 
That’s on the Plains. And then they have a new stunt — then 
they say we should name it after Tommy Douglas. That’s the 
next plank. Then they have this notion — they tell us we’re 



May 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

going to have 10,000 people here on the steps of the legislature 
tomorrow . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, 15,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . 15,000. Then Dr. Melenchuk says 
when the rally is over, he’s going to chain himself to the doors 
of the Plains. 
 
Well not to be outdone, not to be outdone by the antics there, 
now we have the antics here — calling free votes and ringing 
the bells — $28,000 a day. The member says we need more 
money for health care. Well we can find $28,000 this afternoon. 
Let’s get some health care work done in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
obvious the Minister of Health isn’t willing to answer the 
question. The Minister of Social Services doesn’t know. So, Mr. 
Premier, maybe you can tell us. Is Judy Junor still on the SHIN 
board, or have you asked Judy Junor to remove herself from the 
SHIN board, or have you putted her from the SHIN board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to check the 
composition of the board to be absolutely certain of my answer 
before giving out the answer. I haven’t looked at it lately and 
when I do I will provide an answer in this regard. But I want to 
come back to the issue which is before us, and that is the issue 
of the funding of health care and the provision of the top flight 
health care services that all of us in this province and this House 
desire. 
 
Now you just take a look at what’s happening. We’ve been 
talking all afternoon about the $28,000 a day lost. Ten days of 
bell-ringing during the Crown corporations on Channel Lake, or 
whatever it was. How many days? Five days? Money lost. How 
long are you going to ring the bells on this — how long? If it 
depends on me, I’ve said there are no more free votes other than 
the free votes that the June election had in 1995 and the vote in 
December. That’s what I’m telling you. So you tell me how 
long you are going to allow the bells to ring. I’ve given you the 
answer. 
 
Every day that they allow these bells to ring, they are starving 
the health care system. They’re like the Bourbons: they don’t 
understand anything, they don’t remember anything, and that’s 
why they’re going down to defeat again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! All hon. members will 
be well aware we just finished question period and we don’t 
need to repeat the questions and the answers when it’s all over. 
Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Citizen’s Advisory Council on Anniversaries 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this 

opportunity to inform this House and the people of 
Saskatchewan of the formation of a Citizens Advisory Council 
on Anniversaries. The formation of the council was announced 
earlier today by Premier Roy Romanow, and the council is at 
this time holding its first meeting at Government House here in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Citizens Advisory Council has a very specific 
and important mandate to provide recommendations to the 
government regarding celebrations for the millennium and the 
provincial centennial in the year 2005. Between the years 1999 
and 2006, Mr. Speaker, a number of communities, including the 
cities of Regina in 2003, Moose Jaw in 2003, Prince Albert in 
2004, and Saskatoon in 2006 will also be celebrating their 
centennial. 
 
Through the advisory council an effective means of 
coordinating all activities — be they sponsored by local 
communities, non-profit groups, or businesses — will be put in 
place. In addition, the council will provide a mechanism for 
coordinating activities with the federal government and other 
provinces, particularly Alberta who also celebrates its 
centennial in 2005. 
 
It is clear, Mr. Speaker, that a major role of the council will be 
to consult with the people of Saskatchewan to get their views 
and ideas about what type of celebration should be pursued. I 
am pleased therefore to inform the House that effective June 1 
anyone in the province can forward their views and ideas by 
calling toll-free 1-888-390-2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the council is composed of 19 distinguished 
Saskatchewan citizens from all walks of life, from all corners of 
Saskatchewan who have graciously agreed to volunteer their 
time, services, and expertise to this important task. I wish, by 
listing their names now, to publicly express my appreciation 
and the appreciation of this House for their willingness to serve 
on the council. 
 
The members are: Dr. John Archer, Honourary Co-Chair of 
Regina; Alan Sapp, Honourary Co-Chair North Battleford; Paul 
Rezansoff, the Chair from Swift Current; Bob Ellard, 
Vice-Chair from Regina; Colleen Bailey from Yorkton; 
Veronica Balon from Prince Alberta; Gail Bowen from Regina; 
Marjorie Brown from Regina; Gary Carlson from Regina; Doug 
Cuthand from Saskatoon; Jack Greening from Christopher 
Lake; Dr. Stewart Mein from Pierceland; Jeremy Morgan from 
Saskatoon; Theresa Stevenson from Broadview; Natashia 
Stinka from Saskatoon; Laverne Szejvolt from Saskatoon; Irma 
Taylor from Regina; Kate Waygood from Saskatoon; and Peter 
Zakreski from Saskatoon. 
 
As the minister responsible for anniversaries, I look forward 
very much to working with the council and receiving the advice 
they will provide. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
want to thank the minister for the advance copy that we 
received on today’s announcement. 
 
I note a couple of things, Mr. Speaker. I note that of course as 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1998 

we’re nearing the new millennium there will be a number of 
cities, including not only the province of Saskatchewan but the 
province of Alberta, who will be celebrating a particular 
anniversary. And I would hope that the committee will be one 
that will be able to coordinate affairs so that we see very little 
duplication, so we see very little waste. 
 
I notice also that the minister has not indicated the costs of such 
a council — the bureaucratic team that will be required to be 
employed to put in place this anniversary system. 
 
I also note, Mr. Speaker, that the announcement is that there are 
19 men and women who have come to serve to this committee. 
But I also take notice that of that 19, Mr. Speaker, 16 are listed 
as having come from cities in Saskatchewan. Only 3 of the 19 
individuals represent communities outside of the major cities in 
this province. 
 
And while we see that there is a 1 800 number listed, I’m 
wondering whether or not we’re going to get a good 
representation across this province so that we could have had 
people that would have represented all corners of this province, 
rural ridings, rural communities. We don’t see that, Mr. 
Speaker, and I would question the minister as to whether or not 
this community . . . this committee actually represents all of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. As 
each and every one of us in this Assembly know that plans for 
the future require people to commit themselves, give of 
themselves, organize and be made available to participate in 
events that require a lot of planning, a lot of cooperation, a lot 
of coordination. So I congratulate the people that have come 
forward and have been appointed to serve on this type of an 
advisory council. 
 
I had the privilege of meeting with some of these people at a 
luncheon today and I recognized some of those that have 
contributed in other areas. And I know that they will give of 
themselves to make the plans for our future celebrations in this 
province the best and ones that we can be very, very proud of. 
 
And I’m sure that communities throughout this great province 
of ours will offer their input and their cooperation to ensure that 
we achieve those goals, the goals of this particular advisory 
committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 204  The Balanced Budget Act, 1998 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 204, The Balanced Budget Act, 1998 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read the first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 207  The Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement Revocation Act 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 207, The Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement Revocation Act be now read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read the first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 429  The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Northern Village of Cole Bay) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of Bill No. 429, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Northern Village of Cole Bay). 
 
The division bells rang from 2:39 p.m. until 2:49 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 

Bjornerud Toth Gantefoer 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays — 22 
 

Flavel Van Mulligen Mitchell 
Atkinson Whitmore Goulet 
Kowalsky Calvert Teichrob 
Bradley Trew Renaud 
Scott Nilson Stanger 
Jess Kasperski Ward 
Murray Langford Murrell 
Thomson   
 

Bill No. 430 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Coleville) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill No. 430, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Village of Coleville). 
 
The division bells rang from 2:51 p.m. until 3:01 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Draude Gantefoer Heppner 
 

Nays — 19 
 
Van Mulligen Mitchell Atkinson 
Whitmore Goulet Kowalsky 
Calvert Bradley Trew 
Renaud Scott Nilson 
Stanger Jess Ward 
Murray Langford Murrell 
Thomson   
 

Bill No. 431 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Colgate) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 



May 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

reading of Bill No. 431, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Colgate). 
 
The division bells rang from 3:03 p.m. until 3:13 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
Bjornerud Toth Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner  

 
Nays — 19 

 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Mitchell 
Atkinson Johnson Whitmore 
Goulet Kowalsky Calvert 
Trew Renaud Scott 
Nilson Stanger Ward 
Murray Langford Murrell 
Thomson   
 

Bill No. 432 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Colonsay) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of Bill No. 432, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Town of Colonsay). 
 
The division bells rang from 3:16 p.m. until 3:26 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 

Bjornerud Toth D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 20 
 

Romanow Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Mitchell Atkinson Johnson 
Goulet Kowalsky Calvert 
Trew Renaud Nilson 
Hamilton Stanger Jess 
Ward Murray Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 

Bill No. 433 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Conquest) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of Bill No. 433, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Village of Conquest). 
 
The division bells rang from 3:28 p.m. until 3:38 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 4 
 

Toth D’Autremont Draude 
Heppner   

Nays — 18 
 
Romanow Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Lingenfelter Mitchell Johnson 
Kowalsky Calvert Trew 
Renaud Lorje Hamilton 
Stanger Ward Murray 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 

Bill No. 434 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Consul) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill No. 434, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Village of Consul). 
 
The division bells rang from 3:40 p.m. until 3:50 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 2 
Toth D’Autremont  
 

Nays — 18 
 
Van Mulligen MacKinnon Mitchell 
Atkinson Johnson Kowalsky 
Calvert Trew Renaud 
Lorje Hamilton Stanger 
Jess Ward Murray 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 

Bill No. 435 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Coronach) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of Bill No. 435, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Town of Coronach). 
 
The division bells rang from 3:52 p.m. until 4:02 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 4 
 
Toth D’Autremont Draude 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 19 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Mitchell Atkinson Johnson 
Upshall Kowalsky Calvert 
Renaud   
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Now members 
will appreciate there is a need for the Clerk to hear the answers 
to a vote. A request has been made for a standing recorded vote 
and we will honour that. I ask all members to allow the vote to 
be conducted properly. 
 
Lorje Cline Stanger 
Jess Ward Murray 



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1998 

Langford Murrell Thomson 
 

Bill No. 436 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Resort Village of Coteau Beach) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy 
Speaker. I move first reading of a Bill No. 436, The Channel 
Lake Indemnification Act (Resort Village of Coteau Beach). 
 
The division bells rang from 4:05 p.m. until 4:15 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 4 
 
Toth D’Autremont Draude 
Heppner   

 
Nays — 21 

 
Flavel Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Mitchell Atkinson Johnson 
Upshall Kowalsky Calvert 
Bradley Renaud Lorje 
Cline Hamilton Stanger 
Jess Ward Murray 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 

Bill No. 437 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Craik) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of Bill No. 437, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Town of Craik). 
 
The division bells rang from 4:18 p.m. until 4:28 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 3 
 

D’Autremont Draude Heppner 
 

Nays — 20 
 
Romanow Flavel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Mitchell Atkinson 
Johnson Upshall Kowalsky 
Renaud Lorje Cline 
Hamilton Stanger Jess 
Ward Murray Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 

Bill No. 438 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Craven) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of Bill No. 438, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Village of Craven). 
 
The division bells rang from 4:30 p.m. until 4:40 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

Yeas — 4 
 

Toth D’Autremont Draude 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 20 
 
Romanow Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Lingenfelter Mitchell Atkinson 
Johnson Upshall Kowalsky 
Calvert Bradley Trew 
Renaud Lorje Hamilton 
Stanger Ward Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 

Bill No. 439 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Creelman) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of Bill No. 439, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Village of Creelman). 
 
The division bells rang from 4:41 p.m. until 4:51 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 

Krawetz Toth D’Autremont 
Draude Heppner  
 

Nays — 18 
 

Flavel Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Lingenfelter Mitchell Atkinson 
Johnson Upshall Calvert 
Bradley Trew Renaud 
Hamilton Stanger Ward 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:53 p.m. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1431 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1432 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1434 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Cost of Bell-Ringing 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
 Renal Dialysis Now Available in Tisdale 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
 Closure of Plains Health Centre 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1435 
 University of Saskatchewan Neuroscientists Receive Funds to Probe Paralysis 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
 Humboldt Students Win Science Honours 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1436 
 Pharmacists Like Pasqua Expansion 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1436 
 Liberal Campaign Office Break-in 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1436 
 Funding to Enhance Programs against Family Violence 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................1436 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Free Vote on Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1436 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1437 
 SaskPower Proposed Investment in Guyana 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1437 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1437 
 SaskPower Labour Negotiations 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1437 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1437 
 Estey Report on Grain Transportation 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1438 



   

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1438 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1438 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1438 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1438 
 Highway 13 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1439 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1439 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1440 
 Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1440 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1440 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1441 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Citizen’s Advisory Council on Anniversaries 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1441 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1441 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1442 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 204  The Balanced Budget Act, 1998 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1442 
 Bill No. 207  The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement Revocation Act 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1442 
 Bill No. 429  The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Northern Village of Cole Bay) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded Division) ..............................................................................................................................................1442 
 Bill No. 430 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Coleville) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded Division) ..............................................................................................................................................1442 
 Bill No. 431 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Colgate) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded Division) ..............................................................................................................................................1442 
 Bill No. 432 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Colonsay) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded Division) ..............................................................................................................................................1443 
 Bill No. 433 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Conquest) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded Division) ..............................................................................................................................................1443 
 Bill No. 434 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Consul) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded Division) ........................................................................................................................................1443 
 Bill No. 435 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Coronach) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded Division) ........................................................................................................................................1443 
 Bill No. 436 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Resort Village of Coteau Beach) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded Division) ........................................................................................................................................1444 
 Bill No. 437 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Craik) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded Division) ........................................................................................................................................1444 
 Bill No. 438 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Craven) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded Division) ........................................................................................................................................1444 
 Bill No. 439 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Creelman) 
  D’Autremont (Recorded Division) ........................................................................................................................................1444 
 


