





























































Hansard: May 27, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1415 
 May 27, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of many residents 
in the north-east part of the province. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to 
remove the pay telephones in Pelly, Saskatchewan, to 
ensure that citizens have access to pay phones on a 24-hour 
basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from a number 
of communities: Pelly; Arran; Whitebeech; Keeseekoose; 
Canora; Kamsack; Cote First Nation; Norquay; and two 
communities in Manitoba, Roblin and Swan River. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to put 
an immediate halt to all investments in foreign countries by 
all Saskatchewan Crown corporations and instead invest 
Crown corporation profits in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from the Redvers and Antler areas of my 
constituency in the south-east, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions. Mr. Speaker, I present a petition this afternoon signed 
by many individuals who are very concerned about health care 
and the delivery of services in the Carrot River area. The 
petition is signed by people from Carrot River, Evesham, 
Nipawin, and Red Earth and other communities in the province. 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present to do with the closure of the Carrot River 
Hospital. Mr. Speaker, all the signatures on this petition are 
from the community of Carrot River. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I rise to present a petition and 
these are signed by people from the community of Herbert. And 
they are requesting that investments in foreign countries by 
SaskPower be stopped and the money be spent in 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens in the north-east of Saskatchewan concerned about the 
future of radiology services in the north-east. The signatures on 

this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of 
Melfort, Tisdale, and Pleasantdale. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Everyone that has signed this petition is from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased as well to 
present a petition to the Assembly this afternoon dealing with 
the issue of foreign investment by Crown corporations and the 
view of many people of how wrong that is in Saskatchewan. 
 
These petitioners, as I’m pleased to present, come from the 
Gravelbourg, Bateman area of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to rise in 
the House again today to present a petition on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners’ signatures on this petition are 
from the city of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition 
are primarily from Yorkton, and I believe Broadview, and all 
throughout the land. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 
follows: 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1998 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Swan River as well as the city of Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with my 
colleagues on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan 
with respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 
And the signatures on this petition, these petitions, come 
from Kelliher, Ituna, Hubbard, Yorkton, and Endeavour. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions from citizens concerned about deteriorating health care 
under the NDP (New Democratic Party), and specifically about 
the impending closure of the Regina Plains Health Centre. Your 
petitioners this afternoon do not come from all throughout the 
land, but they do come from the city of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward what is now upwards 
of 110,000 signatures that have been brought forward trying to 
convince the government to stop their ridiculous plans of 
closing the Plains hospital in Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member will want 
to avoid falling in to debate of course in presenting petitions. 
And I’ll ask him to go directly . . . Order. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the good people that have signed this petition are 
all from the Coronach area of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to offer 
the following prayer for relief on behalf of the people from 
south-west Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 

and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And as I said, Mr. Speaker, these folks come from Golden 
Prairie, from Maple Creek, and of course there are a few here 
from Schuler, Alberta as well. I’m happy to present that today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order a petition regarding the survival 
of the Carrot River Hospital presented on May 26 has been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) has been found to be 
irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed, 
and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received on 
the following matters: 
 

To ensure that the required level of service in radiology is 
maintained in the North Central Health District; to fund the 
twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; to save the Plains 
Health Centre; to call an independent public inquiry into 
Channel Lake; to relocate Highway 40 to alleviate 
congestion at North Battleford; to take the required action 
to allow Steven and Kimberley Walchuk to remain in the 
custody of maternal grandparents; to take action to ensure 
the survival of the Carrot River Hospital; and to ensure 
equitable treatment to those injured and disabled through 
work-related accidents. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to this Assembly Senator Mary Lou 
Freeman of Alta, Ohio seated behind the bar. 
 
Mary Lou is a former teacher presently serving her fourth year 
on the Iowa State Senate. Mary Lou is on the Midwest Council 
of State Governments, Midwest Canadian Relations Committee, 
and the American Legislative Exchange Council . 
 
This is Mary Lou’s first visit to Saskatchewan and one of her 
interests is natural resources. As Saskatchewan has a wealth of 
natural resources, especially our people, I am positive Mary 
Lou’s visit here will be most rewarding. 
 
Please welcome Mary Lou to our Assembly and to our 
province. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce, sitting 
behind the bar, Senator Keith Schraad from Overland Park, 
Kansas, which those of us who don’t know the geography of 
Kansas, is actually a part of Kansas City. 
 
Senator Keith Schraad was the former aide to U.S. (United 
States) Senator Bob Dole and participated in his run for the U.S. 
presidential nomination. He was elected to the senate in 1996, is 
married to wife Jodi, and has two children, daughter Madeleine 



May 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

and son Jack. 
 
Keith is a Republican Senator who does not support gun 
control. Mr. Speaker, he fits right into our caucus. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, with his experience involved in presidential 
campaigns, I expect to see Keith as a future candidate for U.S. 
president. I’d ask the Assembly to welcome Keith and to all of 
the midwestern delegates who are in Saskatchewan visiting our 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
also my pleasure to introduce today another member from the 
Midwest Regional Council of State Governments who’s with us 
as part of this group. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to 
my colleagues in the Assembly, Senator LeRoy Stumpf. LeRoy 
is from Thief River Falls, Minnesota. For those of you who may 
not be aware, it’s the north-west part of the state alongside the 
Red River Valley, in that part of the state. 
 
LeRoy was first elected into the Minnesota House of 
Representatives, District 13, in the year 1981 where he served 
in 1981 and ’82. He was elected to the Minnesota State Senate, 
District 1, in 1982 and he was re-elected in 1986, 1990, 1992, 
and again in 1996. Not unlike our Deputy Premier, I can see. 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to have you and everyone 
welcome LeRoy here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour this 
afternoon to introduce to you, Representative John Dorso, of the 
House of Representatives in Bismark, North Dakota. 
Representative Dorso represents Fargo, and he is the majority 
leader in the House of Representatives in Bismark — a position 
he has held for three terms and each time he has been 
unopposed in that position. He tells me that under the tutelage 
of my colleagues and myself, he is appreciating getting a 
“liberal” education into Saskatchewan politics. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you, Brenda Bod, once 
again, who was the lady that was very close to being a fatality 
statistic in this province when a 10-pound piece of asphalt came 
through her windshield. I’d also like to introduce you to her 
dad, Roy, and her brother, Laverne. I would ask you to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well 
through you and to the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
present a group of students from the Cowessess School at north 
of Grenfell. There is 10 grade 4 students here with us this 
afternoon accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Bear, and 
chaperon, Jeanne Haywabe. I think that’s sounds . . . I hope I 
got that right. But I’m looking forward to meeting with the 
students later on, and I’d ask the members to join with me in 
welcoming the students here. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 
to you and to the other members of the legislature, 13 students 
from Chief Mistawasis School in my constituency — grade 5 
students, I’m told. They are accompanied by Donna Davis and 
Linda Johnston, their teachers; and chaperons, Mary Anne 
Johnstone and Shelley Duquette. And I will be looking forward 
to the opportunity to meet with this group in about, probably 
about an hour. And I would ask everyone here to join with me 
in welcoming them to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now that we’re 
getting down to the really important people in the gallery, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, a group of students and chaperons and teachers from 
the town of Imperial and the Imperial School. 
 
We have the grade 3’s and 4’s in today. We also have with 
them a number of adults, senior adults I guess — we have the 
young adults and we have the senior adults. I’d ask the senior 
adults to stand as I call out their name and we’ll recognize them 
at the end. 
 
The teachers with the group today are Ms. Barb Tittemore and 
Ms. Kathy Rieger. Also we have as chaperons, we have: Lorne 
Buztynski, Mike Coady, and as well, Nancy Hill. 
 
And along with the group that drove them here I guess is Larry 
Cruise. I don’t want to outdate Larry too much but I think when 
I went to school, Larry didn’t drive me but he did drive some of 
the neighbouring kids to school — so Larry’s been in the 
business a long time. 
 
I’m looking forward, Mr. Speaker, to meeting with the group a 
little later and discuss a few issues. And I’d ask the whole 
Assembly to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to introduce to all of my colleagues in the 
legislature, my mom, Betty Atkinson, who’s visiting us today. 
She’s travelled from the farm close to Landis, Saskatchewan. 
Joining my mom is my sister, Wenda Atkinson, and my niece, 
Kate Atkinson-Fiddler. 
 
My mom’s spending the week in Regina, my niece had her 
dance recital on Sunday, and my sister is convocating from the 
University of Regina on Friday. My sister will be the most well 
educated in our family when she obtains her third degree on 
Friday. 
 
So I’d like all members to join me in welcoming my family to 
the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d also like to also join my colleague from Moosomin in 
welcoming the people from the Cowessess School. I just want 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1998 

to tell the teacher and certainly the aboriginal students, not to 
downplay the importance of the other students in the Assembly, 
but . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
And as a native member of the Assembly, I want to tell all the 
students up there that this is our home as well, and I’d like to 
welcome you on behalf of the Liberal caucus. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want you to join 
with me and with other members of the Assembly introducing 
six special guests. They are individuals who are from the cancer 
patient lodge here in the city of Regina. They are seated in the 
west gallery and I would just introduce them: Sam Bendickson, 
Nick Toderian, Donelda Tingle, and Lorna Greenway; as well 
as two good friends from the days that I spent in Shaunavon, 
Helen and Andy Fauchon. 
 
Obviously these are families and family members who are 
involved in one way or another in cancer treatment here in the 
city of Regina. I want to say special wishes to you and best 
wishes on behalf of all members of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the Deputy Premier in welcoming Andy and Helen here 
today. I hope your stay at the . . . your visit to the Assembly is 
an enjoyable one here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 
to the members of the Assembly, Annette Smith, from the 
community of Shell Lake. She’s here in the Assembly today to 
observe the members in their work. And I wish everyone to 
welcome her here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Fire-fighting Efforts Acknowledged 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to commend a 
group of committed and dedicated employees in northern 
Saskatchewan. These employees include all the fire-fighters, the 
fire protection workers, pilots and crews, fire bosses, and the 
support staff that are fighting the many fires in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Many of these people go for days, if not weeks, fighting these 
fires to try to minimize threats to people, communities, and 
property. We all know and appreciate the fact that resources are 
stretched to the limit and many times crucial decisions to fight 
certain fires with certain methods or not to fight these fires at 
all, are made by professional and experienced people. There is 
no question that it takes skill, experience, knowledge, and 
teamwork to fight fires and I wish to congratulate and commend 
those people that are out there now as I speak, that are fighting 

to protect their forest and communities from fires. 
 
There are pilots like Jimmy Hansen from Buffalo Narrows; fire 
protection workers like Lawrence Daigneault, William Caisse, 
Abe and George Bouvier, Alfred Durocher, Moise Morin, Joe 
and Chuck Desjarlais — all of Ile-a-la-Crosse; regional fire 
coordinators like Robbie Gardiner; and supervisors like Norman 
Fontaine; people like Brian Morin and Alice Pederson of 
Buffalo Narrows; people like Leonard Bouvier of Beauval and 
the many others who are working very hard and are doing a 
very good job with the resources they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all the Assembly members join with me 
to applaud the efforts of our northern forest fire-fighting team. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ribbon-cutting Ceremony at Molson Breweries, Regina 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in Regina is a 
day of celebration. Today there was a $10 million 
ribbon-cutting ceremony at Molson Breweries — a $10 million 
expansion that protects 107 jobs right here in Regina, an 
expansion that added dozens of jobs for local tradespeople 
during the construction phase of it, and an expansion that 
increases Molson’s capacity from 8 to roughly 12 million cases 
of beer. And it also increases the keg capacity from 50,000, I 
believe . . . Yes, 50,000 kegs to 85,000 kegs. It’s really a great 
day for Molson’s and its employees right here in Regina. 
 
It’s an example, Mr. Speaker, of what can happen when you get 
government, business, labour, all working together. A great 
synergy that really enhances the job protection of jobs — very 
good jobs — here in Regina, well into the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Booksellers Association President visits Ottawa 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Gailmarie Anderson, the owner of the Bookstop in Melfort, 
delivered a brief to the Canadian Senate Standing Committee on 
Social Affairs, Science and Technology, on May 26 in Ottawa. 
 
Gailmarie is the incoming president of the Canadian 
Booksellers Association. She is defending the association’s 
position that the GST (goods and services tax) be removed from 
all reading material. Gailmarie states that there are 1,300 
members of the Canadian Booksellers Association and she will 
be the voice for small, independent book stores in a rural area. 
 
Gailmarie will speak to Bill S-10, about to have a third reading, 
to amend the excise tax. Mr. Speaker, would the Assembly 
please join in congratulating Gailmarie Anderson and wish her 
success in the challenge she’s extending to the Canadian 
Senate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Celebration Week 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Rainbow 



May 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

Youth Centre presented its first annual Youth Celebration Week 
luncheon on Monday. Rainbow Youth Centre is a United Way 
agency which is partly funded by the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
The mission of the centre is to involve youth 11 to 19 years old 
in creating a safe, caring, healthy, and adaptive community of 
support by sharing responsibility for recognizing, accepting, 
and developing personal skills. The staff at the Rainbow Youth 
Centre facilitate workshops for youth in anger management, 
skills for adolescents, substance abuse, and education and peer 
help training. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is very committed to the 
youth of our province. Through the Department of Social 
Services alone we have allocated very significant funds to the 
Children’s Advocate and instituted the “building independence” 
initiative of which the children of this province will greatly 
benefit. 
 
The reason why we have dedicated so much to Saskatchewan’s 
youth is because, as the Minister of Social Services said when 
he addressed the Rainbow luncheon, we know that young 
people are the keepers of tomorrow. It is their energy, 
optimism, enthusiasm, idealism, combined with our strong and 
unwavering belief in the youth of our province, that leaves no 
doubt that our tomorrow, our future, is resting in extremely 
capable hands. 
 
I add my voice to the minister’s to congratulate the youth of our 
fine city in our province, and the Rainbow Youth Centre for 
helping us to celebrate them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Error in Member’s Statement 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have some bad news for the good news member of 
Lloydminster today. 
 
A few weeks ago the member from Lloydminster happily 
espoused good news headlines from Saskatchewan weekly 
newspapers. She went on to explain how each headline meant 
that the Saskatchewan economy, and especially small 
Saskatchewan communities, are doing quite well. 
 
The member from Lloydminster gleefully explained that these 
good news headlines are a result of the government’s strategy 
of investing in research and development in Saskatchewan. She 
explains there are more people working in Saskatchewan than 
ever before because of this strategy. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it seems the member from 
Lloydminster is unsure of the people in the province she 
represents. 
 
One of those so-called good news stories rose from CanAmera 
Foods expanding their plant. And I’m going to quote from the 
Langenburg newspaper, The Four-Town Journal. It’s a public 
document, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Vi Stanger unfortunately overlooked one fact. CanAmera 

is located in Harrowby, Manitoba. The majority of jobs 
there are filled by Manitoba residents. 

 
I’d like to send a copy of this over to the member so she 
realizes what she’s got herself into. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News for the North 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in this 
Assembly we had an interesting debate on northern 
development, a debate I was happy to take part in because I 
believe we are making good progress towards strengthening 
northern communities. 
 
For example, the Minister of Northern Affairs discussed the 
recent memorandum of understanding on northern 
development. Today, as further evidence of that progress, the 
Minister of Municipal Government affairs, at a round table in 
La Ronge — municipal round table in La Ronge — is 
announcing six new initiatives designed to assist Northerners 
and improve northern communities. 
 
Briefly the initiatives are: a northern home-owner mortgage 
discount program; 40 new social housing units in smaller and 
remote northern communities; increase in home repair grants; 
the renewal of northern capital grant program; a northern water 
and sewer infrastructure study of all 35 northern municipalities; 
and an appointment of a board to support the Northern Revenue 
Sharing Trust Account. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these initiatives are a direct result of consultation 
between the government and Northerners, and they are good 
news for the North. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Final Tea for Scissors Creek Health Care Auxiliary 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, a week ago Saturday was somewhat 
of a sad day for the community of Whitewood. I say sad in 
respect to the fact that the Scissors Creek Health Care Auxiliary 
had a tea, their final tea that they would be holding, as they 
were deciding to disband, feeling that they really didn’t have a 
function to continue to offer to the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Scissors Creek Health Care Auxiliary was 
formed in 1958. That gives them 40 years of service to their 
community. In the 40 years of service to the community, they 
raised over $50,000 of which 20,000 went to the care home, 
25,000 to their hospital, 5,000 to the handivan and other 
worthwhile local projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate part about the winding down of 
the Scissors Creek Health Care Auxiliary is it’s just another 
example of the fact that this is an ongoing process throughout 
the province of Saskatchewan. And so many organizations such 
as this health care auxiliary have done so much for our small 
communities. 
 
While it is sad, we want to thank them for their worthwhile 
efforts, and the projects that they have worked so hard and so 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1998 

diligently in supporting their communities. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Elrose Area Donates to Canadian Foodgrains Bank 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
people, as we all know, have always been willing to lend a 
helping hand to those in need. I’m proud to say that this spring 
the community of Elrose has taken the lead in donating their 
time, effort, and enthusiasm to battle a serious problem — 
world hunger. 
 
During the 1970s, a time when famine emergencies gripped 
many developing nations, the Mennonite Central Committee 
started a pilot project which was aimed at helping the starving 
people in the world in the most impoverished countries. This 
project’s goal was to collect donations of wheat with volunteer 
workers and ship it to those countries in need. 
 
What started out as a relatively small project of the Mennonite 
Central Committee led in 1983 to the establishment of a new, 
much larger, interdenominational agency, the Canadian 
Foodgrains Bank. This has resulted in a great strengthening of 
the capacity to feed the hungry world. 
 
This year, for the second year in a row, Mr. Speaker, some 
Elrose area farmers have combined their efforts in a unique 
way. One family has donated land, others donated seed, 
fertilizer, machinery, and work to seed 320 acres of wheat to 
donate to the Canadian Foodgrains Bank. 
 
Last year, between the grain grown and the community cash 
donations, they raised a total of $40,000 for the Canadian 
Foodgrains Bank. In the last year, the Canadian Foodgrains 
Bank provided more than 32,000 metric tonnes which is more 
than 1 million bushels of food grain to 26 needy countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to salute all of those involved in this 
very important project. It is a true reflection of the spirit of 
Saskatchewan which has made this the best place on the earth in 
which to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Free Vote on Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Premier or whoever is in charge. 
 
Mr. Premier, four weeks in a row on private members’ day we 
have called on you to allow a free vote on the future of the 
Plains hospital. For four weeks in a row you have blocked the 
free vote on the Plains hospital. You are refusing to stand up 
and take responsibility for this terrible decision that is hurting 
so many people in Regina and southern Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party wants to see a free vote on this issue 
before the end of this legislative session. Mr. Premier, when are 
you going to start listening to the people you represent? When 

are you going to allow a free vote on the future of the Plains 
hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite that the issue of free vote in our caucus is 
one that we take very seriously. Every day we have a caucus 
meeting where members are allowed to express openly their 
views on particular topics. 
 
But as in many organizations, Mr. Speaker, in many 
organizations once a vote is taken in caucus we then come in 
with a common front as you do. I have not yet seen that 
particular party vote against itself. Now that may surprise them 
when in fact four of them . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the Chair is having a 
bit of difficulty already being able to hear the answer being 
provided and I’ll — order, order — I’ll ask for the cooperation 
of all members to enable the minister to be heard in providing 
responses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It’s particularly surprising coming 
from that particular member and the other members from 
Saltcoats, Melfort, Canora-Pelly, and Kelvington-Wadena, who 
were elected a few years ago as Liberals and with no 
consultation, Mr. Speaker, with anyone crossed the floor to sit 
as Conservatives. I would argue, resign today and let’s see 
whether you can win in a by-election in a free vote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Well now the Chair is having difficulty being 
able to hear the Leader of the Opposition put his question 
because of — order, order — because of disruptions on both 
sides of the House. And I’ll ask for the cooperation of the 
House to enable the question to be heard and the answer to be 
heard. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll have 
to try to project my voice even louder. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, people expect their MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) to represent their views and people are 
telling you to keep the Plains hospital open. You refuse to 
listen. You refuse to take responsibility and you refuse to hold a 
free vote. Mr. Deputy Premier, we refuse to accept that. 
 
Today the Saskatchewan Party is serving notice that this House 
will do no more business until you set a date for a free vote on 
the Plains hospital. Immediately following question period we 
are going to start ringing the bells. And they are going to keep 
ringing until you set a date for a free vote on the Plains hospital 
in this Legislative Chambers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, will you set a date for a free vote on the 
future of the Plains hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite that we had a little bell-ringing incident 



May 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

earlier in the session. And I remember how they had a difficult 
time getting their way back into the House. 
 
And I say to the members opposite what we should think about 
around here is back-to-work legislation for that Conservative 
Party to stay here and do their work. This is the second time 
you’ve been on strike this session. And I would urge you to be 
more responsible, come here and do your work so that other 
members of the Assembly can carry on the business. 
 

Compensation for Highway Accident Victim 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two 
days ago Brenda Bod visited this legislature looking for some 
justice and compassion from the Minister of Highways. 
 
Just to recap, Brenda was injured, very nearly killed. when a 
10-pound chunk of Highway 47 came crashing through her 
windshield last Friday. After Brenda’s ordeal was raised in this 
House, a maintenance employee from the Highways department 
from the south-east visited her and told her the department 
would pay her SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
deductible but only if she agreed to sign a paper waiving any 
liability against the Highway department. 
 
Madam Minister, this is blackmail. Is your department at fault 
or not? Why are you asking Brenda to sign this waiver excusing 
you from any liability? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said 
before, when this unusual type of an accident happens there is 
sympathy and there is compassion for the person that was 
involved. 
 
Our department has responded as quickly as possible to this. I 
had the opportunity to meet with Brenda and her brother, 
Laverne, in my office. We certainly needed to try to look at the 
Department of Highways, to work out types of options — also 
through SGI. 
 
My understanding is that there’s several options there that can 
be worked out, and those will continue to be looked at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Madam Minister, why then would 
you ask . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member will want 
to direct his question through the Chair as is the usual practice 
of the House. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, then 
I ask the minister why on earth would you need — if there’s 
going to be more talk on this issue — why would she have to 
sign a liability form? Mr. Speaker, we’re very lucky that Brenda 
is with us at all. A few inches the other way and she quite likely 
would have been killed by this flying piece of asphalt. What 
would the no-fault system have done for her in that case? Not 
very much because she would have been dead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a case of no-fault. There is clearly fault 
here and the fault is with the minister’s shabby highways. And 

in return Brenda’s simply asking the Highway department to 
pay for the damage to her vehicle, compensate her for lost time 
from work, and pay for leasing replacement vehicle. 
 
Madam Minister, if you had no liability here you wouldn’t have 
to have tried to quietly coax Brenda Bod into signing this 
waiver. Madam Minister, Brenda Bod is here today because she 
was nearly killed because of your decrepit highways. How can 
you now stand there and tell us it wasn’t your fault? Why not do 
the right thing and compensate her for your neglect of the 
highways instead of forcing her into your no-fault insurance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said 
previously, by working with our own officials, also working 
with SGI, to come to a solution for this accident that had 
happened. Now I do want to say that there has been a lot of 
response on this and that we will take this very seriously and we 
will continue to work on it. Also I can inform people that the 
highway that has been involved too, there’s been a lot of 
checking over, work done; they’re talking with the trucking 
firms and trying to understand this whole circumstance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Crown Life 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). Mr. Minister, I’d 
just like to recap that Crown Life deal. The government is going 
to lose about $95 million in interest. It may or may not get back 
its $271 million investment in five years or more, we’re not 
sure. Regina stands to lose over 400 jobs and the minister calls 
this very good news. Who negotiated this deal — Lawrence 
Portigal? With what we have to lose, how can you possibly call 
this a good deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I continue to be 
amazed by the member opposite, the member from the 
Conservative Party, who wonders out loud whether we will get 
back the money that the Conservatives put into Crown Life. 
This is what they’re wondering and they’re wondering out loud. 
And they say to themselves, I wonder if we will get back the 
money that the Conservatives put into . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the commentary is 
almost constant and the Chair is having great difficulty being 
able to hear the answer being provided. And I ask for the 
cooperation of all the members of the opposition to allow the 
minister to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to the 
members opposite, who are once again in a contrary position to 
the mayor of Regina, to the chamber of commerce, to the 
economic development authority, to Canada Life, to Crown 
Life officials who say this is a good deal . . . And they’re hung 
up on the issue of whether we will get back the money that 
Grant Devine and the Tories put into the deal. That’s what 
they’re saying. 
 
But what I would urge him to do tomorrow morning when he 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1998 

gets up in the morning is look in the mirror and say, if he’s 
concerned about it, why did I put the money into the deal? 
That’s the question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, you did. 
Members opposite, including the member from Moosomin, sat 
on this side of the House and decided to put the money into 
Crown Life. 
 
And today they say, do you think we’ll get the money out? Why 
didn’t you think of that when you made the decision to invest in 
Crown Life? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I think that we should just turn 
the mirror so that the minister can look at it and tell us what 
kind of a good deal we got in Channel Lake, what kind of a 
good deal we got in Guyana, what kind of a good deal you’re 
now negotiating all over in your little kingdoms. 
 
Mr. Minister, taxpayers potentially — by your own comments 
— stand to lose potentially $95 million of unpaid interest. 
There’s no fixed timetable for the recovery of the $271 million, 
and 400 people are going to lose their jobs. 
 
The only people this is a good deal for potentially are 
companies like DEML (Direct Energy Marketing Limited) and 
Canada Life. How can you say to the 400 employees of Crown 
Life that are losing their jobs that it’s a good deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if the member could 
or would read . . . I will quote for him from the Leader-Post 
what Crown Life’s Brian Johnson says about jobs. He said “the 
loss of jobs was probably inevitable.” Brian Johnson says “was 
probably inevitable given the current trend toward . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. Now . . . Order. 
On both sides . . . Order from both sides of the House. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in quoting Brian 
Johnson, the CEO (chief executive officer) of Crown Life, he 
would indicate, and has indicated to that member opposite in 
briefings to him personally, that the jobs would have been lost 
anyway. 
 
And yet that member comes here, in light of the fact that he’s 
been briefed, or for political reasons, to try to raise an issue 
around what? —about an investment that Grant Devine and his 
party made. This is hypocrisy at its best. And I now understand 
why the Liberal Party . . . I think this was not a crossing of the 
floor from you to the . . . from the Liberals to the Conservatives, 
I think maybe they pushed you a little bit because you lack a 
certain amount of integrity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Land Purchase for Parking at General Hospital 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, in early April the Premier 
toured the Regina General Hospital construction site and told 
the media that this new site would have everything. He told the 
media who tagged along on this public relations exercise that 
the site would contain a state-of-the-art health care facility and 
ample parking. 

However, Regina city manager, Bob Linner, has confirmed that 
the Regina Health District is involved in preliminary talks 
aimed at purchasing a lot at the corner of 15th and Toronto in 
Regina and converting that land into parking space. 
 
Mr. Premier, if this site is going to provide ample parking, why 
is there a need for the district to purchase land for a parkade? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important to 
realize, and certainly I appreciate finally, that the member 
opposite is on his feet and talking about the fact that in the 
Regina system today we’re going to have very good health care 
services. The member opposite has finally recognized that in 
fact in the city of Regina, and serving southern Saskatchewan, 
we’re going to have two major facilities that are going to 
provide world-class services. 
 
I say to the member opposite that it would not be unusual for 
the district health board to have consultation with the city of 
Regina to ensure that as they prepare for the move of the 
services from the Plains Health Centre to the Pasqua and to the 
General, that they would ensure that there would be sufficient 
parking and accessibility for its patrons. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite this is part of ensuring that 
Regina people and southern Saskatchewan people are well 
served at the two new facilities. And I appreciate the 
information that the member provides to ensure that people are 
well served. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition has 
demonstrated that the cost of what they call consolidating health 
care services in Regina is already $25 million over budget. The 
original price tag for the project was $83 million. It grew to $93 
million. It’s now $108 million and counting. And this doesn’t 
include the 30 million that will be spent converting the Plains 
hospital into a SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) campus or the cost of purchasing land 
and constructing a parkade. 
 
It appears that the costs associated with this project are running 
away as fast as NDP supporters. Mr. Premier, the cost of 
consolidation is $108 million and counting. What’s the final bill 
going to be — 110 million, 120 million, 130 million? You tell 
us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s 
important to recognize here is that on this side of the House, 
what we do is we plan and develop and work towards ensuring 
that we enrich health care services across the province. We 
don’t look for a parade . . . we don’t chase parades around the 
province and look at trying to get in front of them, Mr. Speaker, 
like the Liberals do, okay? What we do here is we carefully 
ensure that we plan for the future. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, in this province and in this city, there 
is a major investment that’s been made in health care — 1.72 



May 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

billion to the province, the largest expenditure ever made in the 
province. And to the Regina projects, Mr. Speaker, today, $94 
million to date expended or committed. And there will be 
continued expenditures that will be made in the health care 
system, not only in Regina but in the member’s constituency 
where he comes from, and from Saskatoon and across the 
province we’ll continue to make those kinds of investments. 
 
Because in order to ensure that we have quality health care 
services, it means we need to ensure that we put money into 
staffing, into facilities, into equipment. And that’s the 
commitment that we make to all Saskatchewan people across 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, this government has maintained 
that it’ll save about $10 million annually by closing down the 
Plains hospital, but they’re willing to spend well over $100 
million to do so. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’ve already established that the closure of the 
Plains doesn’t make any sense from a health care standpoint. 
Wouldn’t you agree that it makes no more sense from a 
financial standpoint? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, if today I hear the member 
opposite saying that an investment of $2.2 million on the part of 
the government to enrich the MRI (magnetic resonance 
imaging) services which are going to serve southern 
Saskatchewan in a major way, if the member opposite is 
suggesting that the 200 nurses that we’ve just added to 
complement the services across the province, if the member 
opposite is suggesting for a moment here that the money that 
we put in, $48 million into new positions across the province, is 
a waste of taxpayers’ money, then he should be standing up and 
saying that. Because that’s exactly what his leader says, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s exactly what his leader has said. 
 
His leader has said just recently, Mr. Speaker, that a Liberal is a 
Liberal. Irrespective if it’s federal or provincial, we all support 
the same concept. And the member opposite supports reducing 
the federal expenditures to health across the province and the 
member opposite now suggests that we should be cutting health 
care services in the province further. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of Highway 155 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 
the past three years I have raised concerns about the conditions 
of Highway 155 north of Green Lake. And on a number of 
occasions we have talked about the poor situation that people 
have to travel when we talk about that northern road. Each year 
that this road is ignored by the government, there is a greater 
risk of a real disaster. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Highways. Each year almost 
800 truckloads of fuel, more than 300 truckloads of sulphuric 
acid, 100 truckloads of lime and yellowcake are hauled on this 

highway each and every year. Mr. Minister, this year your 
government intends to earmark $180,000 to that highway. And 
that will resurface about 3 kilometres — 3 kilometres of this 
300-kilometre stretch. For safety’s sake, for the sake of our 
environment, and for the safety of northern residents, will you 
make a commitment today to address the hazardous Highway 
155 north of Green Lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every year 
within our budget we do a lot of allocations of dollars and we 
have to look at the benefit/cost analysis, all of those factors. 
 
But the one thing that we have done certainly is addressing both 
northern roads, but also roads right across the province. We put 
more dollars, we put more dollars into our budget this year. And 
we added the $20 million this year, $30 million last year. And 
actually this year on fixing roads in the North, we’ve committed 
a significant amount of our budget — $35 million is spent on 
work on the roads in the North. 
 
One of the other aspects is not only spending more dollars but 
also in the planning of how those dollars are being spent. And 
we’re working with communities, transportation area 
committees; and in the North, met with a lot of the community 
leaders . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Now the Chair is 
having some difficulty hearing the minister because of shouting 
coming from the benches of the third party. And I will ask for 
the cooperation, I will ask for the cooperation of all members to 
allow the answer to be heard. I’ll give the minister a few 
seconds to wrap up her response. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now I hadn’t even taken my seat and 
the shouting has begun again. And I will ask for the cooperation 
of the House to enable the response of the minister to be heard. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have 
dedicated more dollars, more money to the North for roads. 
What I’d also say is we wish that the federal Liberals would 
also respond in the need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The late Louis 
Morin had a famous phrase that he spoke about when the 
government told him that his highway to Turnor Lake was on 
the list. And his response after 10 years of asking for highway 
improvement is, we can’t travel on the list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister appears to be the only one who 
doesn’t realize how important it is to improve Highway 155. I 
have received letters from the mayors of Beauval and the Chief 
of Patuanak Band, expressing the problems that we have with 
Highway 155. 
 
The village council from Ile-a-la-Crosse— this is one of their 
main priorities. The people of Buffalo Narrows, and our key 
truckers, taxi-cab operators, were all upset about the 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1998 

government’s refusal to fix this highway. And now we throw on 
one company’s needs in terms of transporting all these goods, 
with all these chemicals on that road, talking about the need to 
improve these highways. 
 
Madam Minister, what commitment do you have with the 
people of the North when it comes to Highway 155, and when 
will this road be fixed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think one of 
the challenges which we’re facing, which is a good challenge to 
have, is because of all of the great economic development work 
that is being done in the North. And this is a challenge also to 
our infrastructure system. And certainly it’s one of the ways in 
which, in this year’s budget, we have targeted more dollars to 
be spent on roads in the North than every before — $35 million 
is directed to northern roads. 
 
As I’ve said previously, if we could get a reasonable cost-share 
arrangement with Ottawa, and I challenge the members 
opposite to show us their letters, to show us their requests — 
where Ottawa plays a role in all of this, so we could direct more 
resources to roads in the North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Trade War in Grain 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today through you to the Minister of Agriculture has to 
do with the international grain trade wars that we’ve been 
hearing about for the past three or four weeks. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you well know, we have been worried about a 
trade war which, it has now been confirmed, is in full swing 
because of the fact that we’ve discovered that the Europeans 
have been subsidizing oats by 68 cents going into the United 
States — with the result that the North American oat market has 
dropped by 70 cents a bushel for all North American farmers. 
The net result of course is being that Canadian farmers have 
been cut out of that market. We fear of course, and I think it’s 
real now, that that trade war will escalate into the wheat markets 
and all other grains. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: in view of the fact that 
both Canadian and American farmers will suffer from a trade 
war — especially in North Dakota and Saskatchewan — what 
do you plan on doing to get the federal government off its duff 
to play whatever cards we have left in this trade war to try to 
get it stopped? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m really glad that the independent member is 
concerned about the international grain wars; obviously the 
Liberals and Conservatives aren’t. And this is very important, 
the reason why they’re not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
they say quit grandstanding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me tell you, our federal government, our 
federal government was at WTO (World Trade Organization) 
with all the other countries that were there. 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Now I’m asking again for the 
cooperation of the House and of all — order — of all hon. 
members to allow both the questions to be asked and the 
answers to be provided in an uninterrupted manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, at the last round of trade 
talks there was a formula put forward where people . . . 
whereby countries should reduce their subsidies. The United 
States did not throw away the export enhancement program; 
they simply set it aside. The European Union did not throw 
away their programs; they simply set it aside. 
 
Our geniuses in Ottawa, what did they do? They toss out the 
$320 million of Crow rate immediately and now they stand up 
and say: oh please, oh please, don’t subsidize. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, the U.S. treasury in the United States are 
going to look after their farmers to the degree that they want to. 
The European treasury’s going to look after their farmers to the 
degree that they can. 
 
And I’ll tell you, there is a provision where our federal 
government — and I’d like to see these Liberal members table 
their correspondence saying that we should get back in the 
game — there is a provision and a responsibility for this federal 
treasury to support Saskatchewan and western Canadian 
farmers like the other treasuries do in other countries. 
 
I say the Liberals have played their race before the game 
started. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplementary for the same minister. 
 
After all of the local coaching that I’ve gotten for the next 
question, I want to boil it all down to one very simple question 
for the minister. It’s all right, Minister, for us to point fingers as 
we did in the 1980s — and we had the result then that half the 
farmers in Saskatchewan went broke — I don’t think we need 
to point fingers any more; I think we have to have action. 
 
My question directly to you is: what are you going to do to try 
to get this process under way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now again the Chair is asking 
for the cooperation from the benches of the third party to cease 
with the shouting across the floor. It makes it — order — and I 
will ask for the cooperation of all hon. members to enable the 
minister to provide the response in an uninterrupted manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, to the member. On April 
14 I believe it was, 14 or 17, it was the last letter I wrote to the 
federal government explaining that — we think that they have a 
responsibility to ensure that if this grain trade war escalates — 
that they be in the forefront of trying to stop it, number one, but 
number two, to try to ensure that the farmers of Saskatchewan 
are protected. 
 
Unfortunately the federal government since 1991 has cut its 



May 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1425 

funding to our province by 52 per cent in agriculture — 52 per 
cent. On top of that, they let the $320 million of grain subsidy 
go, which puts our . . . inflates our cost of shipping grain to the 
West Coast to a third of the value, a third of the value of the 
initial price of wheat. On top of that, the grain trade wars bring 
the international grain price down. 
 
And our federal MPs (Member of Parliament) stand up there 
and flap their jaws saying, well you guys shouldn’t do this. 
Well I’m glad to hear them say not to do this, but I want to hear 
their federal plan on how they’re going to have Saskatchewan 
farmers stay in the game, like U.S. and European farmers are 
going to be held in the game by their governments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll take the point of order when we get to 
orders of the day at the usual time. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 415  The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Carrot River) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 415, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Town of Carrot River). 
 
The division bells rang from 2:30 p.m. until 2:40 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 19 
 
Flavel Wiens Atkinson 
Tchorzewski   
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now hon. members will all 
recognize that it’s not in order to be shouting while the vote is 
being taken. And I will ask for the cooperation of all members 
to allow the vote to be taken in an orderly member. 
 
Johnson Whitmore Upshall 
Trew Lorje Sonntag 
Cline Serby Hamilton 
Stanger Wall Kasperski 
Ward Murray Murrell 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m requesting leave to introduce 
guests. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank all hon. 
members for generously granting leave that I might, on behalf 
of the member, my colleague, the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers, introduce to you and other members of the Assembly, 
16 grade 7 and 8 students from East Central School in Prince 
Albert. This fine group is accompanied by their teacher, Valerie 
Horner; and by chaperones Lucy Fowler, Anita MacDonald, 
and Audrey Linfitt. 
 
It will be my pleasure to meet with this group a little bit later 
this day. And I look forward to a discussion with them and 
answering some of their questions. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming this fine group from 
P.A. (Prince Albert). 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the hon. member from Cannington on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, please. 
 

POINTS OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order related 
to Beauchesne’s No. 6, Points of Order, page 96, section 
317(3), it reads: 
 

317(3) Since the introduction of a time limit on the daily 
oral Question Period it has become the custom for the 
Speaker to recognize points of order only at the conclusion 
of the Question Period. 

 
I submit, Mr. Speaker, that we requested a point of order at the 
conclusion of question period, and would ask that it be 
recognized. 
 
The Speaker: — Well the hon. member raises a point of order 
which in essence has answered itself. The Chair recognizes the 
hon. member . . . there was an attempt by the same caucus to 
raise a point of order earlier, and the Chair at that time said that 
as is the usual practice of our House that a point of order would 
be recognized at its usual time, before points of order which all 
members will recognize is the usual time in our House. 
 
However the . . . did I say . . . Before orders of the day is what I 
intended to say. And I do recognize . . . Order. Where as it says, 
rule 42(3) in the rules of this Assembly: 
 

The Speaker shall not entertain points of order during the 
Oral Question Period. Points of order may be raised later 
on Orders of the Day. 

 
Which is the usual practice of our House. And that’s what the 
Chair indicated at that time. 
 
I think that’s the question that the hon. member is raising, 
whether the Chair would entertain a point of order. As he asks 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1998 

now, I think the answer is obvious. He requests to raise a point 
of order and given the unfolding of the agenda as it is taking 
place this day, the Chair has already recognized the hon. 
member to put a point of order. 
 
And so therefore it is a moot question. In essence the hon. 
member is asking whether what has happened is acceptable and 
obviously it is. 
 
Point of order is well taken. 
 
(1445) 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the hon. member’s other point of 
order? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would rise on 
a point of order concerning a personal attack on the integrity of 
a member of this House, namely the member from Melfort, in a 
statement by the Deputy Premier in his response to a question 
where he stated: sir, you have a complete lack of integrity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that this is not acceptable 
parliamentary behaviour and would ask that the Deputy Premier 
be asked to apologize unequivocally. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 
point of order made by the member opposite and the comments 
that I may have made that referred to the member from 
Melfort’s integrity, obviously in the heat of debate in question 
period I can go back and quote many incidents when the 
member from Melfort, in a very personal way, referred to my 
abilities to do many things. And we take this cut and thrust in 
question period. 
 
But having said that, if the member finds it insulting or not 
accurate, I have no problem with withdrawing and apologizing. 
I would only ask that the member opposite, who obviously feels 
slighted, would do the same thing back to me as an individual 
and apologize for all the slights that he has given during 
question period to the Deputy Premier. 
 
And I don’t mind apologizing; I think we should be more civil 
and more upright in how we treat each other in this House. But 
in response to your questions about the way I operate, which is 
very personal, I would urge that this is something that goes on 
in the House every day. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The Chair has 
listened carefully to the point of order raised by the hon. 
member for Cannington as well as to the comments provided to 
the Assembly by the Deputy Premier. 
 
It will be recognized by all hon. members, I know, that it is a 
characteristic of this House that when members come and 
engage in political exchange, the most heated of which in our 
House normally occurs during question period, that passions 
often run high and that’s an acceptable thing to happen in our 
House. 

Members will also recognize, as has been said, that however it 
is never, ever appropriate that, engaging in political cut and 
thrust of debate in this Assembly, that members would draw 
into question the character of another member. 
 
We must clearly all operate on the assumption that all hon. 
members are indeed honourable members and grant to one 
another the assumption that that is the motivation with which 
affairs are conducted in this House. 
 
Without having reviewed the record to listen to the . . . to see 
the precise words used, I take as intended the report provided in 
raising the point of order by the hon. member for Cannington. 
And I also recognize and appreciate that the Deputy Premier has 
indicated that if offence was taken, then he has extended his 
apology. That’s a most appropriate course of action. 
 
It will often be in the conduct of the House, sometimes under 
dispute, as to just exactly what it is that constitutes a violation 
of parliamentary practice and at the end of the day offence 
being taken by members is a significant factor considered by 
the Chair. 
 
I’ve understood that to be the case. I’ve understood the apology 
extended by the Deputy Premier to address that point and 
therefore I will consider the matter to have been appropriately 
dealt with. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 416 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Central Butte) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill, Bill 
No. 416, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of 
Central Butte). 
 
The division bells rang from 2:50 p.m. until 3 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 
Bjornerud Toth D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 17 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 
Atkinson Tchorzewski Johnson 
Whitmore Upshall Trew 
Lorje Sonntag Hamilton 
Stanger Wall Kasperski 
Ward Murray  
 

Bill No. 417 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Ceylon) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 417, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Village of Ceylon). 
 



May 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

The division bells rang from 3:02 p.m. until 3:12 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Krawetz Toth D’Autremont 
Boyd Gantefoer Heppner 
 

Nays — 18 
 
Van Mulligen Wiens Lingenfelter 
Mitchell Atkinson Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Trew 
Lorje Sonntag Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
 

Bill No. 418 —The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Chamberlain) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 418, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Village of Chamberlain). 
 
The division bells rang from 3:14 p.m. until 3:24 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Krawetz Toth D’Autremont 
Boyd Gantefoer Heppner 
 

Nays — 21 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 
Lingenfelter Atkinson Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Upshall 
Bradley Lorje Sonntag 
Cline Serby Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
 

Bill No. 419 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Chaplin) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 419, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Village of Chaplin). 
 
The division bells rang from 3:26 p.m. until 3:36 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 4 
 
Toth Boyd Draude 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 16 
Van Mulligen Wiens Atkinson 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 

Upshall Bradley Lorje 
Sonntag Cline Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Wall 
Ward   
 

Bill No. 420 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Resort Village of Chitek Lake) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 420, The 
Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Resort Village of Chitek 
Lake). 
 
The division bells rang from 3:38 p.m. until 3:48 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 

Toth Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 18 
 

Van Mulligen Wiens Lingenfelter 
Atkinson Tchorzewski Johnson 
Whitmore Upshall Bradley 
Lorje Sonntag Cline 
Hamilton Stanger Jess 
Wall Ward Murray 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Murray: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And my thanks to my colleagues for leave to introduce a very 
fine group of young students seated in your gallery, and I am 
very pleased to introduce them on behalf of my colleague, the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
We have with us all the way from Prince Albert a group from 
W.J. — and I hope I’m going to get all these pronunciations 
correct — W.J. Berezowsky School, and they are grade 4 
students, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 25 of them. They are 
accompanied by their teachers, Ms. Janet Simpson and Ms. 
Janelle Matice. They are accompanied by a number of very 
community-spirited chaperons: Nancy Pardu, Nancy Keller, 
Kelly Timmerman, Marilyn Brown, Grant Gordon, Carey 
Fedoruk, Dale Redford, and also with them is Melanie Braaten 
from SaskPower. 
 
So that is really a wonderful group and we thank you for 
spending time in the Assembly and visiting Regina. I look 
forward to meeting with you later on, and I will ask all my 
colleagues to join with me in extending a very warm welcome 
to all of you. 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1998 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 421 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Choiceland) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 421, The 
Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Choiceland). 
 
The division bells rang from 3:51 p.m. until 4:01 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Bjornerud Toth Boyd 
Draude Gantefoer Heppner 
 

Nays — 18 
 
Van Mulligen Wiens Atkinson 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Upshall Bradley Trew 
Lorje Sonntag Cline 
Serby Hamilton Stanger 
Jess Wall Ward 
 

Bill No. 422 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Christopher Lake) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 422, The Channel 
Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Christopher Lake). 
 
The division bells rang from 4:04 p.m. until 4:14 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 
Bjornerud Toth D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 19 
 
Van Mulligen Wiens Lingenfelter 
Atkinson Tchorzewski Johnson 
Whitmore Upshall Bradley 
Trew Lorje Sonntag 
Cline Serby Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Wall 
Ward   
 

Bill No. 423 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Churchbridge) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading of 
Bill 423, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of 
Churchbridge). 
 

The division bells rang from 4:16 p.m. until 4:26 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 18 
 

Van Mulligen Wiens Lingenfelter 
Atkinson Tchorzewski Johnson 
Whitmore Bradley Trew 
Lorje Sonntag Cline 
Serby Hamilton Jess 
Wall Ward Murray 
 

Bill No. 427 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Coderre) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move first 
reading of the Bill No. 427, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Village of Coderre). 
 
The division bells rang from 4:28 p.m. until 4:38 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 8 
 

Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner  

 
Nays — 19 

 
Flavel Wiens Lingenfelter 
Shillington Atkinson Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Upshall 
Bradley Lorje Sonntag 
Cline Serby Hamilton 
Jess Wall Ward 
Murray   
 

Bill No. 428 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Codette) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move the 
first reading of Bill No. 428, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Village of Codette). 
 
The division bells rang from 4:40 p.m. until 4:50 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Draude Gantefoer Heppner 
 
 



May 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

Nays — 20 
 

Flavel Wiens Lingenfelter 
Shillington Atkinson Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Upshall 
Bradley Trew Lorje 
Sonntag Cline Serby 
Hamilton Jess Wall 
Ward Murray  
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:53 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1415 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1416 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1416 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1416 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1416 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1416 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................1416 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1416 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1417 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1418 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1418 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1418 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1427 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Fire Fighting Efforts Acknowledged 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1418 
 Ribbon-cutting Ceremony at Molson Breweries, Regina 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1418 
 Canadian Booksellers Association President visits Ottawa 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1418 
 Youth Celebration Week 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1418 
 Error in Member's Statement 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1419 
 Good News for the North 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1419 
 Final Tea for Scissors Creek Health Care Auxiliary 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1419 
 Elrose Area Donates to Canadian Foodgrains Bank 
  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1420 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Free Vote on Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1420 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1420 
 Compensation for Highway Accident Victim 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1421 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1421 
 Sale of Crown Life 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1421 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1421 
 



 

 Land Purchase for Parking at General Hospital 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1422 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1422 
 Maintenance of Highway 155 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1423 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1423 
 International Trade War in Grain 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1424 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1424 
POINTS OF ORDER 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1425 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1426 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 415  The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Carrot River) 
  Boyd (Recorded division) .......................................................................................................................................................1425 
 Bill No. 416 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Central Butte) 
  Boyd (Recorded division) .......................................................................................................................................................1426 
 Bill No. 417 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Ceylon) 
  Boyd (Recorded division) .......................................................................................................................................................1427 
 Bill No. 418 —The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Chamberlain) 
  Boyd (Recorded division) .......................................................................................................................................................1427 
 Bill No. 419 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Chaplin) 
  Boyd (Recorded division) .......................................................................................................................................................1427 
 Bill No 420 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Resort Village of Chitek Lake) 
  Boyd (Recorded division) .......................................................................................................................................................1427 
 Bill No. 421 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Choiceland) 
  Boyd (Recorded division) .......................................................................................................................................................1428 
 Bill No. 422 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Christopher Lake) 
  Boyd (Recorded division) .......................................................................................................................................................1428 
 Bill No. 423 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Churchbridge) 
  Boyd (Recorded division) .......................................................................................................................................................1428 
 Bill No. 427 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Coderre) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division)...............................................................................................................................................1428 
 Bill No. 428 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Codette) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division)...............................................................................................................................................1428 
 
 


