





























































Hansard: May 21, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1259 
 May 21, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of the community of 
Carrot River and area. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate actions to ensure the survival of the Carrot 
River Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Kinistino, Melfort, Wakaw, 
Yellow Creek, and Prince Albert areas of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions, and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find out 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I’m presenting are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Heward, Stoughton, 
Regina, and Benson. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

The people that are on the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Estevan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition signed from people around Saskatchewan. And I read 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I too rise, Mr. Speaker, to present petitions 
on behalf of citizens of the Carrot River Valley area. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate actions to ensure the survival of the Carrot 
River Hospital. 

 
Signatures on this petition are all from the community of Carrot 
River, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today regarding the impending closure of the Carrot 
River Hospital: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate actions to ensure the survival of the Carrot 
River Hospital. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
People that have signed this petition are from Carrot River. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition, and the petition deals with the high power 
rates of northern Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to address the issue of reducing 
the high cost of power rates in the North. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition are from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse and Beauval and from all throughout the land. 
And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of the province, this one 
concerning the Plains hospital closure. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 



1260 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
the community of Ponteix. I so present 
. 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleague in bringing forth a petition to try and stop the closure 
of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are all 
from the Mankota, McCord, Glentworth area. I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again on behalf of citizens who are seeking justice for men and 
women who have lost spouses in work-related accidents. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 

The people who have signed these petitions today, Mr. Speaker, 
come not only from Fort Qu’Appelle and Regina, 
Saskatchewan, but there are signatories from Alberta and 
British Columbia as well. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present a petition from concerned citizens of Saskatchewan, 
and their concern is that people permanently injured through 
auto-related injuries covered by SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) no-fault insurance are being denied or 
having benefits suspended at the taxpayers’ expense. And their 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to acknowledge the concerns of 
the taxpaying citizens by causing the government of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that absolute fairness and 
equitable treatment be given to those injured and disabled 
people and their families and be diligent in this most urgent 
matter. 
 

And the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, Moose Jaw, 
White City, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
present petitions on behalf of the people from Fox Valley and 
Maple Creek today: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I’m happy to present them on their behalf today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order a petition regarding the high cost 
of power rates in the North presented on May 20 has been 
reviewed; pursuant to rule 12(7) is found to be irregular and 
therefore cannot be read and received. According to order the 
following petitions have been reviewed, and are hereby read 
and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
take action in health, education, jobs, homes, and roads to 
allow the North to join the rest of Saskatchewan; 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to ensure that 
equitable treatment be given to those injured and disabled 
through auto-related injuries covered by no-fault insurance; 
 
Of citizens regarding the funding of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; acting to save the Plains Health Centre; calling 
an independent public inquiry into Channel Lake; to put a 
moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 
to have the Workers’ Compensation Board reinstate 
pensions for disenfranchised widows. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Estimates 
 

Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Whitmore, Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Estimates, presents the third report of the said 
committee which is hereby tabled as sessional paper no. 195. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
move a motion, seconded by the member for Moosomin: 
 

That the third report on the Standing Committee on 
Estimates be now concurred in. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Monday next move first reading of a Bill, the big game 
hunt farming regulation ministerial responsibility Act. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 55 ask the government the following question: 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

To the minister of the Water Corporation: (1) what 
negotiations are presently taking place with the 
stakeholders in the Lodge Creek irrigation district in 
south-west Saskatchewan, locally known as the Spangler 
irrigation project; will the stakeholders be allowed to 
continue to operate the 1,000-acre project in the same 
successful way that they have in the past or will their 
project be shut down; will they be allowed to keep their 
money for the repairs of their project or will it be put into a 
general fund to be used by other projects. 
 

I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to my colleagues in the legislature a group 
of 17 grade 3 and 4 students from the Regina Christian School 
in the constituency of Regina Sherwood. I’d like all of us to 
welcome them here this afternoon. They’re accompanied, Mr. 
Speaker, by their teacher Mrs. Wiebe, and parent chaperons 
Mrs. Chin, Mrs. Bates and Mrs. Jhanke. 
 
And shortly after question period there will be a tour of the 
building at which time I will be meeting with them to discuss a 
little bit about the happenings here today. So on behalf of my 
colleagues I wish you would welcome the people from the 
Regina Christian School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 24 grade 
6 and 7 students from the Alameda School in Alameda, seated 
in your gallery. Accompanying the students is their teacher, Jeff 
Cameron, and chaperon, Randy Logue. I’d like to ask all 
members of the Assembly to welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
also like to introduce, seated in the opposition gallery, Rita 
Galloway, Wayne Galloway, Willard Ylioja, and Bret Powell, 
who are members of the professional outfitters association, who 
are in to observe the proceedings today. I’d like to ask everyone 
to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to the House today, eight grade 7 and 8 
students from F.W. Johnson Collegiate here in Regina. They’re 
seated in your gallery and I want to extend a welcome to them 
as well as to their teacher, Bill Parr, and to their chaperons, Mr. 
Dennis and Ms. Borys. 
 
And I’d like to ask members to join me in extending a welcome 
to these students from F.W. Johnson Collegiate. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of this House, a family 

from my constituency, from the town of Osler, Pete and Jean 
Wall, and their children that are with them this afternoon, 
Kristal, Darrin, Matthew, Amanda, and Jonathan. I would ask 
them to stand. 
 
I would also ask members of the House if you have some time 
this afternoon to meet with Kristal. She has an excellent article 
on what it’s like to be a member of a family that’s suffered from 
SGI or Workers’ Compensation lack of caring there. 
 
Kristal and her family are spending the four days this week on 
the grounds of the legislature. Would you please join me in 
welcoming them to the grounds. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the other 
members of the Assembly, representatives from two of 
Saskatchewan’s regional economic development authorities. 
Mr. Speaker, they’re here to participate in an announcement 
that I’ll be making later on this afternoon. 
 
With us here today are Ms. Joan Corneil, the economic 
development officer with the Great River Lakes REDA 
(regional economic development authority) — if Joan would 
stand please — and Mr. Graham Halliday, the general manager 
of the Prince Albert REDA. I would ask all members to join me 
in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are many guests 
being introduced today, but I want to introduce you to 81 of the 
best and brightest grade 7 students in all of Saskatchewan. I’m 
talking about the group here from Lakeview School sitting in 
the west gallery. They are accompanied by their teachers 
Madam Cummings, Mrs. Block, and Mrs. Widenmaier, as well 
as parents, Mrs. Boyd, Mrs. Welsh, and Mrs. Clark. 
 
Please join me in welcoming this great group of students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

No-fault Insurance and Workers’ Compensation 
Board Protest Rally 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, this 
week individuals who are injured and subsequently mistreated 
by WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) and the SGI no-fault 
insurance program are protesting on the steps of the legislature. 
 
The Minister of Labour has addressed the rally and for that I 
congratulate him. But, Mr. Speaker, it isn’t enough to speak to 
people, you need to listen to them. It’s also interesting that 
despite the fact a large portion of this group has been victimized 
by this government’s no-fault insurance program, the minister 
responsible for SGI refuses to speak to the group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t determine what is wrong with a program 
without talking to the people it has wronged. I would strongly 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

urge the minister responsible for SGI to reconsider participating 
in the proceedings today or tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the people have been seriously injured by 
no fault of their own yet their lives have been drastically 
changed forever. For some they are no longer able to work, 
some will live with serious injuries for the rest of their lives, 
and still some are forced on to social assistance because the 
government refuses to deal with them fairly. And it is high time, 
Mr. Speaker, that this government owns up to the havoc 
no-fault insurance and WCB programs are creating in the lives 
of the families. 
 
I urge the Premier and the Deputy Premier to go out to the 
podium and speak with the victims of WCB and no-fault 
insurance today or tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Fiscal Management 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
(New Democratic Party) were swept into power in 
Saskatchewan in 1991 by an electorate tired of financial 
mismanagement of Conservative governments. We have been 
cleaning up the Tory mess ever since. 
 
How are we doing in this regard? Since the opposition never 
asked, I appreciate this opportunity to make a brief report, Mr. 
Speaker. The Toronto-based Investment Dealers Association of 
Canada had this to say about NDP efforts, quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan economy is on track to its sixth 
consecutive year of expansion due in large part to 
admirable government management of provincial finances. 
The most indebted provincial economy in the country six 
years ago has now reduced the debt burden to the 
provincial average. 
 
In fact the government debt to GDP ratio has dropped 
sharply from 56.1 per cent earlier this decade to 34 per cent 
in fiscal ’97-98. This 22.1 per cent drop is double that of 
the next best provincial performance. 
 
Sustained government efforts to restrain expenditures and 
the judicious implementation of tax cuts have paid off in 
higher levels of consumer spending and capital formation, 
paving the way for impressive economic growth. 
 

The IDA (Investment Dealers Association) report also noted 
that Saskatchewan is only one of two provinces that has 
balanced its budget for five straight years. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hiring of 200 Nurses 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon 
to offer my congratulations to the Minister of Health on the 
recent announcement on the hiring of 200 new nurses in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I want to say on a personal note that 

I hope some of those will be hired for the Battlefords. 
 
Now I know some people will be cynical enough to say this is a 
small drop in the bucket compared to the number of nurses laid 
off over wellness. I know others will be cynical enough to point 
out that it comes on the eve of a by-election. However 
notwithstanding, Mr. Speaker, it is still good news and we do 
welcome it. The only note of caution I would throw into the mix 
is to tell our health districts they should get the money and hire 
the teachers very, very quickly. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The nurses. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The nurses. Because, in the case of the North 
Battleford by-election, we were promised a $25 million nursing 
home; the day after the by-election, the nursing home 
evaporated, never to be mentioned again. 
 
So let’s get the $9 million, let’s get the 200 nurses on the 
payroll quickly. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Catholic Education Day 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, in the world Christian 
community, today is Ascension Day, a day associated with both 
mission and education. In connection to the day’s theme, the 
International Association for Catholic Education has designated 
today, May 21, as World Catholic Education Day. 
 
Roman Catholic schools throughout the world will be holding 
activities recognizing their international ties. These activities 
range from prayers in individual classrooms to Internet 
hook-ups between schools of the same name in different 
countries. The clear benefit then of this kind of trans-world 
communication will be far beyond the narrowly sectarian, 
promoting both religious learning and international 
understanding. 
 
In Canada, and in Saskatchewan of course, we have a long and 
valuable history of Catholic education. From the establishment 
of a church-run school in Ile-a-la-Crosse in 1860, Roman 
Catholic schools have been and continue to be an integral part 
of our excellent education system. Public and separate schools 
complement each other and provide an educational choice 
which recognizes the diversity of our society and our culture. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I commend the 19 separate school 
divisions in Saskatchewan with their 37,000 students 
representing just under 20 per cent of provincial enrolment. 
They will be very able Saskatchewan ambassadors to their 
fellow Catholic students around the world. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to join the member from Regina Dewdney and send 
my regards to all Catholic students and educators today in 
recognition of World Catholic Education Day. 
 
I understand that many activities have been planned to link 
Saskatchewan Catholic students to Catholic students in all parts 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

of the world via the Internet. Certainly it is wonderful that these 
students will have the opportunity to share their faith globally 
through advanced technologies. That is certainly something that 
the first Catholic students in Ile-a-la-Crosse in 1860 could only 
have imagined. 
 
Catholic education has been and continues to be a very strong 
tradition in Saskatchewan. Today I would like to congratulate 
all of the teachers, parents, and especially students for their hard 
work and dedication to spiritual learning, and hope that today’s 
activities will be very meaningful for them. Thank you very 
much. 
 

Agricultural Research Projects in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Agricultural research 
is very important to this province and to this government. More 
than $1 million has been approved to date this year, already this 
year, for research projects by the Crop Development Centre and 
the department of plant sciences at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Funding was recently approved for 13 unique projects to find 
solutions to weeds, to insects, and other advancements in 
agriculture. 
 
The provincial government has funded nearly $20 million worth 
of research directly related to agriculture in the past five years. 
Dr. Gordon Rowland of the University of Saskatchewan says 
this: 
 

The superb support the Crop Development Centre has 
received over the years from Saskatchewan Agriculture 
and Food has allowed the CDC to become the leader in 
crop diversification in Canada. This partnership in 
agriculture research is the envy of all other provinces and 
ensures Saskatchewan’s continued expansion in crop 
production and processing. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have the world leaders of agricultural research 
right here in Saskatchewan. We are committed to continue to 
support their research for the benefit of agricultural industry and 
for the good of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Housing Strategy 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to expound on 
some of the housing ideas that northern Saskatchewan people 
have had. For the past several years we’ve been harping on 
housing problems in the North and I, like many other northern 
leaders, have been elaborating on a need for an exciting, 
innovative, and comprehensive housing strategy. 
 
We need substance and long-term commitments rather than ad 
hoc rhetoric when it comes to housing problems. These 
initiatives must be sustainable in both the financial sense and 
political sense. The northern people understand that we cannot 
have free houses. We understand that we cannot continue to 
wait for governments to react to our housing needs only when 
it’s politically expedient to do so. This attitude would be 
contrary to the interests of the northern Saskatchewan people. 

Points that must be included in the northern housing strategy 
are: (1) the provision of senior-specific dollars for renovations 
for private homes; (2) an examination of the possibility of a 
housing package geared for working families similar to the 
remote housing program ensuring that housing prices reflect 
true market values; (3) the establishment of a northern housing 
fund with the purpose of constructing new housing and 
providing continual flow of dollars for a repair program; (4) the 
devolution of more control of housing to the local level, to the 
housing authorities; and finally (5) the encouragement of 
homesteading, community lot development for affordable 
housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I present some of these ideas on exciting northern 
housing initiatives. Thank you. 
 

Long-serving Housing Authority Volunteers 
 

Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
a moment to publicly acknowledge two long-serving volunteers 
in my constituency. The first is Roger Laventure of Leoville. 
Mr. Laventure has served 20 years with the Leoville Housing 
Authority. The second is Luella Friesen who has just celebrated 
25 years of service with the Spiritwood Housing Authority. 
 
As you are well aware, Saskatchewan has one of the highest 
rates of voluntarism in Canada. We are particularly fortunate to 
have many fine, dedicated volunteers who are willing to serve 
in organizations such as local housing authorities. Even with so 
many volunteers however, the decades of service of Mr. 
Laventure and Mrs. Friesen have performed are really 
remarkable accomplishments. Such community service should 
not go unnoticed. 
 
I would like all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating and thanking Luella and Roger for their years of 
service. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crown Corporations Accountability 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. Mr. Minister, yesterday the Provincial 
Auditor tabled his 1998 spring report, and when it came to 
SaskPower, Mr. Minister, the teacher gave you an F on 
management and accountability. 
 
The Provincial Auditor is saying the public is losing confidence 
in the NDP’s ability to manage the Crown sector. The 
Provincial Auditor is recommending that government take 
immediate action to address this flagging public confidence. 
The Sask Party agrees, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Party is recommending the 
Crown Corporations Committee hire an independent expert to 
examine governance and accountability at SaskPower and the 
other major Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Minister, will the NDP government follow the advice of the 



1264 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

Provincial Auditor and support the Saskatchewan Party’s call 
for an independent expert to investigate the mess you’ve made 
in the Crown corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
talks about changes in the governance of our Crown 
corporations, and obviously when we read the statement in the 
House on March 10, we dealt with the issue of proposed 
changes that would strengthen the operation reporting 
mechanisms of our Crowns, and I think that is truly important. 
 
In his report the auditor, and I quote, also said: 
 

CIC has taken steps to improve its performance reporting. 
For example, CIC’s 1997 annual report includes vision, 
mission and information on actual results compared to 
plans set out in its 1996 report. 
 

And he goes on to list out a number of improvements that have 
taken place in the Crowns . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member opposite says, can we do better. Obviously there is 
always room for improvement. And our commitment has been 
and continues to be — to the people of Saskatchewan — that 
we will continue to work, not only with the opposition through 
the Crown Corporations Committee, with the auditor to 
improve mechanisms. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I say to the member opposite, his continually 
playing politics with the Crowns leaves a lot to be desired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
the minister and the NDP government are truly serious about 
improving this whole process, then they’ll support our proposal. 
The Saskatchewan Party has asked the Crown Corporations 
Committee to hire Lawrence Tapp, the dean of the business 
school at the University of Western Ontario, to look at the 
governance and management structures at SaskPower and the 
other major Crowns. 
 
Dean Tapp is an internationally recognized expert on Crown 
governance, improving corporate performance and corporate 
restructuring. And he’s willing to do the job, Mr. Minister. 
That’s exactly the kind of advice you say you need, and we’ve 
provided an opportunity for you to take it. 
 
If the NDP is truly interested in improving the process, will you 
support the proposal to hire Dean Tapp as the Saskatchewan 
Party has proposed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the members 
opposite, and through you, Mr. Speaker, to those who may be 
listening to this debate, but it becomes obvious from the report 
that was given from the Conservative caucus, which that 
member now belongs to, to the review of Crown corporations in 
1996, on page 8 of that report they give their position on the 
Crown corporations. 
 

And I quote: “The government immediately take steps to 
privatize SaskTel.” That’s their position. We know that. 
 
Where did we get that? You gave it to us. During the review of 
the Crown corporations in 1996, the Conservative caucus gave 
us this report, and I quote again: “The government immediately 
take steps to privatize SaskTel.” 
 
This is what their . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Some sort of a communist plot. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Oh now he says it’s a communist 
plot — the Crown corporations. 
 
This tells you where that right-wing rump of a party comes 
from. That Crown corporations should be privatized and Crown 
corporations are a communist plot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can you believe that these people have any 
legitimacy here in this Assembly or anywhere else in the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Outfitting Industry Representation 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister for the Environment and Resource 
Management. Mr. Minister, you’re currently proposing to 
transfer the power to license and set standards for outfitters to 
the industry, and that’s fine. 
 
But in true NDP fashion of picking winners and losers, the 
minister has ordained the Saskatchewan Outfitters Association 
as the sole regulator, even though it only represents 40 per cent 
of all licensed outfitters. 
 
When Alberta transferred licensing to the industry, all outfitting 
associations dissolved and formed a new association 
representing all outfitters. 
 
Mr. Minister, why at the end of the day are you favouring the 
Saskatchewan Outfitters Association when they represent so 
few outfitters, instead of creating an impartial process that 
allows input from all licensed outfitters, not just a chosen few. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. member 
for the question. The Saskatchewan Outfitters Association is 
“the” organization of outfitters in the province. They are very 
responsible, congenial individuals representing not only the 
hunting/outfitting industry but also the fishing industry. And 
certainly we are looking at working with all outfitters, but we 
are starting out by using Saskatchewan Outfitters Association, 
as they are a good representation of the outfitters in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The “the” he 
refers to represent less than 40 per cent of the outfitters. Today 
we are joined by a group of very concerned outfitters. Number 
one, they are concerned about the minister’s biased decision 
and the impact this will have on the industry. And number two, 
they’re concerned because the minister has no intention of 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

consulting with them in a meaningful way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister hasn’t replied to concerns presented 
to him by their legal counsel nor has he given outfitters 
sufficient warning of his so-called consultation meetings. Again 
we see this government hold mock meetings across the province 
but conveniently forget to send out notices until two days 
before the meetings. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you commit to consult with all Saskatchewan 
outfitters before you storm ahead with your biased decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We certainly . . . 
Our doors are always open and I’m certainly prepared to meet 
with the individuals that are here, if they so wish to meet with 
me this afternoon. And we can discuss some of the 
shortcomings that might be involved. 
 
With reference to the Saskatchewan Outfitters Association only 
representing 40 per cent. That is certainly a significant number 
of outfitters. And no organization ever has all of the individuals 
of an interest group signed up, but we certainly are prepared to 
work with all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
will you meet with us and representatives of the other outfitters 
in Saskatchewan today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The answer is 
yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Fund 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Municipal Government, the minister responsible 
for the first nations fund. 
 
Madam Minister, the trustees of the first nations fund are 
blocking the Provincial Auditor from looking at their books. 
The first nations fund received $2.2 million last year and $14.5 
million from the government this year, money that is supposed 
to go towards economic and social development of first nations 
people. But how do we know how the money is being spent? 
 
Madam Minister, why are the trustees of the first nations fund 
blocking the auditor from looking at the books? And will you 
immediately demand that the fund trustees comply with a 
complete audit by the Provincial Auditor dating back to the 
fund’s inception in 1997? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to have the 
opportunity to answer this question and to set right the thinking 
on the issue. 
 
This is a new fund established last year. This would be the first 
complete year of operation. There has been a misunderstanding 
that has arisen. I have written to the first nations back in April 

asking them to give — the fund has been completely audited by 
a qualified auditor without qualification — asking them to give 
access to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
I don’t have a response in writing yet but the first nations 
leadership have been in touch with my office today indicating 
that there has been a misunderstanding. And we are mutually 
agreed that nothing less than a full, transparent public 
accounting is required. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporation Financial Disclosure 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) also. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Provincial Auditor is telling you that the 
Crowns need to be more accountable. He is recommending that 
all Crown corporations be required to publish a list of persons 
who were paid more than $2,500 by the Crown; on all of the 
suppliers who received more than $20,000 from the Crown. 
 
NDP Crown corporations continue to hide this information. For 
example, you still refuse to provide us with the list of the people 
and companies who were paid over $1.4 million in a botched 
Guyana deal. 
 
Mr. Minister, if Crown corporations are spending taxpayers’ 
money wisely, you have nothing to hide. Will you follow the 
auditor’s recommendation and will you release a list of all 
persons and companies who receive monies from the Crowns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite that 
obviously the report of the auditor yesterday was one that we 
will look at very carefully as to improving the management, the 
reporting, and the operation of our Crown corporations. And 
having been in the Assembly for 20 years, we get an auditor’s 
report every year and I’m sure if you compare back, Mr. 
Speaker, over that 20-year period, every year there are ways and 
means of improving the operation and governance of our 
province. And it’s an important function that he plays, and 
obviously we will be taking all of his recommendations 
extremely seriously. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what seems to be a little bit hypocritical is the 
Conservative caucus — some of them who sat with the Grant 
Devine administration — coming here when Crown 
corporations were being reported — s you will remember, Mr. 
Speaker, three years in some cases after they were tabled in the 
House they were being reviewed by the Crown Corporations 
Committee. For these individuals to be critical of this 
administration’s management of the Crowns seems a little bit 
ludicrous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister should 
realize that this government’s been in power for seven years and 
the problems within the Crowns are getting worse and worse. 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

Mr. Minister, there was a story in today’s paper about the 
no-see-ums. At first I thought it was another story about NDP 
Crown subsidiaries. The Provincial Auditor says they are 
continuing to hide financial information from the public in your 
no-see-um subsidiaries like Channel Lake. And we all know 
what happened there. Millions of dollars down the tube thanks 
to questionable trading activity and bumbling management by 
your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, you keep hiding the activities of your Crown 
subsidiaries. In fact companies like SaskPower Commercial and 
SaskTel International aren’t even subject to the freedom of 
information Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you immediately make your Crown 
subsidiaries follow the same reporting practices as the parent 
Crowns, and will you start by making SaskPower Commercial 
and SaskTel International subject to the freedom of information 
Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, obviously what their statement’s about their positions 
on the Crowns, and I quote again that in the document they 
gave us in 1996 they said, the first thing we should do is 
privatize SaskTel. We know that they want the Crowns 
privatized and nothing less than that will satisfy their emotional 
and political need to privatize. That’s what they were doing 
under the Devine administration and if they’re elected they have 
stated that’s what they will do again. 
 
As to the commitments that we will improve governance of the 
Crowns, already the auditor — and I quote again — quote, he 
said, “CIC has taken steps to improve its performance 
reporting.” 
 
And I tell the member opposite that we will continue to improve 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I would like to know is whether the members 
opposite would open the Tory slush fund to the auditor and let 
him have a look at the millions of dollars that still exist there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order, order. All 
hon. members on both sides of the House, all hon. members — 
order. 
 

Regina Hospital Bed Numbers 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal opposition has raised concerns on many occasions about 
the present number of acute care beds here in Regina. We 
maintain that the current figure of 675 is not enough to meet the 
needs of the people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan. 
 
The Minister of Health has stated on a number of occasions that 
he’s satisfied with the present number because he says an 
average of 620 patients require beds on a daily basis. The 
Minister of Health has also stated that reducing the number of 
acute care beds in Regina any further would be, and I quote, 

“inappropriate because of the pressure they have from time to 
time serving Regina and the southern part of the province.” 
 
And the question today, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, do you stand by your minister’s comments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Health 
has reported on a number of occasions to this House, in his 
extensive discussions with this health district and with health 
districts and with health care providers across the province, he 
heard the clear message that new and extra workers were 
required to provide the care that’s necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after hearing that, this minister and this 
government acted on it just this week to add 200, Mr. Speaker, 
200 new, front-line health care workers to the health care 
system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across the province that news is being greeted as 
welcome news. Here in my own local paper, a major headline: 
“Health care will benefit from 200 more nurses.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the commitment of this government and this party 
is to provide to the people of Saskatchewan the best possible 
health care that we can provide, which has been the tradition of 
this party and this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would be aided, we would be aided in this 
cause if there were some support, even a modicum of support, 
from the federal Liberal government who has cut 7 billion from 
health spending in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister and 
that government responded only after we forced them to deal 
with the doctors. And they had to respond to our calls to get 
more nurses into the system. Now we’re talking about beds, Mr. 
Minister, don’t try and avoid the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition has obtained a memo from 
the Regina Health District — I have a copy here and I’ll send it 
over in a moment — which confirms that 79 acute care beds 
will be shut down between June 28 and August 31. Two 
months. As a result there will only be 596 acute care beds in the 
system. 
 
Mr. Premier, your Minister of Health has said the average daily 
patient load in Regina is 620, and in his words, any further 
reductions would be inappropriate because of the pressure on 
the system. What immediate action are you going to take to 
ensure that the number of acute care beds does not drop below 
675 this summer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, just days or weeks ago in 
this House the same member from Shaunavon stood in this 
House and created all sorts of consternation in the community 
of Swift Current by saying that beds were going to be closed in 
Swift Current. The district board people in Swift Current 
immediately had to reassure the people of Swift Current that the 
information that that member brings to this legislature, in fact at 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

that day and is often, not accurate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have confidence in the Regina district to manage this health 
care delivery for the people of Regina and southern 
Saskatchewan, as they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. This government 
enjoys that same confidence. 
 
What we have no confidence in, and what the people of 
Saskatchewan have no confidence in, is any health care position 
taken by the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would caution 
the minister answering the question to watch who’s talking 
about inaccuracies. Because on how many occasions have you 
had to swallow those words, Mr. Minister, and, Mr. Premier? 
And you’ll be looking at this document in a few moments. 
 
Obviously the Premier either doesn’t understand or doesn’t 
care. There aren’t enough beds in the system now, and we hear 
this on an almost daily basis. The only reason that the Regina 
district is forced to even think about closing beds during the 
summer is because of the funding shortfall by your government. 
 
Mr. Premier, you admitted this week that you went too far in 
gutting front-line health care workers, and you had to bring in 
200 nurses into the system. Will you now admit that reducing 
the number of acute care beds for the people of Regina and 
southern Saskatchewan will only escalate the bed crisis. Will 
you take charge and prevent these summer bed closures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 
Moose Jaw, the Acting Minister of Health, has provided the 
answer in this matter. And I think it’s fairly well known and 
accepted within the medical profession, within the medical 
profession and the medical community at large, that during the 
summer period there is bed usage utilization which adjusts to 
the question of the summer period and the summer vacation 
demands and others of medical staff and the patients involved. 
 
But I remind the member opposite here when he’s asking us 
about funding and bed shortages, what the Leader of the Liberal 
Party in Saskatchewan said in a interview to Costa Maragos of 
the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation): 
 

“What inefficiencies would you find to make up the $1.3 
billion?” Maragos asks. 

 
Melenchuk: “Well, health care.” 

 
Maragos: “How much would you save there? Give me a 
number.” 

 
Melenchuk: “I don’t know because I haven’t seen the 
numbers. I’ll have to look at the numbers.” 

 
Maragos: “If you don’t know, then how can you say that?” 
 
Melenchuk: “Because I know there are inefficiencies in the 
system and I understand health care reform and I 
understand health care programs and I know there are 
inefficiencies in the system.” 

 
If he does, tell us where your cuts are going to take place. Tell 

us where your cuts are going to take place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Economic Development 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, yesterday’s meeting in La Ronge was 
generally accepted as positive by many northern leaders. There 
has been a willingness of many northern people to once again 
look at your government for leadership in addressing the 
long-term problems of the North. 
 
Mr. Premier, yesterday’s meeting did not have any definite time 
lines or stated objectives. It is time for all levels of government 
to take responsibility. And, Mr. Premier, it is time that this 
government stopped signing MOUs (memorandum of 
understanding) and it is time we start fulfilling our IOUs (I owe 
you) to meet the long-standing promises made to the northern 
people. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are your deadlines? What are your stated 
objectives as a result of yesterday’s meeting with the northern 
people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I note that the hon. 
member in his question prefaced it by saying that it’s time for 
all governments to deal with this issue in northern 
Saskatchewan. And I agree with that. 
 
And that means the federal Liberal government as well. And the 
federal Liberal government, while it had observers at the 
meeting, was not unfortunately a signatory to that contract and 
MOU — we were. This government was and the northern 
leaders, aboriginal, Metis, northern municipalities, were. 
 
So I would urge the hon. member to start asking that those 
IOUs, that his Liberal Party that he is a member of, that they 
start ponying up too. 
 
More specifically to answer his question, we have a 
three-pronged plan. We’re going to have an economic 
assessment plan to identify the economic opportunities, since all 
had agreed that is where the thrust of economic development 
should go in the North. 
 
Secondly, we’re going to have a northern economic 
development board that utilize those plans and construct them 
into positive, concrete action for jobs. 
 
And thirdly, talk about an IOU. Maybe they owe you an IOU, 
the federal Liberals. Get the Liberals nationally to join into a 
Canada-Saskatchewan economic development agreement plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be in fact 
writing a letter to the federal government encouraging them to 
participate. 
 
Mr. Premier, there are three flags we wish to raise and we do it 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

in support of this effort. One, the Athabasca basin people, the 
Dene people of Saskatchewan’s far North, have opted for a 
30-day boycott of this northern dialogue. The Dene people are 
unsure of your government’s intention and have requested a 
second meeting to discuss the specific far North issues. 
 
Second, that the initiative, any initiative, must be community 
based so as to maximize benefits to the northern people living 
in northern Saskatchewan. And third, there has been some 
suggestion of including the federal government in this effort, 
and we support that. We genuinely call for that. 
 
But we do have some concerns that the Saskatchewan 
government may use the federal versus provincial argument to 
stall the application of further development and stall potential 
progress. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are your comments and your commitments 
on the three flags that we have raised on behalf of the people of 
northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The hon. member is inaccurate in his 
information. The Dene with whom I have undertaken to meet, 
the Athabasca Dene, because they were not at the meeting in La 
Ronge, they’ll be meeting in 30 days time roughly, give or take 
a day or two here or there, to discuss the question of the MOU. 
 
But every indication given to us by Mr. John Dantouze, 
vice-chief of the Prince Albert Grand Council from that area, 
indicates that the Dene from Athabasca basin are able to sign on 
this MOU, but they want the 30 days because they weren’t there 
to take a look at where the word changes might take place. And 
we agree with that. I’m going to be meeting with them, 
hopefully in Wollaston. If not, at some appropriate time that 
takes place. 
 
With respect to the timetables the hon. member talks about, the 
MOU actually does talk about timetables in terms of “as soon as 
possible.” One can say that’s very indefinite, but I view that to 
be an imperative to act more quickly than later and we intend to 
do that. 
 
And with respect to the federal government, I sincerely will 
take up the hon. member’s offer to use his Liberal connections 
to pressure the Liberal government in Ottawa to sign on on this 
issue so that we can get on and turn this page and provide the 
hope and the opportunity to prosperity the people in northern 
Saskatchewan rightly deserve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Youth Employment Program 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud today to announce an exciting new program that will 
provide job opportunities to the young people of our province 
and assist regional economic development authorities. 
 
The new, $240,000 REDA youth employment program will 
help young people gain practical work experience in 
community economic development. The program will also 

enable REDAs to hire young people to expand their services in 
areas such as business counselling and business development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, REDAs are essential in community economic 
development in this province. They work in partnership with 
local people to make decisions at the local level which directly 
affect them. This allows for greater community input in local 
development, a better quality of life, and more jobs and 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
This program will help build a stronger future for our young 
people who are the keys to Saskatchewan’s well-being. By 
providing young people with jobs in urban and rural 
communities across our province we are investing in their 
future. We are helping young people gain practical and 
marketable skills, and we’re providing them with the 
knowledge they need to succeed in the new millennium. 
 
This will mean more opportunities, more jobs. It will also mean 
strong, healthy communities — communities that will provide a 
solid foundation for economic growth; communities in which 
there is a bright future for our sons and our daughters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope all members will encourage and support 
this worthwhile program. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s announcement 
makes me think of the lines at the opening of the book, A Tale 
of Two Cities, “It was the best of times, it was the worst of 
times.” There are great times for many here in Saskatchewan 
but for our young people looking for jobs and a future it may be 
the worst of times. 
 
REDAs can play an important part in developing economic 
activity, especially in rural Saskatchewan. In some, and I 
believe there’s six REDAs in this province — one of which I 
am particularly proud because it’s part of my constituency, is 
doing a tremendous amount of work. 
 
This announcement should come as welcome news for REDAs 
and I look forward to discussing the details with the REDAs 
around the province. I hope the rules, the regulations, and the 
red tape are very, very minimal. I hope the emphasis will be on 
work experience, and learning for young people, not filling out 
enough papers to make the government look good. And I also 
hope the REDAs have free rein to spend the money in the way 
they feel would be best suited in their area without a lot of 
government strings attached. 
 
I congratulate the minister in recognizing that REDAs and 
youth employment are both areas that need a lot of work by this 
government. I really hope that the initiative not only creates 
jobs, but starts the more important process of creating a more 
positive attitude about this province, and that young people will 
begin to have faith there may be a future for them in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too welcome the 
announcement we have heard this afternoon. I was of course 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

very pleased in the federal budget when we heard the 
commitment of the federal government to the education of our 
young people, and I was of course very saddened when the 
Premier was critical of our federal government for putting such 
a high priority on our young people. So I’m glad to see that the 
provincial government has now belatedly come on board. 
 
It seems to me this program will complement the new youth 
employment strategy announced on February 12 by the federal 
government. That strategy will provide 110,000 young 
Canadians with work experience by the end of this year. The 
federal summer career program also will offer wage subsidy 
and career-related jobs for students during the summer months. 
 
Nearly 1,200 young people in Saskatchewan have participated 
in the youth internship Canada program so far. Estevan 
Comprehensive School uses this program for students to be 
interned in local workplaces. Federal funding has made this 
possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also the job creation partnerships program has created 1,500 
jobs since 1993. So Saskatchewan’s gotten over $6 million 
from the federal government for youth employment. I’m glad 
that the provincial government has now provided less than a 
quarter million. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 216  The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill, No. 216, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I request 
leave to make a statement of a personal nature. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, with great pleasure in 
open, honest government I would like to table the answer to 
question 64. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to question 64 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of Bill No. 56, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
As many members will know, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Act establishes the level of provincial assistance to be allocated 
to both urban and rural municipalities. Accordingly these 
amendments give legal effect to decisions reflected in the 
1998-99 budget. 
 
The Bill provides for a method of calculating the funds 
available to both the urban revenue-sharing pool and the rural 
revenue-sharing pool in this fiscal year. The Bill provides for no 
change to the urban revenue-sharing pool and a $3 million 
increase to the rural revenue-sharing pool this year. 
 
The increased funding will go towards rural equalization 
payments in order to improve equalization and provide 
assistance to the rural municipalities in greatest need of 
funding. 
 
For urban municipalities it has been decided to maintain grants 
at their 1997 level. In other words each city, town, and village 
will receive the same grant amounts as last year, the same dollar 
value. This distribution strategy is supported by the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. 
 
Funding for rural municipalities has been restructured this year 
in response to a proposal from the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities. Most of the conditional construction 
funding has been shifted to become unconditional funding for 
road preservation and construction. 
 
(1430) 
 
Making the grants more unconditional will significantly 
increase rural municipalities’ spending autonomy. Decisions 
can now be based on local priorities. Amendments confirming 
the ability to specify funding distribution in regulations make 
up the remainder of this Bill. 
 
In closing, the total revenue-sharing funding of $50.7 million 
represents a significant level of financial support to 
Saskatchewan municipalities. I urge the members to support 
this Bill. 
 
Accordingly I move second reading of Bill No. 56, The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1998, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments regarding The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act, 
that’s Bill No. 56. For the most part as we understand, Mr. 
Speaker, the Bill simply implements what was announced in the 
budget in March; a budget I think, Mr. Speaker, if you took a 
look, very few people would really remember. The only things 
that people would remember and certainly the municipalities 
remember is the fact that they were left out in the cold again 
and the fact that the $10 million of dollars they lost in 
revenue-sharing grants in the province last year certainly 
weren’t made up for this year. 
 
Another area that we are familiar with and that RMs (rural 
municipalities) are calling for — rural municipalities 
specifically — was $56 million just to allow them to simply 
keep up and keep their road infrastructure in place, to just 
maintain what’s there rather than adding to it. And 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, while the minister’s piece of 



1270 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

legislation today talks about how they’re going to now 
implement what was announced in the budget — it’s 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the legislation didn’t as well 
address some of the areas that are a major concern to rural and 
urban municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the areas that municipalities continue to 
bring to our attention is the payments in lieu of taxes, and we 
certainly will have some questions in regard to that question. 
And it’s just forewarning the minister of the fact that that it is a 
question that will be raised, not only as we address these pieces 
of legislation we have before us but when we get into further 
estimates, discussion, and debate in the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of where the Bill intends to go, in light of 
the fact that it’s just moving basically to address the concerns 
and the issues that have been announced in the budget, we do 
not see any reason at this time to continue or prolong debate in 
second reading because we feel we can quite responsibly 
address questions directly with the minister in Committee of the 
Whole, and therefore we’re prepared to move to committee at 
this time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 46 — The Credit 
Union Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s been quite 
a number of years that The Credit Union Act and various 
versions of it have been before us. And generally in the past 
what has happened is government has created an idea, and then 
we’ve checked that back in our constituencies and back in our 
communities to see what the reaction would be. And invariably 
it put a real glitch into independent business and some of the 
brokers that are out there. And always there was a major 
concern and always this government got it wrong. 
 
Well this time they done it a little differently, Mr. Speaker. And 
I think from the research we’ve done, it happens to be 
something that at this particular point in time the brokers have 
no problem with. I think the only concern that we do have is 
that it’s in regulations and sometimes government there tends to 
get a little carried away with themselves and think that they are 
in charge of the whole wagon. And they’re not. 
 
But I think as far as what it does and doesn’t do, it brings us 
into line with where we are in time and where we are in line 
with the amalgamation of banks, and a different kind 
environment that the whole financial institutions have to work 
in. And without belabouring that fact, Mr. Speaker, I think 
we’re ready to see this go on to the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 50 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 50 — The 
Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
from my understanding, this Bill deals with what the minister 
describes as fine-tuning of the assessment procedures. And after 
the experience in many communities last year, one might be 
tempted to argue that much more fine-tuning is probably 
needed, and I agree. 
 
Many local governments felt abandoned by the province during 
the reassessment process. Many of the problems experienced 
came out because the legislation or regulations surrounding 
reassessment were so late in coming, leaving municipalities 
with little or no time to prepare. This Bill will give the 
government, through regulation, the power to adjust the 
reassessment timetable. 
 
This may help, but I think the greater help would been to have a 
government that seemingly had a plan going into major 
changes, such as reassessment. Clearly that was missing last 
year and it was local government who paid the price for the 
province’s lack of foresight and planning. 
 
There are many issues involving reassessment that must be 
resolved. Simply put, many people in this province were not 
treated fairly last year. I can use my own community of 
Saltcoats as an example, Mr. Speaker. Reassessment was 
clearly implemented badly last year and I hope this Bill will go 
far in solving the problems. 
 
But in order to do this the government has to actually begin 
listening to what local governments and the people of this 
province have to say. The province has taken away most of 
their revenue-sharing grants and the least they can do is listen to 
them and not treat them in an arrogant manner we usually see in 
the bureaucratic triangle we seem to have. 
 
This Bill refines the assessment appeals procedures. That’s 
positive. But if reassessment is handled better next time, we 
would hopefully see fewer appeals and therefore fewer 
problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that we can address most of our questions in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 51 — The 
Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, many of the aspects of the Bill are routine or have 
been requested by the municipality. We have no objections to 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

these aspects. Our caucus respects the work of the provincial 
municipal governments and we want to do everything we can to 
support them. However, we do have some concerns about the 
Bill. 
 
In the minister’s speech we noted that the municipalities had 
concerns about the power this Bill gives the provincial 
government to amend assessment and taxation by regulation. 
The minister’s only excuse was that the provisions would only 
be used if absolutely necessary. At the end of the day, the 
government can still use this power as it sees fit. So the 
concerns of the municipality should be heeded before instituting 
that aspect. 
 
We also have some concerns about the sections that give the 
municipalities more flexibility in setting penalty rates for tax 
arrears. This may lead to a patchwork tax enforcement system 
although we should always give sober second thought to 
measures that would effectively increase taxes for property 
owners. 
 
In the same vein, the Act prohibits property owners who are in 
arrears from removing fixtures. We would want to see the 
definition of fixtures more clearly defined. Further, does this 
apply to mobile home-owners? If they are given voting rights 
do they have the same responsibility as other home-owners and 
landowners? 
 
Finally, we have particular concerns about the sections allowing 
fees for municipal services. This is a concept we generally 
agree with since it gives municipalities more freedom and 
flexibility to manage their own affairs. 
 
However the Bill stipulates that the normal penalty for 
non-payment of fees is withholding services. Further in the 
Bill’s explanatory notes, Mr. Speaker, fire protection and street 
lighting are given as examples of services that could be subject 
to fees. I do not think that that is a responsible public policy, to 
allow a house to burn down to the ground and endanger other 
properties because the individual has not paid his fees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be willing to let this one also go to 
committee because I believe we can ask our questions there. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 52 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 52 — The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1998 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, most of this Bill is routine, and 
other more debatable aspects have been dealt with within the 
urban and rural municipality Bills so I won’t waste this House’s 
time belabouring those aspects. 
 
There is one part unique to this Bill that I would like to examine 
more closely. This is the section related to the proposed 
Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account Management Board. 
The official opposition caucus is not convinced that this board 

as it is structured in this Bill is the right vehicle to achieve any 
goal. 
 
For starters it has no real power. It can only make 
recommendations to the minister. There is therefore a danger 
that it would degenerate into nothing more than a feel-good 
exercise for the participants and a horse show for the NDP. 
 
Further we find it disturbing that the Bill sets virtually no 
guidelines, mandates, or parameters for the new board. There 
appears to be no particular task or function for this agency. 
 
This is especially a concern with regards to the membership of 
the board. The Bill leaves open-ended the number of people that 
can be appointed. Also the Bill sets out no restrictions on who 
may be appointed. Literally anyone who the minister feels like 
appointing may be appointed. There is a clear danger here of the 
board becoming a vehicle for patronage by the minister. The 
minister may appoint any number of people who need have no 
particular qualifications and can do then no particular job. 
 
We’re not saying that this is the way the board will be used or 
that the government is intending to use it that way, but that 
avenue of abuse is possible and there may develop a public 
perception the board is simply a pork-barrel. 
 
On the whole, our caucus feels that the new Bill should be 
reviewed to make it more meaningful and more defined. We’ll 
want to review these concerns in the committee. At this time 
however, we have no objection to passing the Bill at the second 
reading. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1445) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 7  The Pastures Act 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I invite the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Chair. With me to my left is 
Dr. Peter Rempel, the director of pastures; and to my right is 
Gloria Parisien, manager of land and resource policy. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Good afternoon, Mr. Minister. And I want 
to also welcome your officials here this afternoon. 
 
We have just a few questions on The Pastures Act. And I guess 
maybe the first thing I would ask you to do is to explain really 
what you’re doing in this Act, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well the short . . . I’m just getting the 
short answer from the officials. I guess the best way to put it is 
it consolidates the Act; it brings it . . . The pastures program 
was under different Acts before and we’re trying to streamline 
the Acts so that it’s clear and concise as to what’s going on and 
get rid of any redundancies under the Act. So it’s an updating 
and a consolidation. 



1272 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess really the 
only other question then that I have is, will there be anything 
coming in regulations to follow up this Bill that we don’t know 
about now? Will there be changes to come later? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well what . . . We don’t know exactly, 
because we’re going to do consultations to establish the 
regulations. And the people who are involved in the pastures 
program, the pasture patrons and stuff, will be consulted. The 
managers will be advising us. 
 
And if there’s any concerns that you would have, I’m sure 
they’ll get a hold of you or you can follow it along, because we 
want to make sure that the regulations are easy and manageable 
for the people using the pastures. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
there are some pasture concerns that have been brought to my 
attention, and I’m not sure if you want to touch on them here or 
you’d rather wait until we get to estimates. 
 
But the concern being that a complaint was brought to me last 
year, and it’s happened before, where a patron would take his 
cattle to a pasture and through drought or whatever reason they 
have to leave the pasture early. And I guess the person involved 
in each case was very dissatisfied with what would happen 
because their rates were set — they had to pay the full rate — 
and yet their animals were taken out early. But they didn’t get a 
refund. 
 
Is there any thought down the road of setting out on how many 
days they go in there and a refund would be given back in 
excess of . . . if they were 20 days short, or say for an example 
it got dry and they would cut back 20 animals or something? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, this is not really into the Act and if 
you want to explore this further we can do it in estimates. But 
we have a 110-day policy and if they’re shorter than that then 
we will waive the difference. But at this point in time with our 
pastures we’re thinking that we have enough resources there to 
keep the animals in. I know we’re monitoring them very 
carefully. 
 
And there’s one other point here that my officials . . . Oh yes, to 
eliminate the non-delivery charges that would be accompanying 
the delivering of the cattle. 
 
So we think we’re going to have enough grass. If we can just 
keep the rain coming it should be all right. If not, they won’t be 
overcharged. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s all the 
questions I have on The Pasture Act at this time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I recognize that we’re 
a little hard to see over here sometimes. So I do have a few 
questions though of the minister before we carry on with The 
Pasture Act, because of course in south-west Saskatchewan 
pastures every year are very important to us and of course this 
year may be more important than ever. 
 
Minister, obviously the consolidation part looks good, but you 
referred to the fact that you’re going to do consultation with 

people in order to do the regulations. What consultation have 
you done in order to come up with the idea that you needed to 
consolidate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well this Act is now here as a result of 
concerns from the south-west pasture area, from your area. 
They wanted some policy changes. We took it back here, 
consulted with our officials in Agriculture and Justice, and 
decided that rather than making ad hoc changes, our advice was 
that we should look at the review of the whole Act. 
 
And so as a result, responding to the needs from that south-west 
area, we are now at a point where the Act is being consolidated 
and hopefully streamlined so it’s user-friendly. And the 
regulations —we’re going to attempt to make them 
user-friendly as well. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate your 
answer. I was pretty sure of the answer and what it was going to 
be, but I did want you to get it into Hansard so that I could 
deliver it to the cowboys down in the hills. Because once in 
awhile they forget that they were talked to and then they 
suggest later on that nobody ever talked to me. So we’ll be able 
to show them that in fact you have made that statement, that 
you did talk to them, and they can be assured then that this is a 
result of what they have been telling you. 
 
And if they didn’t tell you the right things, then they only have 
themselves to blame if it doesn’t turn out right, I suppose. 
 
But I do want to pursue it just a little bit further to make sure 
that we have gotten into the Bill what exactly they have been 
talking about. There’s quite a bit of a problem, as you’re aware, 
with noxious weeds in the pastures. Does this Bill cover the 
authority of local people to challenge and take on the problems 
of weed control in those noxious areas? And I think field 
bindweed was one that they talked about quite a bit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes. I appreciate your earlier question 
because I did meet with these people about a year and a half 
ago. And the wheels of government do not turn that fast but at 
least we’re able to respond, and hopefully, through the 
regulations we’ll be able to resolve some of their concerns. 
 
With regards to noxious weeds in pastures, pastures have to 
comply to The Noxious Weeds Act which we’re also updating 
this year. But it’s not in The Pastures Act. They are subject to 
The Noxious Weeds Act like everybody else is. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Have you taken any measures in this Act then 
to provide for natural control of things like leafy spurge? I 
guess sheep, for example, eat it off so short that eventually it 
dies. And some of the people in our area, of course, have dealt 
with this by moving sheep onto pastures where that is a 
problem. 
 
One of the problems of course is that the ranchers don’t like to 
pay the cost of moving these animals around from pasture to 
pasture in order for the facilitation of weed control. So my 
question would be, does this Act provide for funding for that 
type of natural weed control? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — In the Meyronne and Mortlach pastures, 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1273 

we are addressing the problem of leafy spurge with organic 
control — bugs, we’ve got bugs in the pasture and they will eat 
down the weeds and then reproduce in that fashion. 
 
And in the Mortlach pasture I believe we also have sheep 
control. We’re trying to use a combination of animals to make 
sure the pastures are managed well. Sometimes there is a 
cow-sheep combination. In fact they’re experimenting, I think, 
with some horses; the horses will eat some grasses that cows 
won’t. 
 
And in the Meyronne pasture there’s also a PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration) research project, what is a 
research project for the control of leafy spurge. 
 
So we appreciate your questions, and we think that through 
these projects we’ll be able to make sure that leafy spurge is 
controlled and the pastures can be utilized to their fullest 
degree. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Minister, will these types of control 
measures be handled in the regulations? What I was really 
getting at is are there provisions in the Act to provide for 
funding for these types of programs, or do they come under the 
regulations that are coming? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The revolving fund is established by the 
Act and then the resources are allocated by the department 
under the direction of Dr. Peter Rempel. And of course then we 
have to decide where to put those resources. 
 
So with the money that we have, in fact I think the pasture 
program is going very well. We’ve got a lot of cooperation 
from the pasture patrons and the boards because in 
Saskatchewan, as you know, these pastures are very important 
and we can’t be allowing . . . we have to try to create an 
atmosphere with the whole pasture system, first of all, where 
you have long-time employees who do a very good job for us 
and to try to pasture as many animal units per acre as possible. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess what I was 
trying to find out is, I see that you have this pasture revolving 
fund but that doesn’t answer the question as to whether or not 
people in the communities have the authority to access funds by 
their decision — pasture managers perhaps, or an area manager. 
Is there someone in the local area that can make that decision 
that they’re going to spend some money to move some sheep 
from one pasture to another for the control of weeds and then 
pay for that trucking. 
 
Or another example of course might be in a predator control 
program. If suddenly they decided that they had to bring in 
some expertise in terms of an exterminator for example, to 
control some types of predators, would there be that availability 
for those local people to access that pool of funds in order to be 
able to use it to control those types of problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes. No, what we do is, the revolving 
funds there, we allocate as the department. But we do that in 
conjunction with advice from the pasture advisory boards, from 
the patrons of course who are on those boards, and we allocate 
funds throughout our entire pasture system based on need. 
 

In fact this year you mentioned predators. We’ve hired a person 
especially this year to carry out research and programs on 
predators because there’s a coyote problem in some areas and 
we thought it was necessary. The farmers told us it was 
necessary so we used some of the money to do that. And so we 
do it. 
 
So far we’ve been able to keep up with the funds that are in 
there with pasture rejuvenation, with special projects. And we 
work with the Sheep Development Board as well to make sure 
that we can utilize the pastures and have the right combination 
of animals. 
 
So the boards advise us and we work with them to allocate 
funding. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You bring up the 
subject of the coyotes of course and we have talked in previous 
days about the need for coyote control. And the discussions of 
course came up about the use of airplanes and the use of 
professional hunters from aircrafts. 
 
Has any more work been done in that area? Have you done any 
more research in that area or have you any plans to bring about 
a coyote control by use of aircraft control measures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Right now there’s no plans to use the 
aircraft method of controlling coyote populations. We actually 
have two people, I understand. I didn’t realize the Sheep 
Development Board has about . . . we’ve allocated $40,000 for 
them to work on the predator problem. They’ve hired one 
person, we had one person hired before; there’s actually two 
people working full-time on the predator control program. 
 
The aircraft use of course is quite controversial and we at this 
point in time have no thoughts of using that. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, I can appreciate that 
measures that require the killing of anything is always going to 
be controversial. But of course with coyotes, if you don’t kill a 
coyote, the coyote kills the sheep. And I can tell you from my 
own experience that there are quite a few coyotes in the area. I 
have personally seen a lot more in the past year than I have in a 
long time. 
 
You can always tell of course that the coyote population is 
rising when you go out on the land and you find that there are 
no more rabbits around and a lot of people who live and work 
with the land will know that the food cycle and the food chain is 
such that that happens. They will of course recognize that in a 
period of time the coyote population will decline on its own 
because they’ll start to starve to death as a result of having 
exhausted the rodent food supply and the rabbit food supply. 
 
But the point being of course then that drives those animals to 
killing of sheep and the killing of calves and of course the 
killing of young antelope and young deer. They just move up 
the food chain and start killing bigger things. And they start to 
pack up so that they can achieve that. 
 
So in the long run, what is more humane? To kill a few coyotes 



1274 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

now or to allow them to starve to death after the food chain runs 
out and they simply have to starve to death and go through that. 
I think we have to accept the fact that death is a part of the 
circle of life. And in this situation, because the fur bearers are 
no longer in demand as a result of Greenpeace actions 
throughout the world, the reality being that there is nobody out 
there that particularly wants to go out and keep the coyote 
population under control. 
 
And so I think we then have to take the measures ourselves of 
protecting the livestock herds. And so, Mr. Minister, while it 
may be controversial I think you will find that sometimes it’s 
necessary to kill things in order to keep life going on. And I 
would suggest in that same light that the successes that have 
been accomplished in the Dakotas with the airplane control 
programs, clearly are recorded. They are clearly documented, 
people have studied them, and they have all come back with 
good reports of that as a method of control. 
 
When we use poisons there are all kinds of problems with the 
poisons that you’ve outlined yourself and other days when 
we’ve discussed this point. But I do want to make one more 
time this point, that aircraft control with professional hunters is 
probably the most humane and most ecologically sound basis of 
controlling coyotes because that way you can go into a specific 
area with your aircraft where you can’t get in with trucks and 
other vehicles without doing damage to the land. You can go 
into those specific areas, you can specifically target problem 
animals that are around those pastures; whereas if you put out 
poisons and baits and things like that you could be killing all 
kinds of things that you don’t want to kill as well. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would encourage you on behalf of the sheep 
producers of the south-west to reconsider your position on the 
coyote control. And even though it may be provided in this 
particular Act in a very broad sense in that you could, I think 
having read this, implement the program and fund it through 
this, it would take a decision on your part or the department’s 
part to go ahead with that. And so I would encourage you to 
rethink that position and to reconsider it. 
 
I noted in the front cover that we have a clear indication that 
this Act refers to Indian bands. And I would like to know in 
what sense it will deal with Indian bands and why the Indian 
bands are particularly pointed out in the definitions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — This is in regards to the coyote problem. 
The Sheep Development Board has not indicated to us that they 
would like to see an aircraft control solution brought forward. If 
it gets bad enough, I mean that’s always a consideration that we 
would, you would have to look at. 
 
But the two areas that they are working at now is trapping and 
guard dogs. That’s quite an interesting . . . I was just being 
briefed here by my officials that the guard dogs actually live 
with the sheep, not with the master, and the sheep become their 
masters instead of the humans. And so the development board 
brings some money out of that. And so we work with them and 
I guess if they came forward, the Sheep Development Board 
said look, you know, we think we should start using aircraft, we 
would have to consider that at the time. 
 
And with regard . . . yes the poisons are restricted in some areas 

as well. So you’re right, they can kill just about anything, so . . . 
and it stays in the system too. 
 
With regard to the reference to Indian bands, we have a 
management agreement with the Bapaume pasture that I think 
you’re probably familiar with, where the band took over the 
pasture and they were managing it for them for a period of four 
years. And also allows any other instances that where we have 
to deal, work with Indian bands . . . so we have the flexibility, 
so we built it right into the Act. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well I think it’s probably better to cover 
things in general rather than to wish you had had some direction 
before so I understand the need for that from your explanation. 
 
Under the pasture revolving fund, Mr. Minister, you as minister, 
and the Minister of Finance I guess, has specific authority to go 
out and purchase lands for pastures in accordance, it says here, 
with The Provincial Lands Act, and acquire lands for pastures 
by lease, licence, permits or otherwise. Are there any lands that 
you are presently anticipating that would be covered by this 
particular section of the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — At the present time there’s no thought of 
purchasing more land. But again it does build in the flexibility 
if we had to add . . . if we could add pasture onto current 
pasture, add that on the current pasture. But the system hasn’t 
changed. In terms of if there’s any additions or deletions, it has 
to come through the Executive Council in the form of a . . . 
(inaudible) . . . past cabinet. 
 
So it’s not something just that the department can do, it’s got to 
come in the form of a cabinet decision. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, have 
you ever considered, in view of the fact that we have weather 
conditions in the province that are pretty variable . . . and in fact 
in our area they say if you don’t like the weather wait 30 
minutes, you get something else. But we do live with the reality 
of drought in the south-west and of course that has now started 
to happen up North more frequently. 
 
It seems though that when we have a drought in the South a lot 
of farmers are able to take their cattle and move them up North 
to find pastures up there. Has the pasture system and through 
this legislation . . . whether it would be possible to have 
alternate pastures in the South and in the North that you could 
alternate back and forth through sort of a program of a backup 
system of pastures, where you would I suppose buy from 
yourself, basically the Crown, more of the Crown land up North 
and lay it aside as community pastures to be used as alternate 
pastures for the cattle down South when we hit those drought 
periods and move them there. Rather than having people 
running around frantically trying to find people up North that 
will take their cattle in — or sheep I suppose, for that matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, on this particular question, because 
of the . . . there’s always demand for pastures. We try to 
maintain our pastures at 60 to 70 per cent of carrying capacity. 
That does a couple of things. It allows you some flexibility in 
terms of movement of cattle for a drought. It also gives you 
some carry-over from year to year for early pasture, good 
pasture. 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1275 

And we’ve in the past had cattle move from pasture to pasture. 
For example, in the South there’s some people who a few years 
ago moved a pasture to a north-east pasture and have 
maintained that. They truck them back and forth every year, 
thinking that maybe they have more security up there. 
 
So we try to build flexibility in the system. But adding more 
land wouldn’t really solve the problem because there is a large, 
fairly large demand for those pastures. If you put a new pasture 
together it would probably be full, you know, because of other 
people coming in. So the question is where would it end. 
 
And what we’re trying to do though is establish some 
flexibility. And we have done that pretty well in the past. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Mr. Minister, there very certainly is 
demand for more area of pasture in the south-west. In fact I just 
had a couple of letters this past week from young farmers who 
are rather upset with not being able to get allocation of pastures 
in order to expand their rather small holdings that they have at 
the present time. 
 
Now the point that they make of course is a valid one: that as 
young producers, young people getting into agriculture, they 
don’t have a whole lot of money, so the allocation into a 
community pasture gives them a little bigger base to be able to 
work from. They can take those cattle home for wintertime and 
feed them, and in the summer if they have some allocation of 
pasture, it broadens their base. 
 
And they of course are rather critical of the present program 
where it is very difficult for young producers to get into the 
community pasture system. They have pointed out some glaring 
errors that I’m not going to bring up in this forum, but I have of 
course passed along to you by letter and you will have them 
shortly. 
 
I want to deal more specifically here with the general principle 
of the fact that if we had an expanded land base and more 
pastures available, then younger farmers that are trying to get 
into the business would be able to get into those pastures. 
 
Now particularly I’m talking about people in that Piapot area 
where livestock production is probably the best base there is for 
people to be able to sustain an agricultural lifestyle, because it’s 
not conducive to intensified cereal cropping and that sort of 
thing. Now of course, they might go into elk or whatever, but 
realistically most of them look at cattle as the first option, sheep 
maybe at the second, that sort of an option. 
 
(1515) 
 
There has been reported to me in the past couple of days some 
rather large ranches for example that are for sale in the Cypress 
Hills. These ranches of course are being pursued vigorously by 
the Indian bands who are looking to spend their money for 
treaty entitlements and that sort of thing, from all the way to, 
you know, the northern part of the province. The bands are 
coming into the area looking at this land. 
 
Now in reality, the young farmers down there, you know, don’t 
want to get into this kind of debate as to who should have the 
land or who shouldn’t. But what they are saying is that if the 

department were to put some of those ranches into community 
pastures, ranches that obviously local ranchers don’t appear to 
be able to buy and that only the people that can compete to buy 
them are outsiders that have federal government money, what 
these people are saying is that some of those ranches should be 
put into a community pasture system so that the young farmers 
around the area who actually are interested in farming and 
ranching rather than just having a wildlife preserve — and 
there’s nothing wrong with wildlife preserves — but in a 
farming community people do want to utilize the land for the 
traditional purpose that they’ve used it for. 
 
And so I guess what they’re saying to me is, ask the question. Is 
the department considering or would they consider buying some 
of these ranches and hooking them into an expanded pasture 
program so that they in fact can get some allocation to put 
animals in there rather than fighting with their friends and 
neighbours who have seniority in the present system and seem 
never to give up that seniority. 
 
And not that I blame them, you know. From a personal point of 
view, I don’t blame people for not giving up their seniority, but 
on the other hand, how does a young person get started if they 
don’t have a relative that has some seniority that sort of passes 
it on to them. 
 
And so it’s kind of a catch-22 for a lot of these people who 
want to expand and get started in agriculture. So do you have 
any ideas of implementing those kind of expansion programs 
for young producers to get started in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I understand your concern; I understand 
the problem. What we do right now and what we will be taking 
out to the consultation process, maybe to expand upon, is right 
now if spaces come available, about 50 per cent of those will go 
to the younger or new applicants, and about 50 per cent to the 
other applicants. 
 
Under the new regulations we’re going to see if we can allocate 
a larger portion . . . and see if there’s any interest to allocate a 
larger portion to the younger people who are in the area. You 
know, as they score on a point system if they’re young and 
they’re near by. So that’s one of the things we are going to do. 
 
You see in the south-west it becomes very complicated because, 
as you know, the policy as it stands today is if you have deeded 
land and leased land, the leased land goes with the deeded land 
in a sale. There’s no vacant land that we can just sort of use to 
convert to community pasture; we have to buy it. Of course 
then you start competing with the local people to buy the land 
and sometimes this land goes for a very, very high price, as you 
well know, in that south-west region. 
 
So what we’re trying to do, rather than getting into buying more 
land, is to try to get the allocations geared towards the younger 
people who have an interest in getting into livestock. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well I certainly sympathize with your view 
that things are difficult, and if it was going to be easy, I suppose 
we wouldn’t be here. 
 
But the reality is that that’s why I brought up this concept of 
perhaps having back-up pastures in the North. Because land is 



1276 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

difficult to get in the south-west because it has pretty much all 
been spoken for. And realistically the good Lord isn’t making 
any more land on earth that we know of that’s available for 
pastures. There is no more real estate. We only have what we 
have available and we have to use it of course to the best that 
we can. 
 
But that’s why I suggested to you that I was hoping that there 
would be some plans through this legislation, some plans 
through your department, to expand the pasture bases in other 
areas where there is land available that would be rather cheap 
for you to acquire as a department and as a government. 
 
That being of course your own land base, the Crown land base 
in northern Saskatchewan, where you could in fact of course, 
you know, go on the edge of the tree line area of the province 
and perhaps clear some land for lumbering and that sort of 
thing, and then put that into pasture land afterwards and maybe 
use that as community pasture. 
 
There’s all kinds of ideas out there. I’m just throwing out a few 
for you to think about because that’s why I mentioned the fact 
that we should consider that alternative. 
 
But in reality most of the agricultural producers — and 
especially the young producers — would like to have a land 
base close to home. And so some of these ranches that are 
presently up for sale obviously are for sale at a price that is 
attracting the native bands with their treaty money. If they can 
afford to buy it for their purposes, obviously then it must be a 
wise decision to buy that land I think for livestock production 
and for the maintenance of an agricultural base in the province 
as well. So that’s why I suggested to you that maybe the 
department might at this time look at buying some of those 
pastures. 
 
I also wanted to ask you, Minister, a little bit about the grants in 
lieu of taxes that are paid through this particular Act. It’s under 
section 4(e) is the reference and how will that apply or will it 
apply any differently than what we have now and I’ll just await 
your explanation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — To answer your last question first, 
nothing has changed as far as grants in lieu are concerned. The 
RMs bill us and we pay the grant and the grant in lieu of taxes. 
Now with regard to your first question again, just to finish off, 
we’re concentrating on trying to increase carrying capacities of 
existing pastures by pasture rejuvenation in order to 
accommodate some of the demand. 
 
The problem with developing a new pasture of course, the land 
isn’t that readily available in the south-west so it puts it in the 
north forest fringe area. You’re looking at . . . well you can say, 
buy maybe an average of about 100 bucks an acre because 
you’ve got to break it, you’ve got to seed it; well you’ve got to 
scrub the bush off it first. So if you’re looking at the average 
pasture in the North being about 7,000 acres, just for 
establishing the pasture you’re looking at $700,000 and then 
you got to start fencing, corrals, and everything else. You’re 
looking at a million plus and I think that’s a conservative figure. 
 
That is part of the problem and if we’re going to spend that 
money the thought is now that we should try to . . . or it would 

be probably cheaper to increase the carrying capacity of 
existing pastures. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good 
afternoon to the minister and his officials. 
 
I just want to also voice my concerns following up on some of 
the comments made by the member from Cypress Hills with 
respect to predator problems in the province. I think at this 
point in time we can’t overstate the problem. Specifically 
related to coyotes, I think we’re reaching epidemic proportions 
really with respect to some of the problems that we’re seeing 
associated with coyotes. 
 
And I know specifically — I’m not speaking this afternoon with 
respect to the sheep producers and predator problems related to 
that — but I know on the part of cattle producers. I’m privy to a 
number of circumstances where there’s been some rather 
substantial losses incurred this past late winter, early spring. 
And in fact even as recently as last week I’m aware of some 
losses related to . . . well calves being taken by coyotes. 
 
So just a little bit further if we could with respect to those 
individuals that have been hired by the department with respect 
to . . . If I’m to understand correctly, it’s strictly related to 
studying the predator problem. And I would maintain, given 
that this is the problem that it is right now, that resources should 
probably be more put towards the control aspects of it as well. 
 
Now we’ll no doubt be talking about this in estimates with 
Agriculture at a later point in time too but certainly cattle 
producers, being the independent sorts that they are, they 
perhaps aren’t voicing their concerns as regularly as you might 
have expected to directly to the department and to officials. 
 
Has there been any work undertaken by the department to try 
and establish what sort of losses might be incurred at this point 
in time related to predators? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — With regard to the numbers, in Mortlach 
pasture last year we lost approximately 30 head — roughly 20 
lambs and 10 ewes. Tompkins pasture was a little more — 35 
lambs and 15 or so ewes I believe. But that’s out of — like 
Tompkins — about 1,200 lambs and about 1,500 ewes. So it’s a 
problem and we’ve got to watch very carefully. 
 
But we are . . . I hope I didn’t mislead you. We are actively 
trapping right now. We’re actively trapping; we’re actively 
putting in the guard dogs for the prevention. It’s not just a 
study. I mean it’s kind of a pilot project. I mean we’re studying 
it as we actively pursue these options. 
 
So if we can keep the numbers down to where they were last 
year, you know zero is the best, but at least it’s not an 
exorbitant number. And as we move along and increase or 
decrease the number of coyotes they’re trapping and improve 
the systems, we should hopefully get those numbers down. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, 
Mr. Minister. Also following up on some of the comments from 
the member from Cypress Hills with respect to the need — and 
it is a very real one at this point in time — of expanding the 
pasture program, I would have to say that really the government 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

has to look more seriously at an expanded base rather than 
trying to intensify, well perhaps a system of both, of trying to 
more intensively graze the existing pasture base. 
 
But certainly at this time, the post-WGTA (Western Grain 
Transportation Act) era that we’re in, where a lot more people 
are wanting to diversify into livestock and finding it extremely 
difficult. The minister is acknowledging here this afternoon just 
the difficulties in acquiring a pasture base and the costs 
associated with it, and you consider them to be quite onerous. 
Well I assure you that they’re no less onerous for individuals 
and certainly young people trying to break into the business so 
to speak, and trying to get diversified into livestock. 
 
So I would suggest that if there was ever a time to be expanding 
the pasture base, pasture program, it would be now. I’d like to 
hear a few more comments from the minister in that regard. 
 
But also too, before I take my place, just with respect to the Act 
and the establishment of rates too and it sort of piggybacks on 
what I’ve just been mentioning. When you’re trying to establish 
rates with respect to pastures, just how much of a factor does 
the cost of grazing land become in all of this? Because again I’d 
maintain with the high costs, or certainly becoming a lot higher 
— the cost of grazing land nowadays — I think it would put an 
unfair slant in terms of perhaps your formula in establishing 
rates for the provincial pastures. If too much weight was put on 
the current market value of grazing land being that it’s, I would 
say, is quite over inflated at this time relative to its carrying 
capacity and what profits can be made in terms of what cattle, 
or whatever livestock you might want to graze on it. So if I 
might just have a few comments in that regard. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, at this point of time we’re not 
going to be looking at . . . even though there’s a demand up 
there, we don’t think it’s necessary to start new pastures and 
continue on with the programs like helping farmers, like 
winterizing, keeping their cattle over winter, increasing carrying 
capacities, and those types of things. 
 
With regards to the rates, the status quo is going to remain. We 
haven’t any changes right now, but the point here I want to 
make is that these rates are very, very reasonable compared to 
private rates. Now I don’t know if you were saying, maybe we 
should charge more and use that money to you know fulfil some 
of the demand for increased capacity. 
 
But there are other options that people have. You know there’s 
other pastures around, there’s you know buying land. The value 
of the land of course is set by the demand that’s out there and 
whether it’s plated or not is a matter of opinion. 
 
But we understand the necessity to increase our livestock herd. 
We’re working with the livestock industry to do that. We’re 
working hard with our pasture people in the department to try to 
consult with patrons to find out what their wishes are for the 
current pastures. 
 
And I repeat, winterizing, rejuvenation, higher-carrying 
capacities is something that we’re putting our money into 
because that’s basically what they’re agreeing to right now. 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. 
I want to make it very clear this afternoon I certainly wasn’t 
advocating higher pasture fees. I think it’s very important that 
we try and maintain as least cost an approach in that regard, for 
the very reason I stated earlier that it’s a way and means of 
producers trying to, well, certainly to break into the livestock 
business. 
 
And if I’m going to take what I heard from you earlier where 
you’re going to now, under your new regulations, lean perhaps 
a little bit more towards some younger producers wanting to get 
into the program — well, certainly I think it’s more important 
than ever that you try and keep a lid on those prices. 
 
And we’ve spoke before just about farm input costs in general 
and the need to try and maintain a watchdog role in that regard. 
And certainly anything that the department can do to do I think 
is appreciated by producers. 
 
I’d just like to go back to a comment you made earlier with 
respect to predators and the control of coyotes by aircraft. And 
you mentioned that perhaps it’s something that would be 
actively considered by the department if the sheep producers 
association or livestock producers association might be actively 
requesting that of you. Did I understand that correctly? 
 
And if that’s the case, is it something that you will definitely 
begin a program of if you’ve got such requests from livestock 
producer associations in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I’m advised that we have not had 
requests from livestock associations to consider the elimination 
of predators by aircraft. And what I said before was that we try 
to do this, number one, in the most humane way for the animals, 
and along with preserving the animals that are in the pastures 
for the producers. 
 
So we haven’t had the requests, but what I said was all these 
things can be considered if there’s a demand for them. Right 
now we’re trying to handle the increase in predators through the 
ways and means that producers themselves think it should be 
handled, working with us in consultation. 
 
And I just want to add that, as far as the entry that we talked 
about before and the tenure, all these things will be part of the 
regulations discussions with the pastures. So if you have a 
group of people who have a certain idea for pastures, they 
certainly should be consulting our department, or we’ll be 
consulting them probably, with regards to who should be using 
a pasture, what ages, and the tenure of the livestock in the 
pasture. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well on that topic 
with respect to the establishment of regulations, will notices be 
going out to pasture advisory boards or to patrons generally 
about that very issue so that they’re able to actively participate 
in that process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes is the answer, but it’s not going to 
be limited to patrons. It’s going to be the industry, the livestock 
industry in general so we’ll get a flavour of what everybody’s 
thinking. 
 



1278 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
with respect to services that can be provided through The 
Pastures Act, can you perhaps outline for us what some of those 
services are . . . and then I guess more specifically with respect 
to backgrounding of calves I know I’ve had some concerns 
expressed by some pasture patrons, concerns of that program 
specifically and its relative success or otherwise. And they’re 
worried that perhaps the otherwise, the non-success aspect of 
those sorts of services might end up having some impact on 
their fees in future dates and future years. 
 
Could you make some comment about the success of some of 
these services that are provided within The Pastures Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Right now the breakdown is out of the 
$5.5 million budget, 4.6 million comes from grazing fees. 
We’re wintering bulls. A couple of reasons for that. It cuts 
down the fighting in the spring and it increases your ability to 
control disease. We’re wintering cows, which has been a very 
good program in bringing some money into the pastures and to 
the revolving fund. 
 
We did a project, a pilot project of backgrounding last year. I 
think the member from Cypress asked us a question and it’s 
somewhere in the works at Old Wives pasture, which lost a 
little bit of money, $12,000 roughly, partly due to the fact that 
the cattle were picked up and weren’t full of water and feed. 
They were basically shrunk. It was a management thing. And 
then they of course they take shrinkage at the yards. 
 
But that pilot project has given us lots of tools to improve upon 
that so that it could become . . . it may become something, it 
may not, but we’re trying to provide another service. 
 
The other thing too that we’re trying to do through these 
projects is keep our people. There’s a bit of a problem, of 
course, on a seasonal basis — when you’re hiring some people 
seasonally — that you tend to lose them because they want a 
year-round job. In that way, by providing some of these 
services, we can keep the people year-round and keep a high 
quality of employee for the patrons of the pastures. 
 
So we’re trying a number of things. And like I say, we do pilot 
projects; we’re working in consultation with the pastures. If 
they come forward with a project, we’re willing to look at it. 
Because our role in this is trying to provide them with the best 
service possible, try to provide as many animal units as 
possible. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, 
Mr. Minister. I don’t want you to think this afternoon that I’m 
condemning any specific services that might be provided at this 
point in time through the pasture services or ones you might be 
contemplating in the future. 
 
I think it’s good that you’re always adapting to today’s 
environment and trying to look at innovative ways of trying to 
utilize the pastures better. And it’s commendable too that 
you’re thinking in terms of staffing and the continuum of 
staffing so we have experienced people always manning these 
pastures. A very important aspect of the success of every 
individual pasture is the management aspect and the trained 
workers to have on hand. 

I have no other further comments this afternoon. I’d just like to 
thank yourself and your officials for having answered these 
questions. The only one thing I’ll just say before I take my 
place is: I wish you would consider to expand that pasture base. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chair, thank you to the members for 
their questions on the other side of the House. 
 
I just want to end off by saying that we do intend to continue 
along the same vein, working with people. But I want to 
commend also the staff from the Department of Agriculture 
who make my job a lot easier by working with the patrons very 
well and trying to accommodate them as much as possible. I 
think if we continue that trend in the future, we’ll just keep 
improving our community pasture system. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There’s just a 
couple of questions, Minister, that have come up as I’ve 
listened. And I wanted to clarify it because I know if I don’t, 
I’m going to have some irate cowboy after me to write you a 
letter anyway. So I might as well do it now. 
 
Under the powers of the minister under 6(i) it’s: 
 

determine with respect to each pasture: 
(i) allocation of grazing rights, in accordance with the 
regulations; 
 

And then of course under section . . . regulations under 14(d) 
and (i), the ranking of scoring criteria to determine the 
allocations and under (iii) there, the assignment of the 
allocations. Those type of things, Minister, will there be any 
change in the formula that you were using under the old Act as 
compared to what you anticipate in the regulations of the new 
Act for the present time? And of course do you intend as the 
minister to step in and correct some of the inequities that we are 
being told exist but need to be researched to be sure of, to make 
sure that young producers are given a fair chance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — During the consultation process all these 
things were up for review so if there’s a hue and cry out there, if 
a number of people who want to make some changes, then we’ll 
certainly try to accommodate that. We want to work with 
livestock producers to help make the system work as well as 
possible. 
 
Like I said earlier, we’re trying to . . . we’re going to put out the 
thought that we should maybe be gearing it a little more to the 
younger people instead of 50/50 basis now, maybe moving the 
allocation somewhat higher than 50 per cent for new patrons 
and younger people. So I guess the answer is yes. That’s open 
for discussion. Whether it’ll change will depend on what the 
entire livestock community tells us that what the demand is. 
 
So if they can agree that we should be moving it to the younger 
folks, we are certainly in favour of that and we will move that 
way yet we don’t want to cut out the other people as well, so 
you’ve got to try to accommodate both. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well I certainly understand where you’re 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

coming from, Mr. Minister, because obviously the established 
producers can’t afford to lose the base of their income in order 
to help out younger people either. They need to have stability in 
their lives over a long period of years as they carry on their 
ranching operations. I guess that’s why the expansion of the 
pasture program would be a very ideal — maybe idealistic but 
nevertheless an ideal — way of solving some of these problems. 
 
I got a little bit confused when you were talking about the 
budgetary process. I guess my simple question is . . . what is the 
budget from the government’s annual budget for the things that 
are covered in this Act? You have mentioned $4.6 million that 
you take in from grazing fees and of course there’s other fees 
from the wintering of cows and that sort of thing. Which part or 
how much of the budget in this program comes directly from 
government besides what you take out of the producers as fees 
and permits and whatever? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The money from the revolving fund . . . 
the budget in the revolving fund is five and a half million 
dollars, and of that 4.6 million comes directly from grazing. 
Now of that $5 million, five and a half million dollars, it all 
comes from patrons. It’s their money in the revolving fund and 
we administer it for pasture rejuvenation, as I’ve said consulting 
with all the pastures to determine where to spend the money to 
the best advantage of the producers in general in the province. 
 
But there’s an unmeasurable amount of money that is also 
contributed by government by taxpayers through our resource 
people, and everybody that works with the pasture system. It’s 
very, very difficult to put money on that because we have a 
number of people working with them and it comes from 
extension, from the agrologists, right through to Dr. Rempel in 
his department, to me. 
 
So it’s very hard to determine the amount of money that’s 
spent, but there is taxpayers’ dollars going into the program. 
But the most of it, the $5 million budget, is patrons’ money. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well that’s what I kind of thought but the 
way the conversation had gone, I sort of thought that we were 
being left with the impression that the government is spending a 
bunch of extra government money, but realistically the patrons 
are paying for this program themselves. And this legislation is 
basically being designed to help them to run a program fairly 
and equitably, and I think that that’s a very commendable 
approach for you to do. 
 
Also, though understanding that the patrons are paying for this 
program themselves and understanding that the government of 
course always has initiatives for people to diversify and to 
expand and for the province to assist people in order to get on 
with making better incomes, expanding the population base and 
the tax bases, then there can be made a pretty good argument 
for the government to look at expansion of the pasture programs 
by spending a million dollars on a new pasture here or there or 
somewhere else in order to expand the livestock base. 
 
We’ve talked about expanding the hog industry by building hog 
barns, and obviously the government has only put in a limited 
amount of money, but nevertheless some money, into 
promoting those kind of things, and they are helping to 
diversify the base in Saskatchewan — that you are to be 

complimented on as well. However, the same argument can be 
made in the beef industry and . . . but in the beef industry of 
course you can have a feedlot industry that will follow up with 
these inland terminals and use up of course all of the screenings 
and those sort of things and the feed grains that come out of 
those terminals that are now being built — that can go into a 
feedlot operation. Again we can look to Alberta’s example of 
how they’re applying that. 
 
But you cannot have that kind of a program work if you don’t 
have a cow-calf base in the province and an expanding cow-calf 
base, because realistically we don’t have enough calves to put 
on feed to eat up the barley that we could grow in this province, 
considering of course the Crow and all the things that you all 
know too much about already probably. But the reality being 
that we should look for a way to expand the cow-calf base in 
this province so that we can expand the feedlot industry to eat 
up all our grain that we can’t afford to ship out any more and 
that would lend itself to your whole program of diversification. 
And so, Minister, that’s the argument I would leave with you as 
you work on this legislation. 
 
There are some minor questions that I have but I don’t think 
that I need to ask them now. I think we can sort them out as you 
get into regulations. I want to compliment your officials and 
your department people. I think they’ve done an excellent job of 
operating the pasture programs and I think they’ve done an 
excellent job under the old Act. I’m happy to see that you have 
put together the new Act just to more streamline the programs 
and to better assist the farmers and ranchers in the province to 
operate this program. 
 
I’m very happy, Minister, with yourself. I’m very happy with 
the attention that you pay to the people in what appears to be a 
very concerned manner and a very responsive manner. And we 
very much appreciate that out in the hills. We appreciate a 
minister that we can call up and talk to about coyotes and all 
kinds of things that wouldn’t interest a lot of others, like field 
bindweed or leaky spurge, and a lot of folks wouldn’t care 
about those things. 
 
You obviously do and that has been expressed by your concern 
and your actions and we want to thank you for that on behalf of 
the people in the south-west and I’m sure all the rest of the folks 
in the province that have had the experience of working under 
the old Act for pastures. And I’m sure that if you apply the new 
Act with the same vigour that you have put into the old one 
over the past year and a half, that folks will be very happy with 
you and with the Act, and so we congratulate you and we thank 
you for your work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well thank you very much. Just one 
quick comment and I agree with you and the department agrees 
with you as to trying to keep the cattle here. That was the whole 
thrust behind the backgrounding pilot project. The longer we 
can keep those calves in the province, the better. My advice is 
that for every dollar sale of cattle in Saskatchewan spins off $6. 
That’s very important, and we haven’t started a pasture for 
about 40 or so years. If there’s a demand out there we can 
consider it. The problem is that where does it stop and what’s 
the government’s role compared to the private sector role. And 
we just want to make sure we maintain some kind of a balance. 
 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

So I appreciate your comments, and I know there’s a need out 
there and we’re trying to accommodate it through these ways. 
 
As far as expanding the number of pastures, probably it’s not 
going to happen in the near future but it’s something that 
certainly is not out of the question if there’s demand and some 
group wants to come and we can look at it. But remembering 
budgets; somebody’s got to pay for it. So we don’t close the 
door but we think the pastures are working good. And I thank 
you for your questions. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A couple of questions, 
Mr. Minister, as well, as I look the Act and we look at the paper 
that was just delivered into our office and it talks about parched 
pasture land in western Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I know some of the members have talked about pasture 
land. I believe the Act before us is . . . Under the powers of the 
minister it talks about establishing, operating, managing, and 
maintaining pastures. And I know you’ve talked a fair bit about 
pasture land and some of the problems that arise from trying to 
even get into buying and purchasing more land or building 
more pastures. 
 
But I guess what I would like to ask of you, Mr. Minister, I 
think you also talk about entering into agreements with other 
government . . . levels of government or Indian bands or 
persons or agencies. There are large . . . or there’s a significant 
area of land across this province that’s basically sitting idle, and 
that’s a lot of the wildlife development land. Some of that land 
that really is not utilized whatsoever. 
 
Now in some cases I believe, in chatting with the minister 
responsible for Resource Management and some of his officials, 
I think there’s some movement on the parts of wildlife people to 
be sensitive to the needs that may arise at times if there’s 
certainly a shortage of pasture. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, in regards not just to this 
specific piece of legislation before us, but whether or not the 
department themselves have been conversing with SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) in 
regards to some of the wildlife land. Some of this land certainly 
is out of your control as it’s controlled by the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation or habitat trust or some of these areas. 
 
Have there been any discussions, as we look at the long term 
and building for the future, as to maybe working with some of 
these organizations, working along with them. Helping them to 
understand the fact that they can play a significant role not only 
in the preservation of wildlife but certainly of meeting the needs 
of the agricultural community as well, as certainly wildlife 
plays a major role in the economy of this province. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I think you’re very well aware that 
agriculture is still our main industry. And I think it’s important 
that other organizations begin to recognize the importance of 
not just the agriculture community, recognizing that while 
working together as well we can build a solid wildlife basis as 
well that can be added to our economy. So I guess what I would 
ask, what has been done in the past? And under this legislation 
where you talk about the powers and entering into agreements, 
what types of agreements will you begin to enter into and 

whether or not you’ve had discussions in regards to some of 
these lands that are just sitting idle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — I’ll just answer the first part of your 
question about the entering into agreements. We often enter into 
agreements with other people to provide services to pastures. A 
pasture may want us to provide . . . to winter their bulls for 
them, so we enter agreement. We have people for breaking, we 
have scrubbing, we have projects for rejuvenation, all those 
kinds of things. A myriad of things that we could enter into 
agreements with. 
 
With regards to your question, which I think is . . . probably 
would deem your most important question of the two is, 
entering into agreements to utilize wildlife lands for grazing. I 
think that that is a potential. I think there’s some agreement 
now, there’s some shifting of thinking in the wildlife ranks, the 
saying that there is possibly a role for grazing. So I think we’re 
probably, hopefully at the early stages of trying to work out 
some programs that we might be able to utilize some of these 
lands. 
 
Because we have been talking with departments, SERM, and 
with the wildlife people off and on, and there seems to be some 
movement. I’m not going to try to mislead you and say this is 
going to happen quickly. But I think the up side is there’s 
recognition that there is some use for grazing, for cattle over 
that land, and that we can increase your economic activity and 
enhance environmental sustainability by grazing. And I don’t 
know the detail, but there’s a number of things, from the kind of 
plants that grow there to the rejuvenation. Sometimes if you 
don’t graze you have to rely on a fire to rejuvenate. And maybe 
grazing would be better and achieve the same result. 
 
So this is, this is the types of discussion we’re in. There’s no 
signings in the offing. But I think there may be in the future a 
chance for maybe management agreements where wildlife 
people say okay, we can graze so many cattle on this parcel of 
land in agreement with the pasture patrons to use the land and 
put some qualifiers on it. 
 
I think this can happen, I think it should happen, and we’re 
going to continue to pursue it. Although like I say, it’s not 
going to happen overnight. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
in response to that I would suggest that certainly for the number 
of years I’ve been elected to this Assembly there has been a 
significant movement. To be very candid, when I was first 
elected there was a real resistance to any move to have some 
controlled grazing. 
 
And in my chats with some of the local wildlife people as well, 
I’ve talked about the fact that it’s not a matter of just opening 
up the gate and just letting a number of livestock in; the fact 
that they could even control it or be involved in it. 
 
It could be part of . . . And your comment about the fact of 
refurbishing wildlife land, certainly in our area alone, we 
haven’t for a number of years, the late ’80s early ’90s . . . our 
area used to be, back in the ’50s and through the ’60s, an area 
where a lot of ducks used to reside and we hadn’t seen them for 
a number of years. 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

But certainly this past year, and even this year despite how dry 
it is, we’ve got enough bodies of water, it’s amazing how many 
birds are around. 
 
(1600) 
 
The other thing that we’ve noticed as well, Mr. Minister, 
without really going out and specifically working to attract, we 
might be in the near future looking at ways of trying to dispose 
of some wild geese that just seem to be multiplying in the area. 
And you know what geese can do when it comes to possible 
crop damage. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, what it’s pointing out and I think it 
should be pointing out even to individuals involved in wildlife, 
is the fact that if there’s an environment, you don’t necessarily 
improve the wildlife environment by just closing that resource 
off to some of the agricultural environment as well; that we can 
cohabitate together I guess, and work together. 
 
And just looking at the Act, the reason I raised it is the fact your 
department, and under the Act your office, certainly does have 
the ability to work and arrive at agreements or arrangements 
that would certainly enhance pasture or grazing use in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I commend you and thank you for the fact that that’s an area 
your department, under the Act, is certainly able to pursue if it’s 
an area that we can move it, versus finding yourself in a 
position where agriculture is really under stress, your pasture 
lands are under a lot of pressure, and you just aren’t in a 
position to start moving and start building lots of . . . or creating 
lots of pastures, taking advantage of what’s there. And I 
certainly commend you on that. 
 
One other question I do have, and that comes out of the lien on 
animals, section 11. I would take it what you’re talking of here 
is if a patron has an outstanding bill, it gives the department the 
authority to hold or retain some animals until the bill is paid. 
And what I mean by outstanding, are we talking of say arrears 
that are past due to the previous year, or are we talking 
immediate pasture rent, let’s say for this year? 
 
At the end of the year are you asking patrons to have their 
cheque in hand before they remove cattle from the pasture? If 
they don’t, that you have the ability then to retain possession of 
a certain number of head that can be agreed upon to cover that 
lease fee. Is that what we’re talking of here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Just to answer your last question first, I 
want to point out that in the pasture system we have a 
delinquency rate of about half of one per cent. It’ll vary, but 
very, very, very small. 
 
Pasture patrons are very responsible about paying their bills. 
Yes, we have the right to hold those animals, but most of the 
time a certified cheque will do it. And also if they didn’t pay 
one year and they want to bring the cattle back next year, they’ll 
have to clear it up. 
 
It was about . . . It ranges between about 28 and $40,000 
delinquency on a $5.5 million budget, so it’s . . . Or 4.6 I guess 
from grazing fees. So it’s not very large at all. 

One of the things I want to mention is that our pastures . . . in 
our pasture system we are working towards a sustainable grass 
growth system. And the wildlife officials are watching us and 
our management practices in this area. I think that’s giving 
them confidence that we can actually achieve some of the things 
that you talked about and what we’d like to achieve. 
 
So all these things work towards trying to utilize as much land 
as possible. And then have the environmental processes looked 
after while the economic activity, through livestock. So it’s a 
slow process but I think we’re moving in the right direction. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chair, before I move the Bill I’d like 
to thank my officials again, and the members for their 
questions. This is a very important aspect of our livestock 
industry and I’m pleased that they all have such a great interest 
in it. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave to thank the officials, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. We didn’t realize those persons were leaving at 
this time. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. We’d just like to take this 
opportunity to thank the officials that dealt with The Pastures 
Act and be talking to them next time around. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The On-farm Quality 
Assurance Programs Act 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I will recognize 
the minister to introduce his new officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is Bob 
Ford, manager of quality assurance for the industry 
development branch, and behind me is Maryellen Carlson, the 
director of industry development branch for Sask Ag and Food. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’ll maybe 
ask the same question of the minister with this Bill and I think I 
can see the changes that you’ve made. Could you maybe just 
give me an overview of the Bill and what you’re trying to do 
here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — The abridged version is that it’s a 
nation-wide program development for quality assurance. In 
terms of our trading partners, we want to assure them that we 
have quality products, and the federal government is working 
with the different . . . all different provinces and we’re 
developing quality assurance programs. 
 
What this does is it provides a level of assurance and protection 
for the producers and works together with the rest of the 
country to ensure that . . . to send a message to our buyers that 



1282 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

we have a very high quality product and we have systems in 
place so that they might be able to track the product and have 
some assurances that it is a safe product. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Since the criteria 
for these programs will be set out in regulations and not really 
in the Act itself, can you give us an idea of some of the criteria 
that might be involved in this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well the regulations are going to be 
developed in conjunction with the industry and it’s going to be 
an industry-driven program where the industry’s going to 
provide the paperwork and the detail of how the quality 
assurance program should go. 
 
And in conjunction with the industry we’re going to help them 
develop standards. Now initially they’re going to be voluntary 
so that let’s say the hog industry might want to put together a 
program where they have forms . . . we’re working in this 
respect already. They fill out forms voluntarily, keep track of 
production, inputs into the animals, and a number of things that 
assure quality. 
 
And it may be at some point in time where the industries in 
conjunction with the packing plants may want to make it 
mandatory. That will of course be driven I think by consumer 
demand. 
 
And we export a lot of our products from this province. We 
export a lot to Asia and they are very, very quality conscious 
and safe-food conscious. This is a very good move forward I 
think on the part of all of Canada. And I think in the future 
you’ll see it tightened up a little more too, driven by consumer 
demand and competition from other countries who are also 
exporting. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder why 
these changes have happened now. Have agricultural bodies out 
there been lobbying for these changes? Is that where these 
changes came from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, we’re providing support through 
legislation like this to the industries. Before council developed 
the HACCP program to provide quality in the pork industry, 
and that is a new program being developed now. But this is 
being driven by demand. 
 
We know that quality control in Europe for example, they’re 
probably a little bit ahead of us. In the U.S. (United States) 
we’re very close I think to some of them, maybe behind some 
of them, some of the states. So as a country we know that we 
have to be in the game by maintaining quality. So we’re 
working with the industries. The industries will be leading the 
efforts. And so I guess the answer is, it is not a government 
driven program, support program. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, in 
regards to this on-farm quality assurance program, what’s 
basically driving it? Is it being driven by the fact that we don’t 
produce crops or we’ve got no crops, or even areas of livestock 
where we’re not just producing, but we’re also in the area of 
starting to look at processing the product and sending it out as a 
product, not a raw product. But right now we’re looking at 

trying to move a product outside of the province adding value 
added to the product and sending it out as a product that is now 
ready for consumer consumption. Is that one of the major 
reasons and the push behind this particular Act? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes. I guess the short answer is yes. 
We’re planning and trying, as every province in Canada and the 
country as a whole is, to add value to our products. That means 
instead of shipping out the half of pork, side of pork, you ship 
out all the different cuts, chops to tenderloin. 
 
And in order that we might fit in from the farm level with all 
the other programs that are being put in place like the ISO 9000 
(International Standards Organization) for example, 9002 and 
so on, which are step by step quality assurance programs, we 
thought we should also have one right down at the farm level 
where you can record what the animals have been fed. 
 
The consumers are driving this because of food safety and 
quality. And with this there can be a continuum right from the 
farm gate, to the packing plant, to the processor, to the 
consumer. And if you can identify what the animals have been 
fed and where they’ve been fed and where they’ve been 
processed and the quality of the processing, it gives the 
customer off-shore or outside this province and inside, but in 
this case mostly export, the assurance that there is a quality to 
the product that can be traced. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, I guess, Mr. Minister, another question 
that comes as we look at this piece of legislation — I guess the 
question that arises — how many producers will be directly 
affected? Are we talking . . . as you start talking, you talked 
about the fact that in the area of even livestock production 
going back right to the individual producer — say the cow-calf 
operator — whether or not they use an implant in their 
livestock? Are you talking of record keeping or what have you? 
 
I guess the question and the concern that arises out of this is it 
going to mean down the road that every agricultural producer in 
this province is going to be put into . . . or have to comply with 
regulations that they have no control of . . . basically are 
demanding that they have basically top-notch record keeping, 
whether it’s in livestock production or grain production; or are 
we dealing specifically with areas where there’s direct 
producer-to-consumer consumption product? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I want to make sure that I can give 
you a complete answer here. 
 
The reality here is that it’s the packers, the retailers, and 
consumers who are driving it. So what we are doing as 
government through legislation like this is trying to keep up to 
that demand. 
 
Will there be some point in time where every product will be 
under these programs? I would assume yes. Not that we’re 
going to make them do it; it’s going to be that you probably 
won’t be able to sell your animal unless you are enrolled in the 
program because the packer’ll say I don’t want it unless you can 
show me what you’ve put in, show me what injections you 
have, what feed additives there have been, and so forth. 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

So I think the industry people that we’ve talked to are all 
supportive of this. We’ve had our pork central people go out to 
a number of hog producers with the quality control manuals and 
show them and help them how to fill it out. And maybe they 
don’t have a problem with it, it’s minimal effort for quite a 
great return because if you, especially the way the industries are 
going today, but it just doesn’t matter. 
 
If you rely on a hundred-sow operation to add income to your 
farming operation or if you have a free-standing 1,200 sow 
operation, it’s all important money to you and you don’t want to 
someday have the packer say to you I’m sorry we don’t want 
your product because you’re not complying with the demands 
of my consumer. 
 
So it’s an industry-driven program. We as government, like 
other governments across Canada are doing, are trying to react 
to that by putting legislation forward; that’s what this is about. 
At the end of the day you’re going to see more and more 
emphasis put on quality assurance simply because you have to 
do that to be and maintain your competitiveness in the world 
markets. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I guess the question 
being raised here and what I’m suggesting to you is that I don’t 
have a problem with quality assurance. I think if we’re 
marketing a product we want to continue to market a quality 
product and I don’t think anyone has a problem with that. 
 
The problem that arises though is when all of a sudden we find, 
and the fact that so much is going to be put into regulations, as 
the regulations change and producer groups or individual 
producers find themselves with some bureaucrat arriving on the 
doorstep saying that we’re going to close this place down 
because you’re not meeting these assurances. Those are some of 
the concerns that I have that may arise in the future and I’m not 
saying they’re there today. 
 
But I think it’s certainly imperative that we be mindful of how 
things have transpired over the years. I don’t think there’s a 
producer out there who does not want to produce and put a 
quality product on the table or make it available for the 
consumer. They’re going to do everything to make sure that the 
bottom line is positive . . . that they can certainly can make it. 
 
I guess the concern I have and that people have had in the past 
is how regulations can —all of a sudden you find yourself 
facing regulations that you really had no knowledge of — 
facing more red tape. And making sure that while we’re 
attempting to achieve and address a quality of a product that we 
want to present and make available, at the same time not 
becoming so top-heavy and so heavily regulated, that we 
discourage production of agriculture products. 
 
And I guess that’s the concern I raise in making sure that we’re 
aware of that and mindful of that. So as you’ve indicated, while 
you’re talking to all the groups involved, the agriculture groups, 
that we certainly do have full discussion to make sure that we 
don’t start stepping on and interfering with people’s ability to 
produce this quality product we’re talking of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well this is going to go at the speed the 
industry drives it. Regulations will be set up at the request of 

the industry. We may not have to have regulations for the things 
that may be a requirement of licensing. I would try to make it as 
simple as possible. 
 
It won’t be a situation where somebody from government 
marches in and shuts down a production operation because it’s 
going to be the consumer who asks the marketer if you’re 
involved in a HACCP-type program and to show them . . . and 
then the marketer will be probably at the same time the packer 
and processor, so they will then require animals under 
HACCP-type programs right from the farm. 
 
So it’s . . . in this case we, as government, are keeping up to the 
industry. It’s going to be driven by them. The speed of which 
this is implemented will dictate them because if they want to 
stay in business they’re going to respond to what the 
market-place demands are, what the consumer demands are. 
 
So we’re trying to, as many other governments across Canada 
are, to accommodate this. I really appreciate your concerns 
because we don’t want to have a heavy hand — the government 
sort of coming down on producers. This type of legislation and 
the development of the regulations are done in conjunction with 
the industry requesting it saying — let’s say the livestock 
industry — we want to come in and develop a quality-assurance 
program and this Act allows that. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And again 
good afternoon to the minister and to his new officials with 
him. 
 
This particular Bill has me concerned. I’ve got a number of 
concerns — I guess two — with what I’ve heard you make 
comment on here this afternoon. Maybe I’ll start out with some 
of those. But it seems to me when you suggest it’s industry 
driven, that it is just that. It doesn’t necessarily have the best 
interests of the producers of any given commodity necessarily 
in mind. It has the best interests of the consumer, certainly, in 
mind. And we all know what those are. They want the very best 
of quality for the very lowest price — that’s it. 
 
The marketers of any given commodity, it has their best 
interests in mind certainly, because they want to be assured that, 
again, that they the very best possible quality of a product 
available to them readily at the least cost price. 
 
It seems to me it might end up throwing a whole additional 
level of record keeping upon individuals that isn’t necessarily 
the most cost-effective thing to be placing upon them. I see at 
the outset here it mentions in clause 2 that entering into 
contracts — this is with respect to the delivery agent and 
activities pursuant to the on-farm assurance program — that it’s 
only with respect to participants in Saskatchewan who wish to 
be enrolled in such a program. So I take it from that it’s not 
mandatory. 
 
But then I go on towards the end under regulations and where it 
says the Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations 
(a) defining, enlarging, or restricting the meaning of any word 
used in this Act but not defined in the Act. I just worry that it’s 
opening a door towards requiring every producer in the 
province to suddenly submit to an assurance program that may 
place an undue amount of burden upon them. 



1284 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

Another aspect I notice in the Bill, with respect to immunity, it 
looks like the government has made all efforts to make 
themselves immune from any actions relative to this Bill. But I 
wonder in terms of being industry driven, and you talk about 
you know, about providing a continuum from the farm gate the 
end user, aren’t you also creating that conduit for liability for 
producers? 
 
Are you opening up a can of worms there where suddenly 
there’s a cargo of some particular grain that’s delivered to a 
consumer somewhere in the world and it can be tracked back 
through this system to particular producers, and suddenly 
they’re made liable for some sort of an action taken by a 
consumer somewhere in the world. 
 
Do you think I’m over-exaggerating these concerns? I see them 
as very real concerns. I saw situations where for example 
mustard seed manufacturers in the States at one point — now 
this goes back a little ways, maybe 15 years ago now, but . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — 15 or 50? 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — I said 15 not 50. 
 
And we all know how in the States everybody’s pretty 
litigation-happy. Well 15 years ago they were then as well, and 
there was a mustard seed manufacturer who had an employee 
who met an unfortunate end — industrial accident on site. Well 
it ended up that the exporter, a Canadian exporter at the time, 
was actually attached in a court action in the States related to 
the death of this individual at a food industrial plant. It 
happened 15 years ago. Is it something that potentially could 
happen with this particular piece of legislation? 
 
Also I’m curious with respect to grains. We’ve had a Canadian 
Grain Commission federally that I think has certainly done their 
part in trying to maintain quality assurance with respect to 
grains as defined under the Canada Grain Act. Is there . . . I 
guess I’m raising a lot of concerns here. Maybe I’ll let you 
address a few of these. But I’ll go on with respect to the Grain 
Commission and the Canada Grain Act. 
 
(1630) 
 
Are there specific examples where there has been problems 
related to particular agricultural commodities, whether they’re 
more of a raw commodity or more of a processed commodity, 
that have arrived somewhere in the world that haven’t been of 
the particular quality that a consumer had contracted that has 
led to this particular sort of legislation being necessary? 
 
And grains are one prime example of where I could see this sort 
of thing perhaps occurring, where cargoes of grains are traded a 
number of times before they might arrive to an end user. Is this 
what’s led to this particular piece of legislation? 
 
Because again it seems to me it’s putting an unfair burden on 
producers that the actions of a trader, of a marketer, as you use 
the term, might end up being put to bear financially on a 
producer that really . . . It’s unfair. It shouldn’t be put upon 
them. 
 
Maybe I’ll just take my place and let you make some 

comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, I think you’re maybe building in a 
little bit more worry than necessary into this, because it’s 
producer groups that come forward and ask for it. So they’re 
driving it. They’re asking for it. 
 
It’s all to do with marketing and what is being asked for by 
consumers. You can’t separate the consumer demand from any 
portion of the process to deliver that product to the consumer. 
 
So in the case of hogs for example, the producer council came 
forward, asked us to do it. It’s very, very minimal bookkeeping. 
And of course there’s a cost, a time cost to bookkeeping, but 
it’s a cost of doing business that the producers agree with and 
they want to do. 
 
The whole HACCP theory, the hazard analysis critical control 
points, means that you should be able to identify the liability 
areas. Now is it a greater liability to have a process where you 
can register your inputs and have the paper there showing the 
flow of the product, what you fed the product and where it was 
processed — is that a greater liability than not doing it where 
you have no records? Most producers keep records now. I mean 
if you’re in a livestock operation of any kind, and you’re 
administering some kind of medicinal product to that livestock, 
you keep a record of it for your own protection, of when it was 
administered, how long the separation date was from shipping, 
and to the kill. 
 
So this is not anything other than an industry group, whether it 
be grain or livestock, coming together. We have a control 
mechanism now through the Canadian Grain Commission that’s 
been built in for many, many years. But if we had a case where, 
you know, the mustard people, as your example, wanted to 
come forward and develop a control system, then we would 
through regulation help them build that. 
 
So I think you are putting a little more fear out than necessary. 
We don’t see it as a government push. It’s not a government 
push. We are simply accommodating the needs of the 
producers, the wishes of the producers. If there’s somebody out 
there that you know of who thinks this is not a good idea that’s 
talked to you, I’d like to have that name or the group because to 
this point we’ve had very favourable response from all groups. 
 
And it’s again, I repeat, it’s groups bringing their desire to the 
government to create regulations to form a quality control 
mechanism for their product, to ensure that consumer demand is 
met and that they stay in the market-place with their product. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. 
Minister. I know I rambled on a fair bit there so perhaps in 
fairness to you I’ll just put the question to you again, and you 
can put in this way. Like is the current system broke? What are 
we fixing here? Are there specific examples of where the 
system has failed, where consumers are coming forward and 
saying, look, you’ve got to do something to assure that quality 
is maintained from the farm, from the producer level, right 
through to when I get it at my facility wherever that may be 
around this world. And I’m not trying to suggest here that 
producers of any particular commodity should not be sensitive 
towards what the world consumer wants. In fact I think more 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1285 

than ever they need to be. 
 
I recall, it’s almost 30 years ago . . . no . . . yes, it’s close; it’s at 
least 25 years ago now, when a rather innovative group up in 
the Eston area started out a specialty crops company at that time 
— the Allstate Grain Co. — and they had a rather catchy 
slogan, Grow What You Can Sell. And I think it probably is 
even more applicable than ever in this post-WGTA era. 
 
I’m not saying producers of any commodity should be removed 
from knowing what the consumer wants, but I don’t think they 
should be ultimately bearing the responsibility as far down on 
the chain as they may be. Now they’re not always that far 
down. There’s producer exporters, producer marketers as well, 
which bears you know additional responsibility on the part of 
those particular situations. 
 
But somebody who’s just a producer of a raw commodity, why 
should they ultimately bear some liability when there was 
perhaps, who knows how many marketers that might have been 
involved — resellers, traders — from when that product left his 
farm until it ended up in a consumer’s facility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I’ll try to keep this as concise as I 
can but there are a number of cases — you asked for specific 
cases — of food-borne illnesses and other things. There was a 
case in Toronto — I believe it was eastern Canada, I think it 
was Toronto — not too long ago where there was a needle 
found in a ham. There’s hamburger disease; there’s, you know, 
any number of food-borne illnesses that have a liability attached 
to them. 
 
What this does — this is why producers are asking for this — is 
it protects them as an industry group. It protects them because 
they have a record of what they’ve done to produce this 
product. If you don’t have the record, their liability’s much 
greater. Because they may be perfectly innocent, but if they 
don’t have the record they could be named in the litigation and 
without a defence, just saying, well no, I didn’t do that. If they 
have a quality assurance program, where they register the 
amount of feed that goes in and whatever processes they use to 
grow that animal, to produce that animal, then they are 
protected. 
 
So it’s nothing other than the consumer’s understanding that 
there is a market-place out in the world and every country now 
that demands safe food. This will accommodate that. But there 
are food-borne illnesses that can cause many bankruptcies if 
people don’t protect themselves. This should go a long way. It 
should protect them from that. 
 
So that’s why consumers want this. It keeps them in the 
market-place and reduces their risk, reduces their liability. 
Because if they don’t have it . . . and there are, like I say, these 
incidents as you mentioned, and the good old U.S.A. (United 
States of America), where it’s litigation heaven; then we want 
to prevent that from happening here. The producers want to 
prevent that. That’s why they’re asking for this type of 
program. 
 
That’s why the whole country is going towards this, because it’s 
a cost of doing business for the time it takes you to maintain 
your records, but I’ll tell you, it goes a long way to keep 

yourself protected in any kind of litigation that might come 
forward. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I agree, 
Mr. Minister, that if legislation such as this comes to pass, that 
every producer in the province is going to have to be keeping a 
lot more detailed records. But my point I’m trying to make here 
is that why should that significant of an offloading of a 
commercial liability be passed on to the shoulders of producers. 
This is what I’m worried about. 
 
Now another thing is too, you mentioned at the outset that this 
was supported by industry, by marketers, by consumers. Do you 
have some documents to back that up here with you this 
afternoon? 
 
And then you mentioned producer groups that are supporting 
the advancement of this particular piece of legislation. Do you 
have a list of those producer groups here this afternoon as well? 
Because I’d certainly not just be interested but I’d require such. 
I’d like to know who these organizations are. 
 
I recognize that a lot of organizations, when approached on 
issues affecting the quality of agricultural products that are 
exported from this country, they develop, and rightly so, a very 
. . . you might call it a patriotic approach to it, where we have a 
very good reputation in the world for quality of 
Canadian-produced goods. And I think everybody recognizes 
all the way down the food chain that we want to maintain that. 
 
So I think just by virtue of that — that good nature, that 
patriotism, however you wish to describe it — that producer 
groups may suggest, yes we do buy into this system, without 
perhaps considering some of these implications. 
 
You might suggest I’m trying to read too much into it. But I 
would maintain that there are some concerns here that 
individual producers, certainly when they were faced with it in 
terms of like a commercial liability upon themselves, that they 
would be starting to reconsider perhaps aspects of this 
legislation. 
 
Maybe some of my concerns too might be addressed in terms of 
what you’d call “agricultural product” under the Act. It seems 
to be rather broadly based. I know a lot of the examples you’re 
citing here are perhaps some further processed products. You 
mention a lot of, like, problems related to meat products and 
such. Could there be exemptions made — something a little bit 
more clearly defined with respect to what an agricultural 
product is, where if it’s more of a raw product which isn’t 
perhaps harbouring some sort of a food-borne illness that you’re 
suggesting that there might be in further processed products, 
meat products, where some of these more raw products, 
grain-type products perhaps, might be exempted from this sort 
of legislation. 
 
The other thing that I’m curious about too. You mentioned this 
being sort of a national initiative — how many other provinces 
are introducing a piece of legislation of this nature at this point 
in time? Are we the first? Are we one of a few? Could we 
slow-step this process, I guess is the question I’d put to you? 
 
Perhaps some further consultation with individual producers of 



1286 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

producer organizations might be more appropriate. I’ll just wait 
for your response to these concerns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I don’t mind your questions. I 
don’t know what more I can say to reassure you that this is not 
an onerous piece of legislation, but it’s a very positive piece of 
legislation. 
 
We are the first province to hopefully pass this in the 
legislature. Manitoba has an Act in place. They’ll be coming 
along very shortly. And by all indications, all the other 
provinces will be coming in behind simply because this Act is 
accommodating national demand. 
 
Right now the pork industry nationally has a program in place. 
They’ve established beef, dairy, bison, pulse crops, and honey 
industries on a national basis, are developing a quality 
assurance program, and what this Act does, when those 
industries get their quality assurance up and running is this 
accommodates them in our province. 
 
And if there’s regulations needed they will come to us and say, 
under your Act, which is an enabling Act, we need regulations 
for whatever, fill in the blank. We can accommodate them. 
 
So it’s been driven by the industries — 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, I’ve 
named here who are working right now. The pork industry 
already has a system in place. 
 
(1645) 
 
So while I understand the role of opposition in that you should 
express concerns on behalf of the public, and I appreciate you 
doing that, I don’t know what more I can say to you to reassure 
you. Because you’re coming at it from the angle that this is 
going to be an onerous thing for the producer to do, and he 
shouldn’t have to do that because it’s driven by somebody else 
and not his responsibility. 
 
If you go out and talk to any of the producers who are in the 
business of exporting — and we’re the highest, largest 
exporters per capita in Canada — they will tell you that this is 
not onerous. In fact it protects them. Like right now if you’re in 
the dairy business and you have antibiotic in your milk, you 
don’t sell your milk. This is a program that is going to help the 
industries and help us as an exporting province. 
 
So I may not be able to say much more to alleviate your 
concerns but I can reassure you that this is being industry 
driven. The producers are building it themselves to protect 
themselves from litigation, to ensure themselves that they have 
a quality product that they can trace into the market-place. 
 
I’ll give you an example what’s happening, and this is a 
phenomenon that’s going to be worldwide. There are processes 
in place now where you can put a chip in an animal’s ear to 
trace the animal’s movement. Pretty soon you’re going to be 
able to — in fact I think the technology’s available now — 
where you can actually fingerprint the meat. So you’ll know 
exactly. And I believe in Europe right now they’re at the place 
where when you buy the product it’ll say on it where it was 
grown, where it was slaughtered, where it was further 
processed, and where it was marketed. 

Those types of things are leading edge right now, but they’ll be 
commonplace in the not too distant future, driven by 
consumers. The best way for the producer to protect himself is 
to have a process in place to assure that he is not somebody that 
can be named in litigation as contaminating product, because he 
has his records done that the processors and packers and all 
those people comply. It’s a continuum, as I said in the 
beginning. 
 
So I don’t see anything but positive out of this, simply because 
it’s accommodating legislation that is enabling producer groups 
to come forward and ask us to, with them, develop regulations 
to protect themselves and keep themselves in the market-place. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, you’re asking what else you could do to alleviate 
some of my fears. 
 
Well I suppose one way you could certainly help to alleviate 
some of the fears is to assure me here this afternoon that this 
on-farm quality assurance program would always remain 
voluntary, as is stated in the Act. Only those producers who 
wish to participate would be required to do so. Would you be 
able to state that unequivocally to us here this afternoon? 
 
Now you talk about what’ll be the best way to protect yourself 
as a producer. Well under this system it sounds a lot like you 
better get yourself a good lawyer and keep him on retainer 
because that could be what, in effect, you’re going to end up 
having to do. It’s a case of right now under the present system, 
the market demands certain qualities at certain prices — the 
producers attempt to meet that. If they’re not able to quite meet 
those particular qualities, the marketers apply a discounted price 
to purchase their products and then the marketers take those 
products and sell them on to consumers who’ll accept that 
quality and maybe it will be at somewhat of a discounted price. 
 
And in an ideal system certainly producers will want, as I said 
earlier, they’ll want to grow what they can sell. They’ll want to 
try and maximize profits by keeping the best records they can, 
by growing the best types of varieties of grains, let’s say; 
growing or producing the particular breeds of livestock that 
produce more desirable traits in carcasses that the marketers 
want that the consumers want. That’s fine and good. 
 
But in terms of when the consumer gets a particular shipment of 
a product whether it’s more of a raw food product or a finished 
food product, where I start having concerns is if when that 
consumer gets it and then it isn’t meeting particular contract 
specifications that that in turn some sort of liability may end up 
falling ultimately upon a producer who, for no other reason 
other than out of a goodness wanting to try and meet certain 
quality requirements, ends up being named in sort of a lawsuit. 
 
So again I’d ask you to try and address some of these concerns 
here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well let me try this again. Right now 
they’re liable with no defence for the most part unless they have 
records of their own that they can produce. 
 
Under this system, they are still liable but with a good defence 
as an individual or a group of people who can produce a quality 



May 21, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

assurance program with records, with a process that is 
acceptable to the general public. And the voluntary nature of 
this program would only change if the producers came and said, 
we want it to be mandatory. 
 
And it wouldn’t just be on a provincial basis, it would probably 
be on a national basis because when you’re selling to a country, 
they don’t know whether the pork really comes from 
Saskatchewan or Alberta or Manitoba or Ontario. I mean you 
can market . . . Alberta tries to market Alberta beef but there’s 
. . . you know, without the records there’s no guarantee that it is 
Alberta beef. In fact most of the Alberta beef that’s sold in the 
world market, about 60 per cent of it comes from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So this type of program could be mandatory but it would be the 
producer saying that we want to protect our sales and our 
industry. It would only become mandatory if the majority of the 
people want it to be mandatory. And they would only want it to 
be mandatory if it gave them greater assurance in the 
market-place. And as far as the lawyers are concerned — your 
point — it’s entirely the opposite. Because under this type of 
program you have complete records that is recognized if it’s a 
HACCP type program, not just in Canada but worldwide, and it 
should reduce litigation. 
 
So I think for some reason we’re coming . . . we see this in 
different light and totally opposite lights, but I reassure you 
again that it’s going to be the producers who are driving it. It’s 
going to give them more protection, not less. And it’s going to 
be something that’s only going to increase in the future, not just 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
But we are the largest exporter per capita in Canada — grains, 
meat, other products. The hazard analysis critical control point 
mechanism is world-wide accepted. A number of quality 
control programs are in effect. And we’re accommodating that 
because we know we have to be leaders in this field as 
Canadians — not just Saskatchewan, as Canadians. This 
legislation accommodates the wishes of someone who wants to 
put forward their product under a quality control mechanism. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Chairman, I’d agree with the minister 
that certainly producers at this point in time bear responsibility 
in terms of what they’re producing and what they’re selling on 
to a marketer, but not necessarily to some end user, some 
consumer somewhere around the world. Right at this point in 
time, certainly they might enter into a contract with a particular, 
let’s say in the instance of some grain, a particular grain 
company here in North America to provide X number of tonnes 
of a certain quality. If they don’t do that, certainly they expect 
or should expect some recourse against them by the marketer, 
by the grain company. 
 
But that grain company in turn, when they take and sell that on 
to somebody somewhere in the world and that particular 
consumer claims back on the grain company, when the 
producer had met the criteria at the farm gate as far as what they 
sold to that marketer, why should they suddenly bear any of the 
commercial risk that at the present time is assumed by the 
marketing organization. That’s my point here. 
 
I see some additional risks, some significant additional risks 

that might be put upon producers through this. And I just think 
that it’s something that if we’re the first province to be 
considering to enact such legislation, that perhaps there should 
be some more consideration given to the fact that others aren’t 
wanting to put this through so quickly. 
 
And I might add that some of these other provinces that are 
perhaps not putting this particular piece of legislation through 
as quickly are ones that might even have a lot more added value 
food products that they might be producing than we are here, 
where we recognize that we’re growing in terms of the further 
processing of food in this province but we’re still recognized as 
a producer, by and large, of raw commodities. 
 
So why should we be the ones to be the first one to enact such a 
piece of legislation when we could perhaps learn from some of 
the experiences of some other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I guess we’re all judged by our 
actions, and I’d sooner be criticized for doing something than 
doing nothing. In this particular case, it’s just accommodating 
the desires of the groups that are interested in it. 
 
Now I’ve given you a list of six industry groups who are 
already developing these programs on a national basis. And I 
understand your concerns. I don’t agree with your concerns, but 
I understand them. 
 
So maybe you could provide me, when you stand up again, with 
a list, your list of producer groups who oppose this legislation. 
And if you can do that, then I guess maybe we could go and 
consult some more with the industry. 
 
But stand up and tell me . . . I’ve given you six groups — pork, 
who already have one; beef, dairy, bison, pulse crops, and 
honey — who are producing control systems nationally and 
when they get that organized they can come to us and we can 
make our regulations to accommodate them. So if you can tell 
me one group that you have evidence of who is opposed to this, 
please do so now and I promise you I will consider this again. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Chair, I would maintain to the minister 
that he can’t pass the buck quite that easily. How many of these 
producer organizations have put it to their individual producers 
that by the way, contravening this particular piece of legislation 
could lead to your imprisonment or fines up to $20,000. How 
many of those producer organizations actually polled their 
producers to ask them their opinions of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well it’s not the producers who are 
fined; it’s the delivery agent. And I knew the answer to my 
question. You don’t have any evidence. So I mean you can keep 
me here till it’s very cold in somewhere, but it’s not going to 
change because you don’t have any evidence of people who are 
opposed to it. You know you don’t, and for some reason you’re 
doing this little filibuster. I don’t mind. I mean I’m around here 
today and tomorrow and next week so it’s up to you. 
 
But I think that in order to preserve your credibility you may 
want to go out and consult with the producer groups. But before 
you come back, bring this back because to the best of our 
knowledge in our research and consultations they’re agreeing 
with it. The livestock people have one of their own that can 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1998 

easily be converted into this if they come forward. 
 
But it’s up to them to come forward. We’re not pushing 
anything on them. So I understand what you’re saying. I don’t 
think . . . I think that you’re making a mountain out of a 
molehill, but even let’s say next time this comes up, whenever it 
comes up again in this legislature, that you bring forward the 
names of producer groups who are opposed to us going forward 
with this legislation. I would be willing to listen to those people. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, I move that the committee 
rise and report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7  The Pastures Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 7, The 
Pastures Act, be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The committee reported progress on Bill No. 35. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:04 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1259 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1260 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1260 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Estimates  
  Whitmore.................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1261 
  Tchorzewski ............................................................................................................................................................................1261 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1261 
  Lorje.........................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 No-fault Insurance and Workers' Compensation Board Protest Rally 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1261 
 Saskatchewan Fiscal Management 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1262 
 Hiring of 200 Nurses 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1262 
 World Catholic Education Day 
  Tchorzewski ............................................................................................................................................................................1262 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1262 
 Agricultural Research Projects in Saskatchewan 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1263 
 Northern Housing Strategy 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1263 
 Long-serving Housing Authority Volunteers 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1263 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Crown Corporations Accountability 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1263 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1264 
 Outfitting Industry Representation 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1264 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1264 
 First Nations Fund 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1265 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1265 
 Crown Corporation Financial Disclosure 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1265 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1265 
 Regina Hospital Bed Numbers 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1266 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1266 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1267 



 

 Northern Economic Development 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1267 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1267 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Youth Employment Program 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1268 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1268 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1268 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 216  The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1269 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1269 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 56 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1269 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1269 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 46 — The Credit Union Act, 1998 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1270 
 Bill No. 50 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1270 
 Bill No. 51 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1270 
 Bill No. 52 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1998 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1271 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 7  The Pastures Act 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1271 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1271 
  Goohsen .........................................................................................................................................................................1272, 1278 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1276 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1280 
 Bill No. 35 — The On-farm Quality Assurance Programs Act 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1281 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1281 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1282 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1283 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 7  The Pastures Act 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
 
 


