





























































Hansard: May 12, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1081 
 May 12, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of many people 
in the southern part of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I’m pleased to present on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition to the Assembly regarding the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre, and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good folk from 
the community of Radville. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Carievale and 
Gainsborough. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions signed by people across Saskatchewan, and I read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of Saskatchewan people concerned about the impending 
closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Radville and Gladmar. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

Everyone that has signed this petition is from Radville. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to present a 
petition on behalf of Saskatchewan people dealing with the 
issue of the closure of the Plains hospital and a moratorium that 
they wish to see placed on that closure. 
 
The people signing this petition come from the southern part of 
Saskatchewan — Radville in particular — and I’m pleased to 
present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has signatures on it from the 
communities of Weyburn, Moose Jaw, and John Nilson’s third 
cousin . . . oh, I mean Moose Jaw. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition, and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed this petition are 
from Ituna and Hubbard and all throughout the land. And I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of the province alarmed by the 
catastrophic deterioration of health care services under the 
NDP(New Democratic Party) and about the impending closure 
of yet more hospitals by the NDP. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 
from citizens of the city of Melville. The petition calls upon the 
Legislative Assembly to take action to reform the system so that 
the interests of children such as Steven and Kimberly Walchuk 
are put first. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may take the required action to allow the 
children named to remain in the custody of the maternal 
grandparents and that appropriate amendments be made to 
the justice system. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are close to 300 signatures obtained in a very 
short period of time from the citizens of Melville. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair will want to remind the Leader of 
the Third Party of course, that in presenting the petition he’s 
only provided the opportunity to present the prayer itself. And I 
know that if presenting future petitions he’ll want to guide 
himself accordingly. Continued presentation of petitions. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again on behalf of citizens who are seeking justice for men and 
women who have lost their spouses in work-related accidents. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows, widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatories today, Mr. Speaker, are all from Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present a continuing stream of petitions from the people across 
Saskatchewan whose prayer for relief basically is continuing to 
ask for the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 
 
I’m happy to present on behalf of the people from Swift Current 
and the village of Cabri today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to twin the Trans-Canada Highway; to 
save the Plains Health Centre; to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre; and to have Workers’ 
Compensation Board reinstate pensions for disenfranchised 
widows and widowers. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members an especially 
interested and keen group of people who are seated in the west 
gallery. It’s a group of 55 introduction to political science 
students from the University of Regina. I think they will be 
especially interested to see what is happening here in this 
institution. They’re accompanied by their instructor, Patricia 
Paton. I would ask all members to welcome these people in the 
usual cordial and warm way. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to you, to 
members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce someone 
behind the bar, a former MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) in this Chamber, Mr. Elwood Cowley. 
 
Mr. Cowley served as MLA for the constituency of Biggar from 
1971 to 1982, served in many senior capacities as cabinet 
minister in the Allan . . . Premier Allan Blakeney government. 
Mr. Cowley and I also have the opportunity of saying that we 
also represented the same constituency of Biggar for many 
years. 
 
And I could also say that Elwood and I are also related also, so 
there are many commonalities that we share. And I again would 
like to welcome Elwood here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in your gallery we have 15 
students from Shoal Lake School from Pakwaw Lake, 
Saskatchewan, and these are in grade 6. They’re accompanied 
by their teacher, Ms. Ivy McKee. There’s chaperons Darlene 
and Marcel Head, and Christopher Head and Eldon Whitecap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words in Cree as well. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
my colleague from Cumberland and welcome our guests from 
Shoal Lake. I’m sure you’ll find the proceedings of the 
Assembly informative, and certainly challenging and exciting 
as well. 
 
And as an aboriginal member of the Assembly, I’m encouraged 
to see that you are bringing many native kids and children to the 
Assembly and it’s good to see that you are here. 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with my colleagues in introducing our visitors from Shoal Lake. 
As most of you will know, Shoal Lake is in the constituency of 
Carrot River Valley. It’s the most beautiful part of our province. 
It is a beautiful community and their graduation, Mr. Speaker, is 
on June 4 and so I know that they will enjoy that time and 
hopefully I will be able to visit them then. So enjoy your visit to 
Regina, have a safe trip home. Thanks for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — If other members have completed 
introductions, the Chair would like to introduce some visiting 
guests from my own constituency. In the Speaker’s gallery are 
seated 21 grade 7 students from Ross School in Moose Jaw. 
They are accompanied today by their teachers, Ramona Stillar 
and Yasmina Shugaifi; as well as chaperons Steve and Sandy 
Myers, David Moore, and Carla Usher; and also Bobbie Reeves 
and Art Erickson. 
 
Following their leaving the Speaker’s gallery at 2 o’clock for a 
tour of the building, I look forward to meeting with them briefly 
for photos and refreshments and a visit, with the assistance of 
the hon. member for Shellbrook-Spiritwood, to enable to me to 
be free from the House to do that. And . . . order, order. 
 
The hon. members remind the Speaker to bring the hat for the 
photo. So I’ll be sure to do that. And I would ask all hon. 
members to join with me in extending a warm welcome to these 
students from Ross School in Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Free Vote to Save the Plains Health Centre 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, one look at the order paper makes it clear that this 
afternoon all members of the Legislative Assembly will have 
the opportunity to debate the future of the Plains hospital. But it 
is less clear whether the Premier will allow a vote on the motion 
to save the Plains, and if so whether NDP members will be 
allowed to vote with their constituents rather than with the 
Premier and his Health minister. 
 
That is what the people in the real world call a free vote, Mr. 
Speaker. I mention this as a point of clarification because I am 
not sure the NDP know what a free vote really is. In response to 
our demands to allow a free vote the Premier and his House 
Leader tell us all votes in the NDP caucus are free. Well that’s 
not what former NDP MLA, Dr. Lewis Draper, has to say about 
the process and procedures in the NDP caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Draper comments that the only time NDP 
MLAs were asked for their input on health issues, including the 
closure of 52 rural hospitals, was to suggest the propaganda that 

would sell to the public the decisions that had already been 
made. I’m glad to see democracy is alive and well in the NDP 
caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are calling on the 
Premier to allow a free vote on the future of the Plains. Will 
that vote take place today? And will the Premier remove the 
shackles from the MLAs and allow a free vote to take place 
today? Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Urges Amendment to the 
Canada Transportation Act 

 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later on today I will 
be introducing a motion urging the federal government to 
amend the Canada Transportation Act in order to make it more 
producer friendly. I call on all opposition MLAs to support this 
very significant motion. 
 
Saskatchewan producers have been hit hard with rail-line 
abandonment and the rising costs of shipping their products. 
 
An unanimous vote by all members of the Assembly will send a 
strong message to the federal Liberals in Ottawa that changes to 
the CTA (Canada Transportation Act) must be made. 
 
This motion supports the NDP government’s current policy 
direction of making it easier for producers to transport their 
products. Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food and Highways 
and Transportation have been working with Saskatchewan 
producers and other western provinces pressuring the federal 
government into making changes to the CTA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage all Saskatchewan MLAs to support 
this motion today and add their voices to this important issue. 
Perhaps today is the day, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan 
Party and Liberal Party will stand up in a free vote and join with 
us to support the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Funding 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we told 
this House that the Southwest Health District is preparing to dig 
its heels in to prevent any further cuts to its local health care 
system. The board says health care services have been cut too 
far already and will not cross that line. 
 
Last night the people of Carrot River expressed the same 
feelings in spades. Mr. Speaker, about 300 people attended a 
public meeting to discuss the possible closure of their local 
hospital. 
 
Residents of the community sent a clear message to this 
government which was sent very loud and clear. They will not 
sit by and allow the NDP to close their hospital. They will not 
allow their local services to be slashed any further. They will 
not allow this government to continue its “we know best” 
attitude when it translates into poor health care services at the 
local level. 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

Health board members say they were shocked at the response. 
We hope some of that shock rubs off on this government — that 
they sit down with this and other boards and find a solution to 
the funding crisis which continues to gut our health care system. 
Thank you. 
 

Saskatchewan’s Jobless Rate Falls 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s 
jobless rate continues to fall. On May 8 the Leader-Post 
reported, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan’s job market kept racing along again in 
April, adding 5,400 new jobs compared to the same month 
last year. The province’s job figures have climbed year 
over year for the past 15 months. 

 
The article went on to say that Saskatchewan’s unemployment 
rate was 6.6 per cent for the month of April, while the national 
average was 8.6. 
 
In addition, the unemployment rates for 20 major Canadian 
cities were reported. Regina had the lowest of all Canadian 
cities at 4.3 per cent, as compared to 4.7 per cent in Calgary, 6.3 
per cent in Edmonton, and 5.8 per cent in Winnipeg. 
 
That’s good economic news for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 
Citizen of the Year 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to stand and congratulate the former . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the Chair is having 
difficulty being able to hear the member provide his members’ 
statement. And I — order — and I would ask for the 
cooperation of all members of the House to allow members’ 
statements to be presented in an uninterrupted manner, as is the 
usual case. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to stand and congratulate a former constituent of 
mine on being awarded the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) Citizen of the Year. Mr. Donald Deranger was 
a former resident of the far North — Fond-du-Lac to be exact 
— and was recognized for his work at the FSIN’s spring 
Legislative Assembly in Saskatoon. 
 
Don is the Athabasca training and employment coordinator 
under the Prince Albert Grand Council and is a definite asset to 
the North and the Dene people. Don has been doing an 
excellent job working with the far northern communities in 
areas such as increasing northern employment for the Dene 
bands with the mining sector; was the first Dene journeyman 
millwright; he single-handedly organized the certification of 
100 athletic coaches from the far North as well. He also 
organized training, travel, and accommodation of over 500 
northern athletes for the Indian Summer and Winter Games — 
an incredible task. 

Above all else, he treats people with care, compassion, and 
respect, Mr. Speaker. I share with the entire Assembly, an 
article in the Prince Albert Herald that covered the commitment 
of Don Deranger to his people. I know Don very well and as the 
MLA for Athabasca, I thank him for his service and 
contribution to his people and congratulate him once again. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Palliative Care Week 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we begin the 
observance of Palliative Care Week here in Saskatchewan, I’d 
like to pay particular tribute to one individual, Dr. Zachariah 
Thomas, the former president of the Saskatchewan Palliative 
Care Association, who died suddenly last August. 
 
Dr. Thomas was a driving force and an inspiration for palliative 
care in our province. Palliative care of course refers to 
interdisciplinary services that provide active, compassionate 
care to the terminally ill, whether they are at home or in 
hospitals or other institutions. 
 
The purpose of palliative care is to improve the quality of 
remaining life of people for whom cure or prolongation of life 
is no longer an appropriate objective. It emphasizes quality of 
life, maintenance of human dignity, comfort, and concern for 
the terminally ill as well as their families. 
 
And palliative care is more than medical care. It addresses the 
whole person physically, psychologically, socially, and 
spiritually. And so I know I speak for all members of this 
Assembly when I thank the countless volunteers across the 
province who provide palliative care to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Eastview By-Election 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to welcome to the 
Saskatoon Eastview by-election race, Judy Junor. I want to say 
that I have some affection for the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses and her work with that organization because they 
certainly had a key role to play in my election in North 
Battleford. They were most effective in pointing out in North 
Battleford that NDP claims that health care was not in crisis 
were hogwash, and they contradicted what the NDP were 
saying, and saying that health care was in crisis. And the North 
Battleford people believed the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 
 
I just have one note of caution however, for Ms. Junor. In the 
unlikely event she is elected, she will unfortunately have to 
make do with considerably less than the 100,000 a year the 
Minister of Health says she and other nurses are presently 
earning. However if she is able to get by on about half what the 
Minister of Health says nurses in this province earn, she will 
find it an exciting and rewarding life. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

Kinsmen Club Sponsorships 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 
to recognize the efforts of two Kinsmen clubs in my 
constituency. The Wilkie Kinsmen recently made three 
generous donations to their community. The Wilkie Golf Club 
was presented with a cheque for $5,500 to help with 
renovations for the course clubhouse. The Wilkie Regional Park 
received $10,000 for the completion of a new ball diamond. 
And still another cheque for $2,400, which will be used to 
purchase a large screen television, which went to the seniors at 
the Poplar Court Special Care Home. 
 
Obviously the Wilkie Kinsmen Club have been very busy and 
their fund-raising events have been well supported by their 
community. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the Macklin Kinsmen Club for 
recently sponsoring the first Macklin Kinsmen LRA (Lakeland 
Rodeo Association) indoor rodeo. The club very successfully 
organized this major event, which was well attended and 
appreciated by the community, and which will hopefully 
become an annual event. 
 
I would like to thank both the Macklin and Wilkie Kinsmen 
members for their volunteer efforts and for the many benefits 
they have given back to the citizens of their community. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Carrot River Hospital Closure 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of Carrot River are about to lose their 
hospital and they are extremely angry about it. Last night over 
300 Carrot River residents got together to let the health board 
and the government know that they are not prepared or willing 
to accept the loss of their hospital. 
 
The question is, did you get the message? Did you get the 
message that health care is in crisis thanks to the 
mismanagement of the NDP Party? 
 
Mr. Minister, if NDP health reform is working, if you are 
providing adequate funding for health care, why are you still 
closing hospitals? When is the NDP destruction of the health 
system going to stop and will you start today by ensuring that 
the Carrot River hospital remains open? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to say to the member opposite . . . and he has some 
appreciation and understanding of this because just recently I 
was in his constituency of which he was also a partner at the 
podium, and together we talked about and shared the opening of 
the new Wawota facility. 
 

The decision around the new Wawota facility was made by the 
district health board, which was a conversion, conversion of a 
hospital to a community health centre. And the people who 
stood up at that event spoke highly about the wonderful services 
that they had in Wawota today. 
 
And that decision, Mr. Speaker, was made by, that decision was 
made by the district health board — not unlike the decision 
that’s currently being made in Carrot River where the district 
health board is going to the community, having a discussion 
with the community about what their needs are, and will be 
making some determinations in the near future about what level 
of care or services they require for Carrot River; not unlike, not 
unlike the same decision that his constituents made and their 
district health board made in Wawota, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yes I was 
at that meeting and yes the minister will also realize that the 
people of Wawota got what they asked for. They asked for and 
they received the acute care beds that they wanted and they 
didn’t have them all closed down. 
 
But the people of Carrot River won’t have that to talk about. In 
fact, Mr. Minister, you keep telling us that your health care 
system is working, but it’s falling apart. It’s falling apart, yes, 
thanks to the fact that the federal Liberals cut $7 billion out of 
the health budget without so much as a peep out of their 
provincial puppet party. 
 
Then the NDP claims to have replaced that funding but for 
some reason despite the replaced funding, beds keep closing, 
hospitals keep closing, Saskatchewan people continue to suffer. 
People in Carrot River are not prepared to accept your decision. 
In fact, where is the member from Carrot . . . the member 
responsible, the member from Carrot River? Is he supporting 
his community? 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you doing to address this crisis? Will 
you start today by telling the people of Carrot River that their 
hospital will remain open, or is Carrot River going to be another 
casualty in the NDP attack on health care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to reiterate to the member opposite that when he talks 
about there being a crisis in Saskatchewan in the health care 
system, I have travelled around the province and have had a 
chance to be in many of the health care districts. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that he should visit 
the town of Neilburg, who have a health centre. And that health 
centre today has more specialized services in it today, 
community-based services, than it ever had when it had a 
hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He should visit, he should visit the Shellbrook . . . he should 
visit the community of Shellbrook, who converted their health 
care centre . . . converted their hospital to a health care centre 
and today have more people receiving a broad range of 
community-based services than they ever had. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite, when he talks about 



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

mismanagement of a system, the member should just reflect a 
bit into the 1980s when he sat as a Tory in the Tory government 
and gutted this province to the tune of $15 billion. And today 
we pay $750,000 in interest payments of which you, my friend, 
have been a part of accumulating to Saskatchewan people. You 
talk about mismanagement. You’re the owner of 
mismanagement in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — A further question to the minister. Mr. Minister, 
that response does nothing for the people of Carrot River. You 
haven’t even addressed the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, your proposal is to cut back to two hospital beds 
in Carrot River. Sharon Newstead is a nurse’s aide at Carrot 
River hospital. She said that yesterday there were 14 patients in 
the Carrot River hospital and she wanted to know who was 
going to decide which patients get to stay and which will be 
sent home. That I think, is a very good question. 
 
Where are these other patients going to go, Mr. Minister? And 
who is going to make that decision — you or the NDP member 
from Carrot River Valley? How can you justify cutting back to 
2 acute care beds when just yesterday 14 beds in Carrot River 
were being utilized? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that in this year’s budget allocation, we provided to the 
health district of North-East almost $200,000 of additional 
funding in their 1998-99 allocation. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that the district board will 
examine what the needs are in their community and will 
examine what the needs are for all of the individuals who live in 
that part of the district and will ensure that people, at the end of 
the day, will receive the kinds of quality health care services of 
which they’ve been charged to provide. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that you need to pay more 
attention to what’s happening in other parts of Saskatchewan as 
well. When you need to look at what’s happened, look at what’s 
happening today in the communities of St. Walburg where 
similar kinds of decisions were made and today the community 
is richer for its health care services. And I say to you that that is 
the case across the province and you should visit some of these 
communities to see the kinds of outcomes that exist, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Railway Successor Rights 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
member for Carrot River Valley refuses to stand up for his own 
constituents and help save their hospital, but I see he’s moving 
a motion calling on the federal government to assist in the 
establishment of short rail line operations. 
 
That’s a joke, Mr. Speaker, when you consider it’s the NDP 
government that is standing in the way of short rail line 

operations by refusing to remove successor rights. Yes, the 
federal government — federal Liberal government — must 
make changes to the Canadian transportation Act to make it 
producer friendly, but the NDP should get its own house in 
order before it calls on Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — My question is to the Minister of Agriculture. 
Mr. Minister, will you immediately take action to help 
Saskatchewan farmers by removing your successor rights 
legislation and making it easier for short rail line operations to 
set up in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am glad to 
have the opportunity to answer this question. Successor rights 
are not an issue to the short-line railways that are trying to 
operate in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair had no difficulty 
being able to hear the question being put and I’ll ask for the 
cooperation of the House — order — to allow the answer to be 
heard. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, it’s 
not successor rights that are the obstacle for short-line rail 
development in this province. We’ve got Omni Trax that is 
operating in this province, we have Southern Rails that’s 
operating in this province, and we certainly heard from other 
short-lines that want to be operating in this province. 
 
What the obstacles are in this province is the changes that 
happened to the Canadian transportation Act that do not allow 
for competition, for true competition, which was the work of 
both the Tory and the Liberal governments, in which they do 
not have an opportunity. We want to talk today, as part of those 
solutions . . . is to have true competition, to have joint running 
rights, to have things that are the real obstacle . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now the Chair — order 
— the Chair asks for cooperation of both sides of the House to 
allow the hon. minister to complete her response in a way that is 
able to be heard by all who are here and care to hear the answer. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve been 
out across this province and talking to the producers in this 
province, what is the obstacle to short-line development is the 
Canadian transportation Act that needs changes, which we need 
to have competition in this, we need to have joint running 
rights, we need to have the pieces changed that will allow true 
short-line development in this province, in which the federal 
government — both Conservative and Liberals — have been 
obstacles to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP is really 
showing its true colours today. If there’s ever a choice between 
helping farmers or helping their union leader friends, the NDP 
will side with their union leader friends every single time. 
Removing successor rights would be better for everyone. It’d be 
better for the short rail line companies; it’d be better for railway 
workers; and it would be better for farmers in this province. 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

The only people who are opposed to the removal of successor 
rights are the NDP and the NDP’s union leader friends. And 
guess who wins out. Your lack of action on this is inexcusable, 
Madam Minister, and it’s the farmers who’ll pay the price. 
 
Immediately after question period I’ll be introducing a private 
members’ Bill to remove successor rights for short rail line 
operations. Will you stand up for the farmers of Saskatchewan, 
Madam Minister, and support that legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Well you know it is really interesting, in 
talking to all of the groups in this province that are wanting to 
form to save their branch lines, in order to talk to the short lines, 
it’s not successor rights that come up even once. 
 
The issue there is definitely the changes that need to happen to 
the Canadian transportation Act. But it seems again that we’re 
in favour of the big railways across the way, that CN (Canadian 
National) and CP (Canadian Pacific) should have all of the say 
in this. That’s the problem. We need division . . . They know 
what the problems are; we need division of revenues. We need 
to be able to have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the question period would 
be facilitated immensely if it wasn’t for the constant 
commentary, and I’ll ask for the cooperation of the House to 
allow the minister to be heard. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — The short-line railways that have been in 
contact with us also . . . it’s not successor rights. They say they 
can work around that and they know that. And we’ve had very 
. . . we’ve got examples of success with that. But what we need 
is the changes to the federal legislation that will allow for true 
competition, which will allow for the development of short-line 
railways in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Potential Drought Conditions 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My final question is for 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, yesterday Saskatchewan farmers were 
looking to you to see if you had a plan to deal with the 
increasing threat of drought in Saskatchewan. And the answer 
they got was pretty disturbing. There is no contingency plan in 
place at all. You haven’t even contacted the federal 
government. And all we got was you, Mr. Premier, predicting 
that it was going to rain. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, why don’t you leave the weather forecasting 
to the experts. Just do your job instead. Pick up the phone, call 
the federal Minister of Agriculture and start putting together a 
plan for dealing with this very large potential crisis. What are 
you waiting for, Mr. Premier? The farmers of Saskatchewan are 
wondering what your plans are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m really glad that 

the opposition woke up after the member from south-west 
raised the issue. Now here’s the concise answer. There is a big 
concern about grazing, about the grass starting. We have 
programs in place for water pumping. We have programs in 
place to affect the . . . if you have to sell your cattle. We have 
all kinds of programs that have been in place and will be in 
place today and in the future. We monitor the situation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now once again the Chair is having 
difficulty being able to hear the answer provided because of the 
constant commentary from the official opposition. I would ask 
for the cooperation of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe they don’t 
want to hear the answer. Maybe it’s just straight politics. The 
answer is that we are monitoring the situation. We don’t want 
to, we don’t want to pull the pin too early here and create a 
crisis that isn’t there. We know there’s urgency; we know 
there’s urgency in the livestock side. We have programs in 
place to deal with that. 
 
We have talked to the federal government. It’s not true what the 
member says. I don’t know where he gets his information from. 
We have talked many times about this. Why, my deputy’s down 
east right now talking about defining these disaster programs, 
talking about what we need for disaster relief if necessary. But 
let’s not pull the string right now and sort of put the country in 
an uproar. I know these people like to cry wolf like Chicken 
Little but let’s just be calm and rational and handle this as it 
should be handled. 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Liberals staged 
a Save the Plains meeting last night in Swift Current, and it 
appears what we have been saying is finally beginning to sink 
in with the NDP members. The Premier says we’re 
fearmongering when we raise concerns about accessing the 
General Hospital, but the member from Swift Current last night, 
and I quote, said: “Everybody agrees access is a problem.” 
 
The member from Regina Centre, when commenting about 
which hospital serves the people of rural Saskatchewan best 
explained, and I quote again: “I agree with you. The Plains 
would have been the better choice.” 
 
Mr. Premier, your own MLAs are finally coming to realize that 
we are raising legitimate concerns. The question is, are we 
getting through to you yet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat again to the 
House that when the renovation of the Regina hospital system is 
such that we have the finest in Regina and the finest in southern 
Saskatchewan of modern technology that medicine can provide, 
as we will have, the people of this province and this country — 
I’ll say this province in any event — can be very proud of what 
we are achieving. We are well on the way now to turning that 
corner in the next few months. 
 
The member talks about Swift Current. I tell you what the 
message I got out of Swift Current. 
 
Several of your Liberal and Conservative supporters talked 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

about the need of health care premiums in the extent of 8 to 
$900 a year. I think Mr. Hermanson, the leader of the so-called 
Saskatchewan Party, raised it and the Liberals supported it, 
including you. Is that the true message of Swift Current — you 
support, as you have, two-tier medicine and 800, $900 health 
care premium a year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Premier, do you support premiums? You 
have a $1,500 deductible drug plan. That’s a premium, Mr. 
Premier. You must support that; you brought it in. But the 
question is access, Mr. Speaker, and it is a concern because a 
computer-generated video has been produced by the Regina 
District Board which attempts to guide rural people to the 
General Hospital. 
 
This cartoon provides an aerial view of a car taking a 10-step 
process before arriving at the General. But it fails to show any 
other vehicles on the route. It doesn’t explain problems 
associated with rush hour traffic. It fails to mention that 
motorists must drive through two school zones. There is no 
mention of parking problems and it certainly doesn’t warn the 
people about hookers and drug dealers in this area. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you know how much time and money was 
spent developing this cartoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I do not know. The 
Regina District Health Board can give that answer, the Minister 
of Health can find out that answer. But the member opposite 
talks about access. He’s dead right, the issue is access and 
accessibility. The issue is whether or not the Liberals and the 
Conservative policy on health care, which now involves health 
care premiums . . . notice how he did not respond to that 
because he knows what I said is the truth. 
 
Last night the Liberals and the Conservatives together 
advocated $900 a year health care premium. You’re right, the 
issue is accessibility; those who’ve got the money, they get in. 
Those that don’t have the money, tough luck for them. That is 
the destruction of medicare. That’s the way you Liberals and 
you Conservatives have always been. 
 
And it’s demonstrated by the fact that you took away — they 
took away — $7 billion of health care in Canada, the Liberals 
did, and now stand up in defence of medicare. Nobody believes 
you. Nobody believes the Liberals or the Conservatives as 
defenders of medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this province, 
those that have $1,500 can get their drugs, those that don’t have 
to do without. And it’s happening every day right across this 
province, Mr. Premier. What about that? What about your 
two-tier process? What about you? You brought in the drug 
plan. 
 
Mr. Premier, for weeks you have said that the Liberal 
opposition is nothing but fearmongering. Now we find that 
we’re spending God knows how much on a cartoon, a 10-step 
process that no one will remember, especially in an emergency 

situation. 
 
Mr. Premier, if this is your solution to major concerns about 
accessing the General Hospital in an emergency, we’re in 
serious trouble. Why don’t you provide the ultimate solution to 
concerns about access to this hospital and keep it open? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, these are the same old 
Liberals with the same old solutions. In 1961, 1962, one Liberal 
leader came to the door of this legislature at the time of 
medicare when Woodrow Lloyd, the father of medicare in this 
province and this country, was introducing and fighting it, came 
to this door, the late Premier Ross Thatcher, and he kicked at 
the door. 
 
Today in 1998 the new Liberal leader, he goes around to every 
of one of these Liberal-sponsored so-called rallies and he 
promises not to kick at the door. He promises that he’s going to 
chain himself to the machinery at Plains hospital in opposition 
to this. 
 
What happened to Ross Thatcher was the people of 
Saskatchewan knew that what he really was fighting was the 
implementation of medicare. And what the current leader, the 
good doctor in Eastview knows, is that he is fighting the 
reforms of this government designed to make medicare in this 
country and in this province the very best that we can afford — 
once again the next step forward to health care reform. 
 
Nothing ever changes. They’re like the Bourbons. They 
remember nothing and they forget nothing. They just slash $7 
billion worth and are in favour of health care premiums of $900 
a year. Shame on you, Liberals. Shame on you, Conservatives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier can talk the 
talk but can he walk the walk? He gave us a little history lesson 
a minute ago. Well I’ll give him a history lesson. 
 
The last time we had a legislative inquiry in this province 
similar to the Channel Lake inquiry was 1953 when Tommy 
Douglas’s minister of Finance was under investigation. What 
did Tommy do then? He went before the Crown Corporations 
Committee to answer the allegations; to testify as to what he 
knew. 
 
My question for the Premier: does he the same moral fortitude, 
the same courage that Tommy had, or does he just talk about 
Tommy? Is he prepared to follow in Tommy’s footsteps and go 
before the Crown Corporations Committee to answer what he 
knows, or is he going to continue to duck and hide behind his 
NDP puppets on the committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this member from 
Battlefords talking about moral fortitude — moral fortitude. 
This was the same member I think I recall a couple of days ago, 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

together with his colleague, the member from Melville, who 
were saying that today’s — Melfort — who were saying about 
today’s witness, allegations of the highest order of wrongdoing; 
bring in the police. 
 
Did you have the moral fortitude to ask one question about that 
today when Mr. Portigal was before the committee? Nothing. 
Did you have one moral fortitude to ask one question about 
that? 
 
You talk to me about moral fortitude. You don’t know it if it 
hits you in the face. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — There are lots more questions that have to be 
answered and asked, Mr. Speaker. But the one question we did 
get to today was what was the significance of March 31. What 
we were told: this was not a business deadline. This was 
political deadline for one reason and one reason alone — so we 
could bury Channel Lake and not have to report what was going 
on to the legislature of this province and to the people of this 
province because of the embarrassment if the people of this 
province and this House found out what was going on. 
 
April 10, a statement was made in this House as to the sale and 
the profits from Channel Lake. That statement turned out to be 
wrong. Did SaskPower or the government, or the NDP caucus 
who had issued that statement, think it necessary to come up 
with a clarification or a retraction or a correction? Not a peep. 
 
My question for the Premier: why was there no correction when 
you found out in June that was wrong — there had been no $5 
million profit? Why did you let that false information stand on 
the record? That’s the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite, who 
claims today to have established some startling revelation about 
the March 31 deadline, on page 14 of the Deloitte Touche 
report, which we tabled in this House two months ago, I want to 
quote; it says, and I quote: 
 

However, it is clear that significant attention was focused 
by SaskPower officials on how the 1996 Channel Lake 
financial results would be detailed and made public, and it 
was believed in some quarters that settlement by March 31 
would allow the corporation to tie the losses and sales 
together in one “package” and thereby simplifying the 
process surrounding public disclosure of the Channel Lake 
situation. 
 

And following up that, my comment in my report from CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation), I said: 
 

The goal of concluding the sale by March 31 in less than 
90 days led to serious shortcomings in the sales process. 

 
I reported that to you two months ago. And so you found that 
out today; you found that out today and reported to the House 
this startling document. I say your credibility, sir, on that kind 
of logic and that kind of inquiry is seriously questioned — I 
would say it’s zero. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Potential Wheat Trade War 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is either to the Premier or the Minister of 
Agriculture. For the past week, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been 
hearing warning signals coming out of the international 
communities about a potential of a trade war in wheat. And we 
first heard about it last week of course, when the Prime 
Minister’s nephew, the ambassador to the United States, came 
to Regina to discuss this and other matters with the Premier. 
 
I would like to ask very simply of the Premier or the Minister of 
Agriculture: what plans do you have to protect farmers in 
Saskatchewan from a trade war with the Americans; what 
advice did you have for the ambassador last week; and what do 
you have to say to the people who are ringing those alarm bells 
today from the federal Department of Agriculture, namely the 
Minister of Agriculture at the federal level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this question is a very 
important question because it speaks to something which 
threatens the — how should I describe it? — the normal way in 
trade of a very important aspect of our economy, agriculture. 
 
The position that I have taken as Premier consistently — by the 
way, even before the meeting with the American . . . Canadian 
ambassador to America here in Regina when I was in 
Washington three weeks ago with officials in the United States, 
everywhere — is that we oppose what’s going on with the 
potential of subsidizations — with the EU (European Union); 
the program, the EEP (export enhancement program) program 
in the United States — with the United States government 
officials. 
 
And the Canadian government is also on this same track. We 
believe that the Canadian government, through its minister thus 
far, and certainly exemplified by Mr. Raymond Chrétien as the 
Canadian ambassador to the United States, opposes the idea that 
fair trading should be disrupted in this way. 
 
Now you ask what happens if this process should proceed and 
escalate. That we’ll have to await, because right now these are 
in an important stage of diplomatic and other talks and other 
communications, and it involves huge, huge dollars. And if 
Canada gets into this by way of support for our programs, what 
we do of course, is compound the very problem which we have 
raised with respect to the federal government and the authorities 
with the embassy in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental to the minister and to the Premier. Mr. Premier, as 
you will know, historians are writing the records of the past and 
they refer to the 1980s as the “dirty” ‘80s. Part of the reason for 
that of course, was the economic position taken by Europe. And 
at that time, we were told that we should blame the Europeans 
for our problems. 
 
But at the same time we had the export enhancement program 
that the Americans had put into place. I don’t know who we’re 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

going to blame this time, but the truth of the matter is that the 
export enhancement program is the very one that the Americans 
are talking about bringing back into effect. That devastated 
agriculture in Saskatchewan in the 1980s and totally destroyed 
the economic foundation of this province and can largely be 
attributed to the terrible economic problems that this province is 
in in its fiscal areas. 
 
Mr. Premier, knowing all of that, do you have any plans to send 
a delegation to the Americans and tell them about the 
possibilities of destroying the province of Saskatchewan’s 
economic base? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the member asks, do we 
have any plans? And my answer to the member is that we’ve 
begun to execute the plans by meeting, as I have, in Washington 
with our Canadian ambassador and with American officials, not 
only on this issue; other issues as well, but on this issue. 
 
And it’s a question, you’re right, of whether or not EEP really 
gets up and going the way it was in the mid-80s, complemented 
by the EU subsidies. Whoever began that war, it doesn’t matter; 
the negative impact of it we all know historically is the case. 
 
It is the responsibility of the federal Government of Canada 
under the constitution and the conventions of this country to be 
involved in international trading and treaty relationships. The 
hon. member will know that. 
 
It’s the responsibility to the External Affairs minister, it’s the 
responsibility of the Prime Minister, it’s the responsibility of 
Ottawa, to fight on behalf of the Canadian farmers. We’re doing 
it provincially, as you’re doing it in this House. And I thank you 
for raising the question because it gives me an opportunity, as it 
gives you an opportunity, to raise this matter. 
 
Now if this thing escalates to such a point that the situation 
fiscally is even further harmed — although I’m not that 
pessimistic yet; I’m much more optimistic both in terms of 
weather, both in terms of the trading arrangements and 
negotiations — but if it escalates, it is the primary responsibility 
of the federal government to come through to the aid and the 
benefit of farmers in western Canada, because food is not a 
Saskatchewan matter. Food is a Canadian matter involving all 
Canadians, in fact many people of the world, and that is the 
national responsibility first and foremost. 
 
And thus in the discussions that the Minister of Agriculture 
reported to the House on other questions, we are putting these 
and other propositions for the federal minister to consider, and I 
think the federal government is considering them. Let’s see 
what happens in the weeks and months ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 220  The Trade Union Amendment Act 
(Repealing Successor Rights) 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
first reading of a Bill No. 220, The Trade Union Amendment 
Act (Repealing Successor Rights). 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 2:27 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 14 - The Adoption Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 5 - The Animal Products Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 6 - The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 
Bill No. 8 - The Stray Animals Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 13 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 17 - The Certified Management Consultants Act 
Bill No. 16 - The Certified General Accountants 

Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 30 - The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998 
Bill No. 3 - The Public Utilities Easements Amendment 

Act, 1998 
Bill No. 23 - The Statute Law Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 19 - The Physical Therapists Act, 1998 
Bill No. 20 - The Election Amendment Act, 1998 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:30 p.m. 
 
(1430) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Grain Transportation 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 
statement today, Mr. Speaker, I will move a motion, a very 
significant motion, and I would urge and expect all members of 
the Assembly to support that motion. 
 
Why do we need a motion on transportation, Mr. Speaker? Why 
do we need a motion dealing with the Canadian transportation 
Act. Well I’m going to try and demonstrate to you and to the 
Legislative Assembly why we again have to bring this matter to 
the attention of the federal government and to the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to read into Hansard a speech given by the Minister of 
Highways at a recent meeting that demonstrates why we need to 
have a motion, a significant motion, that it will be recognized 
by the federal government. And this is what the speech says: 
 

We all know (that) what agriculture means to us — we 
know it in our bones. We see it (in) . . . the faces of our 
rural friends and neighbours. 
 
We are here today because of the importance of a critical 
link in our agricultural economy — grain handling and 
transportation. 
 
Right now I’ll give you just one very important statistic 
that is worthy of remembering — Grain handling and 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

transportation costs make up 25 per cent of a 
Saskatchewan farmer’s input costs. 
 

That’s a bigger cost, Mr. Speaker — and many of us will not 
realize — a bigger cost than fuel costs to the farmer. It is a 
bigger cost than the fertilizer costs to the farmer, Mr. Speaker. 
Twenty-five per cent of all the input costs is freight costs. 
 

All of us here today (the minister goes on to say) 
understands that either regulation or competition are 
essential in an efficient grain handling and transportation 
system to ensure producers pay affordable, reasonable, 
rates and have accountability in the system. 
 

And I’ll go on, Mr. Speaker, to mention that this problem is not 
just for Saskatchewan farmers but it in fact affects farmers in 
Alberta and in Manitoba as well. 
 
In regards to competition, one of the things that we have been 
mentioning for a long time is joint running rights or common 
road beds — something that will promote competition. And 
now we see that the CN and CP are doing it on their own, 
looking at sharing each other’s track. But you know, Mr. 
Speaker, that might be like putting the chicken in . . . or the fox 
in charge of the chicken coop. And you’ve got to be very 
careful of that. There are . . . Joint running rights is a very good 
principle. Common road bed is a very good principle. But we 
must be quite concerned as to who is in control of that system. 
 
I want to read you an article from The Western Producer, Mr. 
Speaker, that illustrates to you and to the Assembly the 
importance of this matter to the producer, to the individual 
producer. And this is by Barry Wilson of The Western Producer 
and it’s dated April 9, 1998 and it says this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Like every prairie farmer, Robert Anderson of Shaunavon, 
Saskatchewan, paid attention three years ago when the 
federal government announced the end of the Crow Benefit 
grain transportation subsidy 
 
And like many others, it is just now that the full 
implication of that announcement is hitting home. 

 
More than two years after the end of the Crow, falling 
grain prices finally are exposing the on-farm implications 
of freight rates that have tripled in just a few years. 
 
“It wasn’t such a shock when the announcement was made 
because we kind of knew it was coming,” Anderson said. 
“It is a shock now to see the freight bills when there aren’t 
the grain prices to cover it.” 

 
You know that the federal government disguised the end of the 
Crow rate because they gave just a little bit to get people’s 
minds off of the subsidy. Also when we look at grain prices at 
that time, they were quite reasonable. And of course it was 
natural for farmers to not to worry about the cost so much as 
what they were getting for their product. 
 
But in the end result, Mr. Speaker, today with the low grain 
prices, high input costs, and as I mentioned earlier, freight being 
25 per cent of the input costs to farmers, certainly they are 
starting to realize it. 

An interesting note in this article, and I will quote again, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is what it says: 
 

Federal officials are brimming with confidence that higher 
freight rates and lower prices for export grain will be good 
for prairie agriculture . . . 
 

That’s the federal officials that are saying that. That’s the 
fellows that work for the federal Liberal government in Ottawa. 
That’s what they’re saying. They’re saying that in fact they’re: 

 
. . . brimming with confidence that higher freight rates and 
lower prices for export grain will be good for prairie 
agriculture, forcing farmers to quit exporting raw product 
and the jobs that go abroad. 

 
Well isn’t that interesting, Mr. Speaker. Yes, we need to value 
add to our production here, our production of raw materials. 
And we will do that, Mr. Speaker. But that doesn’t happen 
overnight. We still are a producer of raw product and we always 
will be. And we have to ship that grain to market, to our great 
friends in Japan and China and the U.S.S.R. (Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics)and everywhere else in the world. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that takes time. To value add, it takes time. 
We will always be producers of raw products and we will 
always have those freight costs that go with them. So for the 
federal officials to brim with confidence because freight rates 
are increasing and grain prices are falling, is beyond me, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s beyond me. 
 
I read with interest as well, Mr. Speaker, and it’s another reason 
why we have to make this motion today, as the reaction to the 
report from the CNCP on their earnings of the first quarter of 
this year, and I think the earnings . . . it says here, CN reported 
earnings of $104 million, up 46 per cent from the $7.1 million 
the same period last year. 
 
Well that’s interesting. They seem to be doing all right while 
the farmer in my area and Arborfield and Carrot River and in 
the Tisdale area, I don’t think they can say that their income is 
growing by very much. And do we hear the Saskatchewan Party 
say a word? Uh uh, nothing. Do you know why? Because 
they’re more interested in maybe defeating this government. 
They’re not really interested in the farmers of Saskatchewan or 
anybody else for that matter. They would just like to be the king 
in power. That’s what they would like. 
 
And it’s interesting to note also, Mr. Speaker, that CP reported 
142 per cent increase in operating profit to $150 million. So 
that’s another interesting statistic, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the 
reason why we have to bring a motion to this House today. 
 
Another interesting point to look at is how our transportation 
has improved over the many years that we’ve had to ship our 
grain to market from the centre of Canada, from the prairie 
provinces. 
 
And this is another newspaper article from the Moose Jaw 
Times, dated April 16, 1998, and this is what it says: 
 

The turnaround for a rail car to port and back in 1910 (in 
1910, Mr. Deputy Speaker) was 20 days. 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

Do you now what it is today in 1998? It is 20 days. So isn’t that 
interesting. Efficiencies that the railways have provided to the 
farmers of the Prairies, 20 days turnaround time, grain cars to 
port in 1910; today the same turnaround time. Isn’t that 
interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My motion today, Mr. Speaker, will call on extending the 
period of time allowed for interested parties to consider 
purchasing rail lines put up for abandonment. The reason that’s 
in the motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this. And I’ll give you a 
personal experience. 
 
In my constituency in Carrot River Valley we have two lines, 
the Chelan subdivision and Arborfield subdivision that are 
going to be abandoned. Well with this brand-new Bill C-101 
that the federal government passed in 1996, gives us so very 
little time to find anybody with some interest to open a 
short-line, that in fact most of the time a short-line will not 
develop. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan Party will go on and say it’s successor 
rights that are stopping short-line development. Well that is 
completely false. This is the time, in the Bill C-101, the time to 
be able to purchase rail lines that the CN or CP doesn’t want. 
It’s just not sufficient. It doesn’t allow short-lines to develop. 
 
They allow the private sector 60 days. Now can you imagine 
trying to determine if a short-line is feasible — after the CN 
says it’s not — to be able to purchase that line to, in fact, save 
the roads and save the farmers some money; 60 days they allow 
a group of farmers to look at purchasing it. It’s a wonderful 
thing. I think the federal government allowing the railways to 
abandon at will is what it really means. 
 
And then if the private sector can’t come to some kind of 
conclusion in the 60 days, well then they dump it onto the 
province. And you know how much time they give the province 
to decide whether they can help a group of producers look at 
purchasing a line, whether it’s financially viable, whether the 
farmers will use that line. You know how much time they give 
to the farmers? They give 30 days. Well whoopee ding — 30 
days to decide to buy a rail line. Well that is just wonderful. 
 
But the Saskatchewan Party stands there and says, oh, it’s 
successor rights that is the hold-up here, that’s what stopping 
short-line development. 
 
Well it isn’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s the railways and the 
federal government that is stopping short-line development in 
this province, I’ll tell you right now. 
 
And then if the province can’t come to a determination within 
30 days, you know who gets it then? Well the municipality gets 
a chance to purchase the railway. And do you know how many 
days they get? They get a whooping 30 days to decide whether 
they should be able to buy the railway. 
 
So you know, most bankers can’t decide whether to give me a 
loan in that length of time, let alone trying to come up with 
some kind of a proposal, finding out whether the rail line is 
financially viable, to find out whether the producers will in fact 
use the line if a short-line is developed, what kind of loading 
facility there will be on that line. 

Right now in Arborfield, the Department of Highways are 
working with a group from Arborfield and Chelan. They’re 
doing a track study to see what kind of shape the track is in. 
That all takes time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So certainly we have to change the CTA and make that time 
more viable so that people can in fact take a serious look, 
groups can take a serious look at operating a short-line, if in fact 
it is of benefit to the producers and to the community. 
 
The other thing that we’re going to do in the motion is ask for 
an inclusion of provisions allowing for the encouragement and 
establishment of independent, competitive short-line railroad 
operations. 
 
Right now the short-lines you see can’t really develop because 
CN may strip away a little chunk in between two destinations. 
So perhaps the whole section would have been viable but 
because only a portion of it is abandoned by the railway, which 
isn’t really interesting to anybody, it destroys the economics of 
the whole line. Well this can’t continue, Mr. Speaker, to allow 
the Liberal opposition over there and the Saskatchewan Party 
opposition to stand at their desk and say successor rights are the 
problem here, when we know full well the railways and the 
federal government are at fault. 
 
The other thing we’re going to be asking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is that establishing by law the principle of joint running rights. 
And I know that the CN and CP are quite a bit against it, if in 
fact it’s done by the producers and the provincial governments. 
But if it’s done by them it’s okay because they still . . . You see 
they have a duopoly. The CN has control of the north part of the 
province; the CP has control of the south part of the province, 
and you see they control therefore, the whole province. And we 
the producers, are captive to the railways. 
 
If we’re going to haul a bulk commodity like grain, the only 
way we can haul it is in fact by rail. So if there is a monopoly, 
or what I call duopoly because you have two of them sort of in 
charge and deciding what to charge and controlling the whole 
system and wanting to control even more of the system, to have 
them control joint running rights doesn’t make much sense. 
 
But if it was a neutral body perhaps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or 
perhaps a group of producers controlling the running rights on 
railways or some kind of a system that could involve the 
railways as a partner but certainly not on . . . 
 
(1445) 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Johnson): — The member has used 
up his time. Would he now move the motion? 
 
Mr. Renaud: — I would be more than happy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to move my motion, and it will be seconded by the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers. And the motion reads: 
 

That the Government of Saskatchewan urge the federal 
government to amend the Canada Transportation Act, 1996 
to make it more producer friendly by extending the period 
of time allowed for interested parties to consider 
purchasing rail lines put up for abandonment; by including 
provisions allowing for and encouraging the establishment 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

of independent, competitive short-line railroad operations; 
by establishing in law the principle of joint running rights; 
and by making other specific changes that level the 
playing-field between the railway companies, short-line 
railways, shippers in general, and prairie grain producers in 
particular. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am proud 
to stand up and second a motion put forward by the member 
from Carrot River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, short-lines are needed. With short-lines we need 
joint running rights; on main lines as well. Rail lines are selling 
and some are being abandoned. If we had competition on rail 
lines, Mr. Speaker, we would not have to worry about 
purchasing or abandoning rail lines. Competition would 
determine what lines would remain open. 
 
I’d like to look at a couple of lines that have been closed and 
where I think joint running rights would have probably had a . . 
. played a factor in. And one was the line between Shellbrook 
and Prince Albert. And at one time that area, we used to have 
pulp come in from the Big River area, as well as chips, logs, 
and also grain. That line had been taken out and so the trucks 
had moved onto our main highways and roads, and it created a 
lot of problems there too. 
 
Competition would determine which lines would be open, and 
as I stated also in the line right now between Meath Park and 
Choiceland . . . is up for closure or abandonment. And I believe 
if you had joint running rights and allowed competition on 
those lines, those lines would probably stand a chance of 
staying open. 
 
Another one is between PA (Prince Albert) and Birch Hills, 
which would really cause a lot of problems if that line had 
closed, and we look at especially going towards Hudson Bay 
and to the Churchill and one of the closest ways to port. So that 
would really remain a problem if that was closed. But I think 
joint running rights would probably not . . . would play a big 
factor in keeping that line open. 
 
Also I just listened to the member again from Kindersley stating 
about successor rights. Mr. Speaker, I just keep thinking to 
myself, why does he keep going back to this successor rights. 
And we see that Omni Trax not only purchased the line from 
P.A. to Warman, they’ve also took a lot of the workers from 
CN, so . . . and you don’t hear them complain about it. And I 
just want to say it’s too bad we have to keep . . . or hear him 
keep picking on the workers. I think these workers are great 
people and probably hired by Omni Trax because of their 
capability of doing their job. So I sure think that we need these 
people. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is potash. This Bill allows for 
potash companies to negotiate prices, and if we look, it says 
here it is somewhat ironic that rail line competition for other 
commodities such as potash has been encouraged under the 
Canada Transportation Act. For example, competitive tendering 

for potash shipments has reduced freight rates by about 30 per 
cent since 1992 to negotiations of confidential contracts 
between shippers and railroad carriers. So that shows you, Mr. 
Speaker, that there is some benefits to keeping or having this 
. . . or having other producers being allowed to compete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to discuss the competition regarding 
chemical companies. Why I bring chemical companies in, it’s 
the same as having competition on the rail lines. And I look at 
chemical companies that didn’t allow for competition in the 
market-place. I can remember working with Focus on Inputs, 
and we went around to communities doing research — which 
was a great benefit to the producers, had been being able to get 
on to the competition. But the federal government extended the 
patent protection and of course Focus on Inputs was not able to 
proceed. They are given the protection there. So I see the same 
thing happening here under this protection Act here that is 
called the Bill 101. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the profits that the railroad companies are able to 
make, especially in the last year, has not been actually given to 
the producers. It’s the railroad companies that were the ones 
that benefited. So I just want to say that I was glad to enter into 
this debate, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll be looking forward to some 
questions from the opposition later. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter the debate this afternoon and I find it somewhat ironic that 
we find these new free enterprisers opposite here talking about 
competition. They have never talked about competition in the 
past. Never been in favour of competition. Always in favour of 
more regulation, more roadblocks to everything possible. 
 
The fact of the matter is that your roots are in nationalization. 
You remember that? Every time you turned around you 
thought, when someone was making any money at something, 
you should take it away from them. Often without any 
compensation whatsoever. That’s your background over there. 
Remember the potash companies that . . . the holes in the 
ground that you took over? Those are . . . that’s the kind of 
legacy that you people have opposite in terms . . . 
 
Now they’re talking competition. Now they’re saying that we 
should open up the rail lines and have anybody and anybody 
across this province that wants to run a locomotive . . . 
(inaudible) . . . open them up to competition. Well there may be 
some merit in it but it certainly isn’t any merit in it when it 
comes from you people opposite who’s always been in favour 
of anything but competition. 
 
Every time that there’s a problem for Saskatchewan, 
particularly when it comes to Saskatchewan agriculture, it’s cry 
on the federal government’s shoulder. Rather than taking any 
responsibility and doing something that would truly be 
meaningful towards the agriculture in Saskatchewan and helpful 
to the farmers of this province, cry about it to the federal 
government and what they’re doing. 
 
You want some suggestions? You want some suggestions about 
what you could do to help farmers in Saskatchewan these days? 
I’ll give you a few suggestions. One of them is in terms of 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

diesel fuel taxes. Some of the highest diesel fuel taxes in all of 
Canada is right here in Saskatchewan, right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And who imposes those fees? It’s you people opposite. And 
those costs are capitalized into the cost of moving grain here in 
Saskatchewan, those costs are capitalized into moving grain 
here in Saskatchewan, and every farmer every time they deliver 
a bushel of grain helps pay for that diesel fuel that moves that 
grain to port and helps pay the taxes that those rail companies 
have. 
 
So if you want competition, look at that area for competition. 
Move toward reducing the taxes in that area. 
 
Another . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We are. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — You are? The member from Lloyd says they are. 
You’ve done nothing in terms of any reduction in taxes in terms 
of rail lines. Nothing whatsoever. Reassessment is hitting the 
rail companies again which will be capitalized in the costs of 
moving grain. High taxes in every area will be capitalized into 
moving grain in Saskatchewan. 
 
More regulation, that has always been your forte. That has 
always been what you people stood for — regulate, regulate, 
regulate. In fact a few years ago, Mr. Speaker, they brought in, 
in the throne speech — they were going to reduce the regulation 
here in Saskatchewan. We’ve seen nothing in that area. You’ve 
increased the amount of regulation, not backed off on it. 
 
I’m surprised and shocked to see these new free enterprisers 
opposite wanting to open up rail lines for competition. Open up 
competition, all right. If you want to open up competition, open 
up competition in terms of allowing short rail lines to come into 
this province. 
 
The members opposite . . . How to do that? I’ll tell you how to 
do that. The members opposite, if they would have attended the 
short rail line conference here in Regina last winter, would have 
been told how to do that. The way that you do that, they said, 
company after company after company stood up and said, the 
way to do that is to take successor rights out, to allow for 
competition, to allow for competition. 
 
You people want competition? Truly allow for competition . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I most certainly was there. And the 
fact of the matter was that company after company after 
company stood up and said they want to see successor rights 
dealt with so that they could come in and operate here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the fact of the matter is that if that happened, you would 
see short rail lines take place. You would see short rail line 
companies take root here in Saskatchewan. And the fact that 
you could point to one company or two companies here in 
Saskatchewan that say that it isn’t an issue is not relevant to the 
issue. 
 
People here in Saskatchewan believe that there are 
opportunities. If you look at the road and rail committee, if you 

look at the road and rail committee in west central 
Saskatchewan, there’s a view there that a short rail line 
operation would work, would work. But the fact of the matter is 
you people, through many, many of your policies, are standing 
in the way of real transportation reform here in Saskatchewan. 
And the member opposite wants to chirp from her seat and 
we’ll be asking her to speak to the debate. 
 
The fact of the matter is the farmers of this province want 
meaningful change here. They don’t want the member from 
Carrot River standing up and saying we’re whining about what 
the federal government is doing. Look in your own back corner, 
look in your own house, Mr. Speaker. Look in your own 
backyard before you start crying about everybody else for a 
change. 
 
(1500) 
 
People here in Saskatchewan believe that there needs to be 
changes to Saskatchewan law. We’ll deal with federal law at 
some point as well, but Saskatchewan needs changes as well. 
Certainly the federal Liberals should be doing everything they 
can to encourage the development of short rail line operations. 
The federal government’s lack of transportation policy or 
strategy in general is doing harm to the provinces, yes, in 
Saskatchewan in particular. 
 
Goodale has been very, very unhelpful in this regard since . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who is he? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well he’s Saskatchewan’s only federal cabinet 
minister. Most of the time when it comes to these issues he’s 
strangely silent though, and the farmers of Saskatchewan are 
beginning to notice that. The feds are offering to supply 
facilitators to encourage short rail line development, but that’s 
about all they’ll do and we should be calling on them to do 
more. 
 
But it’s hypocritical for the members opposite to sit there and 
tell the feds what to do when the NDP won’t do anything 
themselves to facilitate short rail line operations other than to 
pay lip-service or to point fingers at everybody else. Again they 
do everything to shirk their responsibility in this issue. It is in 
this province that the meaningful change could take place. If 
you truly wanted to see changes in this area, why wouldn’t you 
just remove successor rights and let’s get on with the job. 
 
The people of this province, and particularly the farmers of this 
province, don’t believe that the NDP have any credibility in 
putting forward motions when they have this union-only type 
mentality that precipitates across their party membership. But it 
doesn’t have any credibility in this issue, not with the farmers 
of this province. The farmers of this province want to see 
changes in these areas. 
 
And as we see the kind of problems that are beginning to come 
forward in rural Saskatchewan these days with an impending 
drought and lower commodity prices, it’s only going to be more 
and more important that we do everything we can to reduce the 
cost of operations of the farm people across Saskatchewan. And 
the largest bill, the largest bill that a farmer in Saskatchewan 
pays today is not his fuel bill, it’s not his fertilizer bill, it is the 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

bill for transporting his product to market. 
 
And that’s an area that this government has some responsibility 
for and could make some changes that would help in that area, 
as I’ve outlined, in terms of fuel taxes, in terms of successor 
rights, in terms of the issue of reassessment, in terms of general 
taxation here in this province. Those are areas that this 
government could impact upon if they truly wanted to see any 
help in this area, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll conclude at that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to participate in this debate today. It’s very interesting to hear 
from the opposite side the whole question of regulation and 
deregulation when it comes to the grain transportation system, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today within this resolution we talk about a quaint idea that 
farmers talked about 15 years ago, joint running rights. The 
only way we can have true competition in the grain handling 
system is to have joint running rights, because railways running 
75 kilometres apart is not competition. And we have the parties 
across the way and their federal cousins, starting in the 1980s, 
talking about a system of deregulation. A system of 
deregulation that’s only for the railways, not for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. That is shameful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — I have seen changes to the western grain 
transportation system that have been detrimental to the farmers. 
I’ve heard these parties talk about deregulation, deregulation by 
which the farmers suffer. We see a new Act in terms of the 
grain transportation system that takes out a chunk of track that 
makes it absolutely worthless. We see that in a case of the rail 
line that goes from Eston to Elrose, that the member was 
speaking about, that takes that chunk out to the Alberta border, 
that makes the track absolutely worthless to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to the farmers who want to use it. So you tell 
me who’s speaking on behalf of the farmers. 
 
And then we talk about the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, 
Mr. Elwin Hermanson, who talks about an attack on the 
Canadian Wheat Board, in terms that he wants deregulation — 
who’s the deregulation for? It is not for the farmers. 
Deregulation has not been for the farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are talking about true competition when we are talking 
about joint running rights. Three to four weeks ago the Reform 
Party in Saskatoon held a meeting talking about grain 
transportations, everyone from all political spectrums. And do 
you know what came out as the joint statement that all farmers 
at that meeting supported? You know what it was from the left 
and from the right? Joint running rights — joint running rights. 
 
As I’ve said earlier in another speech, Mr. Speaker, in this 
House, there is only one place in Saskatchewan by which there 
is true competition in the railway industry, and that is the main 
Omni Trax to CNCP (Canadian National and Canadian Pacific) 
running through Saskatoon, side by side to the Alberta border 
— the only place farmers have competition with the railway 
system. 

I am tired of hearing farm organizations talk about deregulation 
when they think the system will get better. Well we got 
deregulation. But what did it get us? Higher freight costs, poor 
system to move grain. And you know what the railways say? 
We don’t know if grain is important to us any more. 
 
In 1983 when the Western Grain Transportation Act changed in 
terms of deregulation, I sat in a room with the former president 
of CN, and the former president of CP Rail said, grain, now 
with the changes to the system by which we are being paid, 
grain is the most important commodity. 
 
We are paying them full price and getting nothing in return. It is 
time for the kind of competition that we need in the system, Mr. 
Speaker — true competition. And a member opposite says, oh 
my God, this is coming from the social democratic party, the 
NDP, the question of competition. 
 
When things don’t work in this province, farmers come together 
to make it work. Short-line railways is an example of that. But I 
am tired of this. I am tired of this so-called deregulation that we 
hear from both parties. From both parties. Because I want to 
remind the Liberals opposite it was their federal cousins who 
cut the grain transportation Act as a payment from producers to 
the railways. 
 
You know what I hear right now from those from the right? 
They’re starting to say that maybe paying the railways was a 
good idea instead of the producers. At least we had control. At 
least we had handcuffs on the railways. At least we had a say. 
Now we have nothing. 
 
It is time to fight for those kind of controls and those kind of 
competitions that protect the farmers of Saskatchewan. And 
while we talk about this question of what’s going on here, I 
know where this party stands and I know it is right in terms of 
what it’s fighting for. So I ask the other parties to support this 
motion and send a message to our federal cousins, because I tell 
you it will be in your back door next when it comes to a rail line 
being abandoned. And what will you do to protect the producers 
of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Now I 
know the hon. member will be well aware — order! — the hon. 
member will be well aware of rule 28 which requires that all 
debate be directed through the Chair and I’m sure that he will 
want to conduct himself in his debate accordingly. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I apologize for that and 
I have completed my portion of the debate. Thank you again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
get in on this debate. My constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife 
has a large component of agriculture. And having lived in this 
area for most of my life, I have experienced the changes and the 
challenges facing our farmers. 
 
When my husband and I started farming 30 years ago, our basic 
crops were wheat, oats, and barley. At least with these crops, if 
the price was poor for grain, we could feed our crops to our 
cattle, our sheep, and our pigs. 



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

Now farmers are diversifying into canola, flax, mustard, peas, 
dill, specialty livestocks. You name it — we’re growing it and 
we’re raising it. There are many reasons. There’s advanced 
chemicals and technologies . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. We’re having a bit of a 
disturbing kind of trend here that the ones who are calling out 
the most are the ones who have already spoken and have put 
their remarks on the record. Now I ask for the cooperation of all 
members of the House. Those who have spoken, allow the 
others to be heard. And those who have not spoken, put your 
remarks on the record. 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Mr. Speaker, advanced chemicals and 
technologies, the price, the processing, and the need. And as we 
are all aware, grain prices fluctuate daily but input costs are 
consistently high and freight rates since the loss of the Crow are 
sky-rocketing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1987-88 to move grain from Reford, 
Saskatchewan via Thunder Bay, the railway freight was $6.65 
per tonne. In 1996-97 that freight rate was $33.46 per tonne. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, farmers are and have always been 
risk-takers. But how do individual farmers continue to survive 
with low rainfall, low prices, poor yields, railway rip-offs, or 
off-the-farm incomes? 
 
First of all, more and more farmers are forming co-ops to have 
more value added processing in their own area — the hog 
barns, the cattle feedlots, the malt plants, the pellet plants. 
 
And community leaders are realizing the impact of low farm 
incomes and have been meeting — such as the west-central 
municipal government committee who are discussing 
transportation networks and trying to find solutions. And farm 
groups are meeting regarding short-lines and other alternatives 
to move grain more efficiently and more cost-effective. 
 
The western premiers at their May ’97 conference urged the 
federal government to establish a review of the grain handling 
and transportation to develop long-term system improvements. 
And what is happening while Mr. Justice Estey is reviewing 
this? The railways are closing short-lines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the western provinces recommend that alternatives 
for enhancing competition should be evaluated and we need to 
expand the use of running rights and joint . . . or common use of 
rights of way for provisions, and maintain or enhance too access 
to producer cars. If the freight charges are 25 per cent of a 
farmer’s input costs, why not encourage competition so that 
farmers can enjoy the benefit of their labour? 
 
CN reported earnings of 104 million — up 46 per cent from the 
71 million in the same period the year before, while revenue 
rose to 1.6 billion. Record profits while last year prairie grain 
sat waiting to be shipped. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, farmers will be compensated for these 
losses. CN Rail has agreed to pay the Canadian Wheat Board 
millions in compensation for poor rail service to farmers in 
lower freight rates and cash. 
 

So it’s time for change and competition. Therefore I support 
this motion and I encourage the federal government to get on 
board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
interesting to listen to this debate and I’m pleased to be able to 
be a part of it. And I’m just wondering if there’s any farmers 
out there — there’s the odd one that may have a small TV in his 
tractor cab or on a breakdown on the way to the repair shop — 
and I’m sure he’s asking, I wonder who in the world is actually 
sticking up for the farmers because I haven’t heard that here 
today. 
 
And I certainly don’t hear it from the members opposite. The 
question that I would ask is what in the world have they done to 
help out the producers in this province to get their products to 
port. What have they actually done? Well the answer is pretty 
simple, Mr. Speaker. It’s nothing. They’ve actually done 
nothing, Mr. Speaker, absolutely nothing. 
 
But could they do something? Yes, sure they could. And they 
do what they do best — they whine about what everybody else 
should be doing. They continually blame the former Tories, 
whether it’s in Saskatchewan here, whether it’s in Ottawa, 
about the terrible state they put this country in, and this 
province. They continually blame the federal government in 
Ottawa. They just keep crying and whining like a lamb lost in 
the forest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What could they do? 
 
Mr. McLane: — What could they do? Maybe a few 
suggestions we could ask them, Mr. Speaker. And maybe I’ll 
ask a few of these questions at the end. 
 
What have they done in conjunction with the grain companies 
to stop mass abandonment of their facilities along these rail 
lines? What have they done? Have they talked to the grain 
companies? Have they talked to their friends at the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, one of the largest grain handlers in 
this province? Have they talked to them and said, will you quit 
bulldozing your elevators over till we get this situation 
straightened out? Have they talked to them? I ask the question, 
Mr. Speaker, have they actually talked to those people? 
 
I have my doubts. I have my doubts if they’ve talked to them 
about it because they wouldn’t want to step on anybody’s toes, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And have they actually started thinking about picking up any of 
these branch lines, Mr. Speaker? Have they actually thought 
what the provincial government could do in this province to 
help out the producers and the communities affected by these 
lines. Have you ever actually thought of going and buying any 
of these branch lines for net salvage value — which would not 
be an expenditure, it would be an investment. They would 
receive equity in doing it. And if the net salvage value of the 
line today is a million dollars, in 5 years it will likely be a 
million dollars and in 10 years it will likely be a million dollars. 
So it can be an investment till you get this thing straightened 
out. 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

There’s no plan, there’s no plan, Mr. Speaker, of transportation 
in this province. No road, rail plan — nothing at all, Mr. 
Speaker. So I’m wondering why they’re crying. Wonder why 
they’re always crying about everybody else. 
 
And they don’t . . . Yes, Mr. Speaker, it does sound a bit like 
I’m whining, as the member opposite from Saskatoon noted, but 
I tell you it kind of grows on you in here. And coming over 
across there it kind of grows on you. It sticks to you, all the 
whining, whining, whining, and it gets to everybody eventually. 
 
(1515) 
 
There’s one thing I would like to mention, Mr. Speaker, and 
read into the record if I could. It’s an article in The Western 
Producer by Barry Wilson, and it talks about . . . I guess the 
point of this, Mr. Speaker, is who is sticking up for the farmers. 
And I’d like to quote if I could, just a short paragraph from this 
article: “Over the strong objections . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, Mr. Member, The Western Producer is a Liberal 
magazine . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could quote from this article by Barry Wilson: 
 

Over the strong objections of the Reform and Conservative 
MPs, the House of Commons has approved in principle 
Canada Labour Code changes that would prevent west 
coast exports from being tied up by third party work 
stoppages. 

 
What this does is make the grain handlers an essential service, 
Mr. Speaker. And it’s opposed, it was opposed by the 
Conservatives, the federal Conservatives and the Reform Party, 
Mr. Speaker. That should tell you who’s sticking up for the 
farmers in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of this there is a question and answer 
period; I have a couple of questions I will be putting forward to 
the members opposite. But I would wish that the provincial 
government for once in it’s lifetime — this NDP government 
since it came to power in 1991 — would take a leadership role 
for something in this province and stick up for the producers 
and the families in this province and start doing something 
proactive with regards to the abandonment of these rail lines. 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
very pleased to enter this debate and to support the motion 
presented by the member from Carrot River. 
 
One of the reasons is that I think some of the policies that are 
being put to the people of Canada by the federal government are 
going to change the face of rural Saskatchewan. In fact they are 
going to change the face of Saskatchewan, period. And along 
with the government I agree with the member from Arm River. 
Yes, the grain companies and yes, other people are working 
hand in hand — the railways, the grain companies, and the 
Liberal government — to destroy the kind of province that I’ve 
known since I was a young child. 
 
I can tell you that I feel very, very, very emotional about this 
and I don’t apologize for it. Because my grandparents came 
from Ukraine, and I don’t want to see in three generations the 

people of Saskatchewan being serfs on their land again. We 
came to this country three generations ago because there was 
land here. We could work hard. We could own our own land 
and we could get ahead. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the policies that I am seeing by 
the railways and by the federal governments, subsequent federal 
governments, are destroying the freedom for our producers to 
farm and to own their own land. Shippers in the prairie 
provinces are major users of the Canadian railway system. I’m 
going to say that again — shippers in the prairie provinces are 
major users of our railway system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Nearly 800 million tonnes . . . 8 million tonnes 
. . . 80 — pardon me, Mr. Speaker, I’ll get it right yet — 80 
million tonnes of products such as grain, coal, potash, and 
sulphur are shipped every year by rail to market. Prairie traffic 
forms an important component of all Canadian rail traffic. 
 
I mean the way it looks to me sometimes, it’s as if somehow we 
were the users of this and we did not contribute. Mr. Speaker, 
we contribute 50 per cent of all the tonnage that is hauled by the 
CN and the CP. And what do we get in replacement for that, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Not only that, we have given millions of acres in western 
Canada to the railways — free, millions of acres to the railways. 
Not only that, we have paid, our taxpayers have paid, for those 
railways. The cost of rail transportation represents a significant 
component of the delivered price of prairie products. A modest 
increase in transportation costs could have a significant 
implication to profit margins as shippers. And of course when 
we say shippers, we mean also our farm producers. 
 
For example, potash, the average freight rate per tonne 
represents over 35 per cent of the delivered value. Similarly for 
coal, the freight rate exceeds 45 per cent of the delivered price. 
 
Most prairie markets are inherently captive to rail because of 
their high weight, low value, and long distance to market. 
Availability of rail competition is a key component to prairie 
shippers while negotiating freight rates and service 
requirements with CP and CN. 
 
And let me tell the member from Arm River why the federal 
government is responsible. We are a land-locked province. We 
need the railways. That was a condition of Confederation. 
That’s what built this country. 
 
We are not whining. The federal government is responsible to 
keep this country together by helping the railways, by helping 
the producers, by giving us good legislation. They are 
responsible. I’m not a whiner or a crier, but this is a backbone 
of Confederation. 
 
I mean the salmon industries get subsidies, the cod industry gets 
subsidy. Look at the eastern provinces. Good luck to them, but 
it’s about time that Saskatchewan got some of this backing that 
other producers get. It isn’t a matter of whining and crying, it’s 
a matter of what the responsibility of the federal government is 
to this country. 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, I want to put into the record the fact that as 
taxpayers we have given the railways, as I said before, a million 
acres of free land. As the taxpayers, we have subsidized the 
railroads to the tune of millions of dollars, and it’s time that the 
federal government gave us a hand in directing the railways to 
serve our producers and our shippers in western Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I just want to say that I feel very strongly that the face of 
Saskatchewan is going to change in the next five years. And 
what makes me sad is, I think down in Ottawa there are people 
that just don’t give a care for us here. And I want to speak up 
for the producers in my area and all of Saskatchewan, and it’s 
about time that somebody got a handle and joint running rights 
at the very least would help people to really be competitive. 
 
You know what? The funny part of it all is, Mr. Speaker, is 
people like me and my philosophy, we don’t mind competition. 
What I see, what I see in the philosophy of these great free 
enterprisers that they so espouse, what competition means to 
them is this — I’ll tell you what competition means to them: 
competition means monopolies. They love having complete 
control and not any true competition. 
 
The smaller businessmen, the smaller producers, people like 
myself, we can compete and we believe in that kind of 
competition. What we don’t believe is in railways and grain 
companies having all the power, and the producers and people 
having none of the power. That isn’t competition, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s a monopoly and it drives small people completely out of 
the business. And again you are going to have huge land 
holdings and you are going to have the same situation that my 
grandparents tried to escape from just three generations ago. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take a 
few minutes to address this motion, particularly at this time 
when there is a proposed rail-line abandonment joining my 
constituency of Prince Albert to Birch Hills. And this line 
connects all the way up to the Churchill River. 
 
Of course in using that shipping route, our farmers have advised 
us that there’s a saving of approximately up to the vicinity of 
$20 per tonne if the grain is shipped through the Churchill River 
system — through the Churchill Port system, Mr. Speaker — as 
opposed to the Lakehead or to the west coast. So this rail line is 
particularly important to people, to farmers, and to all of us who 
benefit from having farmers shipping their grain to ports to 
export outside of the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to address only one portion of the motion, 
and that is this business . . . the portion of the motion that deals 
with establishing in law the principle of joint running rights. 
 
I believe if we could make that change alone in federal 
legislation or regulation, whichever the case may be, that that in 
itself would go a long way to assisting farmers with their 
shipping costs. 
 
Right now the way the situation is evolved is that CN and CP, 
who effectively got monopolies on the rail transportation across 

the country, they got the monopolies and in turn they were 
supposed to supply or to produce some . . . there was some 
social responsibility that came with that monopoly. Once they 
were privatized in total they seemed to have forgotten that 
there’s a social responsibility and they’ve now turned all of 
their attention strictly to profit. That’s the bottom line only. 
There is no social conscience to the corporation at this stage, to 
either of those corporations at this stage. 
 
So what they’re trying to do is abandon the lines one by one. 
Take little portions out here, take little portions out here 
because they’re not viable and then . . . because this enables 
them to maximize their profits. And the way they do . . . the 
way it maximizes profits is that a lot of the haul is then done by 
farmers who have to pay truckers to haul longer distances, and 
of course the people, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, who are 
footing the bills for the highways that are being damaged by 
this kind of a policy. 
 
So if the railways were not given the privileged position of 
being able to destroy the lines on their own but had to offer that 
line and give any company that might come up the running 
rights on that line, then the natural market-place would take 
care of which lines would stay in place and which wouldn’t. 
And I would maintain, Mr. Speaker, that the line from Birch 
Hills to Prince Albert would stay. 
 
And when it comes to the principle of joint running rights, you 
know we used to think that that was such a foreign concept. But 
when you think of it, when you think of it, Mr. Speaker, the 
whole idea of running rights has changed a lot in this province 
and across the continent. We always had joint running rights on 
our highways — anybody could go, it was paid by the public. 
 
We never used to have joint running rights on our power lines, 
but the system is evolving so that any company . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . God bless you, Mr. Speaker — so that any 
company can now put their power into the power grids and the 
transmitting company has to charge them a fair price for doing 
it. 
 
So you’ve got joint running rights on power. The same thing 
applies to telephones. We’ve got companies from all over the 
continent vying for position and trying to attract customers, but 
it’s SaskTel’s lines that they’re using for the most case, in 
addition to the satellite and microwave towers they may be 
establishing. 
 
You’ve got joint running rights on telephones, on highways, 
and on power. And you have joint running rights on gas, natural 
gas. Why can’t we have joint running rights on the railways? 
 
The only reason we don’t have it is because of the sweetheart 
deal between CNCP and the federal politicians, and that has to 
change. And we are asking, in this motion, to take a hard look 
at it and change that, and be consistent. If you want to have 
freedom and you want to have competition, then have it. Don’t 
give somebody a monopoly and provide them with the 
opportunity to have a scorched earth policy, or a scorched rail 
track policy, Mr. Chair. 
 
So with that, I want to advise that I will be, on behalf of my 
constituents, voting for this motion and supporting the mover, 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

the member from Tisdale. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? If the 
Assembly is ready for the question then we will proceed to the 
second part of the seventy-five minute debate for the 10 
minutes of exchange of questions or comments, at the 
conclusion of which then the vote shall be put on the question. 
The floor is now open for questions or comments by members. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
member from Arm River. I notice he stands up in this House 
often and never blames the federal government for the massive 
cuts in health care funding. 
 
For example, he stands up in this House and he never complains 
about the lack of funding by the federal government or the lack 
of interest to the national highways program. He stands up in 
here and he favours the railways over the farmers. 
 
I guess my question to him is: why is it when an issue is either 
in the interest of the federal government, or in the interest of the 
farmers on the other hand, he always sticks up, and his party, 
for the federal government rather than the producers of the 
province? 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I suspect that the 
rules apply the same in this question and answer exchange as 
they do in question period, where we’re not allowed to say that 
the member isn’t quite being straightforward with his answers 
. . . or his questions. And I’d like to use a little stronger 
language if I could, Mr. Speaker, because I am one of those 
farmers in this province, and a producer, and I stand up many 
days in this House, standing up for the principles of the farmers 
and the communities in which they live. 
 
And for the member opposite to say anything else — the same 
member who has been dead silent on the issue of the hospital 
closure in his community — to stand in this House today and 
say that we’re for the . . . everything the federal government 
does, is absolutely ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I wish that member would speak up on behalf of his 
constituents — the very people, Mr. Speaker, that elected him 
— now to represent them; he’s being very quiet. So I would just 
say to the member opposite, we will do everything in this 
Liberal caucus to ensure that the producers rights in this 
province are upheld and that their products get to port on time. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I do note that 
there’s many political donations to the Liberal Party by the 
railways and I’m wondering, is that why the member there 
sticks up for the railways over the producers of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure who 
the member is talking about, if he’s talking about the federal 
Liberal Party or the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. As far as I 
know, the Saskatchewan Liberal Party doesn’t receive those 
types of donations from the huge railroads. 
 
And certainly with the stand that the NDP have on 
transportation and issues reflected by the railways, I’m 
surprised that the railways continue to donate money to the 

NDP, in which they do federally. So I don’t think the member 
can have his cake and eat it too. 
 
(1530) 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair does want to remind all hon. 
members that in rule 75, in seventy-five minute debate, for 
questions and comments, the questions and comments must be 
pertinent to the debate made by the member in the motion 
before us, and that no member can be required to be held 
accountable for actions of their political parties, but must . . . in 
this Assembly. But the debate must be in the context of the 
motion before us. Questions and comments will continue. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would too like to 
ask the members opposite a question. I guess I will direct it to 
the member from Carrot River Valley since he was the one that 
moved this motion. In the motion they talk about the extended 
period of time allowed for interested parties to consider 
purchasing the rail line put forward. And they didn’t want to 
talk about that issue in their debate, and I’m not surprised why. 
 
To the member, my question is: would he take a proposal back 
to his caucus and to his cabinet, to his cabinet ministers 
responsible for transportation in this province, to look at these 
rail lines that are up for abandonment, Mr. Speaker, that are 
allowed to be bought for net salvage value, which means what 
the value of the rail line would be after it’s torn up and hauled 
down to some place in the States where most of these are going 
to? 
 
His government would make a commitment to these rail lines to 
buy them now as an investment and hold them at the very least 
until this situation has been settled — transportation — until his 
government has a plan in this province. Will the member take 
that back to his cabinet? 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker, a very good question. He wants 
the federal government to be able to dump the railways onto the 
province and make the province pay. Well isn’t that interesting. 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that our Premier has asked for a 
moratorium, a halt on all rail line abandonment until Mr. Estey 
finishes his review of the grain transportation. 
 
We also have asked in this motion that the 60-day time for the 
private sector to purchase a short-line . . . or a piece of line from 
the railways, or 30 days by the province or 30 days from the 
municipal government, is not enough time. It doesn’t give 
anybody enough chance to find out whether it’s financially 
feasible and/or warranted by the producers. So certainly we’re 
asking all of that on this side of the House. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — I’d like to ask the member from Arm River a 
simple question. The question is, Mr. Member, do you not think 
the federal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now I want to remind the 
hon. member that all . . . according to rule 28, all members 
understand that debate and comment in the House must be 
directed to the Chair. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Sorry about that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to ask the member from Arm River a simple 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

question, and the question that I’d like to put to him is: does he 
think the federal government has any responsibility to the 
province of Saskatchewan as it is in conjunction to agriculture? 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess I would ask 
that member the same question I asked the previous member 
from Carrot River who didn’t seem to understand the question 
and I don’t think he understands the process. 
 
And maybe this member could go and give me an answer 
whether she would go back to her cabinet colleagues and 
present the same opportunity that I asked the minister . . . or the 
member from Carrot River to do, and that is to make an 
investment in Saskatchewan, in the farmers in the communities 
in Saskatchewan, and go and invest in these rail lines now, as 
they’re being abandoned, for the people of Saskatchewan until 
such a time that you have an actual plan for transportation in 
this province. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:39 p.m. until 3:40 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Van Mulligen Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Kowalsky 
Bradley Koenker Renaud 
Lorje Hamilton Stanger 
Wall Kasperski Murray 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Gantefoer Heppner 
Osika McLane Julé 
 

Nays — nil 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to make a 
motion regarding the transmission of the previous motion and 
the debate to the Prime Minister and the Minister of Transport. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Lloydminster: 
 

That the text of the motion and transcripts of the debate on 
the motion just passed regarding the need to amend the 
Canada Transportation Act, 1996 be transmitted to the 
federal Minister of Transport, the federal minister of the 
Wheat Board, and the Prime Minister, on behalf of this 
Assembly, by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 — Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to enter into the debate this afternoon and discuss a very 

important issue that people across Saskatchewan are very 
interested in. Certainly people across the southern part of the 
province have taken keen interest in through their attendance at 
a number of public meetings. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we would hope as well that at the end of the 
debate, we will have the same opportunity to have a vote taken 
on this question as well, that all members would have the 
opportunity through free vote to express their opinions and 
represent their constituents. And that, Mr. Speaker, is in regards 
to the imminent closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we discuss the Plains Health Centre it’s 
interesting to note how on many occasions the government, 
whether it’s the Premier or the Minister of Health, keep telling 
residents of Saskatchewan, keep telling members of this 
Legislative Assembly, that everyone has had an opportunity to 
speak out on the issue. 
 
They had an opportunity certainly in 1995, at least that’s what 
I’ve heard the Minister of Health say at many of the public 
meetings, whether they be in Swift Current or Weyburn or 
Whitewood or Indian Head or wherever the meetings have been 
— Assiniboia. And the Minister of Health has got up and he has 
stood in his place and basically said, people of Saskatchewan 
voted for the Plains closure in 1995 at that provincial general 
election. And the fact that the NDP was re-elected was a 
positive vote for the government and the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 
 
(1545) 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, however, that as has been 
pointed out on a number of occasions, that in the vote that was 
taking place in 1995, members even of the current governing 
party, member from Regina South, was openly and publicly, 
and even in campaign brochures, saying elect me; I will stand 
up and I will make sure that I will speak up on behalf of the 
Plains and see to it that the Plains is not closed. 
 
I’m sure the member from Cannington . . . or Indian 
Head-Milestone on many occasions said as well that he would 
speak out in support of the Plains Health Centre 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, however, before the election writ was even 
over and the election ballots were counted, we find that these 
members all of a sudden were on the government side of the 
Assembly basically saying no, I’m sorry, we cannot stand in the 
way of progress — that’s the way they would put it — the beds, 
the Plains Health Centre, needs to be closed. 
 
But one has to ask, why do we need to close the Plains Health 
Centre. Especially when we see headlines such as “Bed 
shortage delays heart surgery” in the Wednesday, April 8, 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, or people . . . “Family angered as a 
result of lack of a bed availability for family member.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the debate taking place in the 
province, in Saskatchewan, and you look at what the Plains 
Health Centre has offered people of Saskatchewan, certainly 
rural and southern Saskatchewan, the Plains Health Centre as a 
facility no doubt provides top-notch care. 
 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

We’ve seen that on many occasions where individuals in very 
traumatic situations were brought into the Plains Health Centre 
and where they were given the life support that was needed to 
allow them the opportunity to continue to live a productive life. 
And while we can argue the fact that in many cases people have 
been treated very fairly and certainly have received very acute 
and specific care and emergency care, their needs have been 
met at the Plains. 
 
And while the government had argued that those needs will not 
be lost, they will be offered in the Regina General or the Pasqua 
hospitals, the facts are, Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis we hear of 
more bed closures across Saskatchewan. We hear of — as a 
result of bed shortages — we see waiting-lists continue to grow 
in the province of Saskatchewan for elective surgeries, Mr. 
Speaker. We even find emergency situations where people are 
scheduled for emergency operations but basically a more severe 
emergency arrives, that individual may be bumped for a few 
hours or even two or three days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that on one hand . . . even 
we just had a debate in this Assembly talking about rail-line 
abandonment, and the government, the NDP government, has 
said that it’s . . . and they basically requested the federal 
government to hold a moratorium on rail-line abandonment 
until further debate can take place to allow a total review of the 
problems that may arise or how we look at rail-line service in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
If indeed, Mr. Speaker, the government really feels that a 
moratorium is necessary to address the rail-line abandonment in 
the province, it would certainly be appropriate I think as well, 
Mr. Speaker, for the government to recognize that maybe a 
moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health Centre would be 
reasonable as well. And I think that’s what people are looking 
for. 
 
People are looking for this government to begin to listen, and I 
think a recent poll conducted, phone-in poll conducted by the 
Regina Leader-Post, reflects how people feel about health care. 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, the fact that over 5,700 
respondents, from people who responded to that phone-in show 
or phone-in line, and 91 per cent said that health care is in 
worse shape than it was prior to the wellness model. I believe a 
lot of that is reflective of the anger that people have, especially 
with the closure of the Plains health care centre. 
 
Now why are people so angry, Mr. Speaker? Why are people so 
annoyed at the fact that the government has talked about closing 
the health care centre? They’re annoyed for a couple of reasons. 
The fact that they haven’t had an opportunity to really be 
involved in the debate. The fact that the Plains health care, the 
Plains facility sits an ideal location for quick and easy access 
not only from many areas of the city of Regina, but certainly 
southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, people are angered because they see the 
cut-back in their own local communities of acute care facilities 
and of acute care beds and they view access to acute care 
facilities in the large urban centres as something that is their 
right if you will — if they need the service, that they’ve got a 
bed to come to. 
 

Well the government will argue that 675 beds are all that’s 
needed in the province of . . . or in the city of Regina, and the 
fact that when the Plains closes there will be no further bed 
closures. The facts are even one of their own studies, the 
Atkinson report indicates that 900 beds would be the more 
appropriate or in that neighbourhood of 900 beds, acute care 
beds would be more appropriate than 675. 
 
And the member from Regina South says no. I guess the 
member from Regina South wants to . . . says that anyone who 
has to wait more than a year for elective surgery, that’s fine. 
That’s their problem. Basically that’s what he’s basically saying 
to them. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if indeed this government is listening to the 
people, if indeed, Mr. Speaker, this government has the concern 
of the public in mind, if indeed it feels that it is addressing 
health care appropriately, and if it feels that people have had a 
chance to have a voice, then I would feel, Mr. Speaker, it would 
be appropriate for this Legislative Assembly to have an open 
and free vote on the question. 
 
Why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? Because we’re all elected. I 
say that because of the fact we are elected to represent our 
constituents. And I’m sure that many of the members on the 
government’s side of the House as well as my colleagues on the 
opposition side have had many people calling us in regards to 
the closure of the Plains health care centre. 
 
And I’ve just got in front of me just a few of the many letters 
I’ve received from individuals not only in my constituency but 
across the province in regards to the question, in regards to the 
closure of the Plains health care centre. And in one of the letters 
I quote, Mr. Speaker, says this: “We realize . . .” And this is 
talking . . . addressed to the Minister of Health: 
 

We realize that your main interests lie with the populations 
of Regina and Saskatoon, but remember there are a few 
taxpaying citizens like ourselves left in rural 
Saskatchewan. We do not think that you are properly 
addressing our concerns. Rural hospital bed and services 
have been decimated, yet your government is continually 
opening new office space. We would like to draw your 
attention to the fact that office space, personnel, and 
computers do not replace hospital staff, beds, and medical 
attention. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s just one of the letters I’ve received. 
 
Another letter to the editor, “Time has come to speak out 
against injustice.” And an editorial in the Star-Phoenix, April 8, 
talking about the closure. Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the 
Minister of Health would like everyone to believe that it was 
the Regina District Health Board that made that decision. And 
I’m quoting from editorial, “Lack of say on Plains angers 
public.” 
 

The government tells them the Plains closure was made at 
the local board level. Oh, was it? 
 
Let’s quickly review the record: 
 
“If it is not cost-efficient and it doesn’t make sense, the 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

government will not be providing funding,” said Regina 
South MLA Andrew Thomson, wearing a “Save the 
Plains” T-shirt at a rally on July 26, 1995, where he vowed 
the government would not close the Plains until a proper 
study was done. 
 

Then as you go further on in the article: 
 

“In terms of an acute-care facility, that issue is closed,” 
said then health minister Eric Cline on Jan. 16, 1996. 
 

That was just shortly after the 1995 rally that the member from 
Regina South attended with his Save the Plains T-shirt on, and 
then he comes to the Legislative Assembly and the Minister of 
Health at that time says, case closed. — that’s what the 
Premier’s arguing. 
 
People in Saskatchewan are basically saying, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re asking whether or not this government has any 
compassion, whether or not this government is willing to listen 
and willing to heed the wishes and desires of the people and 
allow the public to have some say. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, I do have a number of letters that 
have been addressed to my attention from people all across this 
province speaking out about the Plains health closure. Not only 
that, Mr. Speaker, I have had many people who have called me 
personally by telephone to speak and raise their concerns. 
 
And what I like, Mr. Speaker, about the fact people are writing 
and people are calling me is they’re not just talking about the 
personal circumstances they face, Mr. Speaker, but they’re also 
giving some solid reasons as to why the Plains Health Centre 
should stay open. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to get 
emotional on a question like this. It’s easy to talk about 
personal care that you’ve received. And granted, Mr. Speaker, 
many hospital facilities across this province do give excellent 
care when it comes to acute care. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to talking about the Plains 
health care centre it’s not just the emotional issue of how 
different people have found the service and the facility. There’s 
so many questions about accessibility, about the fact that it’s a 
trauma centre. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that we have so many 
other shortages in other areas in this province, it would seem to 
me that it certainly would be appropriate for the government to 
continue to allow the Plains to act as a trauma centre in the 
southern part of the province of Saskatchewan and allow the 
General to meet its role and allow the Pasqua to meet its role as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the fact talking about free vote 
or free expression, what did the former member have to say 
about the so-called free vote — Mr. Lewis Draper, member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg? 
 
This is what Mr. Draper says in an article, Leader-Post article, 
Thursday, May 7: 
 

“Nobody informed me we intended to close small hospitals 
and it was a great embarrassment when I learned about it.” 

This is a letter he wrote to fellow NDP MLAs: 
 

“I do not wish to embarrass my rural colleagues, but if the 
choice is between 52 politicians and 5,200 patients and 
friends in Lafleche and Gravelbourg, the choice becomes 
very easy.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of being involved in a 
by-election back in 1989 in that same area, 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg area, and the debate at that time was 
health care as well. In fact a letter by the NDP in that campaign 
went around saying to individuals that if they had voted for the 
Conservative candidate of the day that they would lose all their 
hospitals. 
 
Well the facts are, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t the Conservative 
Party that closed hospitals in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. Since 
1991, the NDP closed hospitals in that constituency and 
continue to close hospitals. 
 
Mr. Draper also in this article says: 
 

“I heard nothing about health care in the lead up to the 
1991 campaign until days before (the election was called) 
when we (candidates) were given a ‘hand-out’ that talked 
about wellness.” 

 
And he says: 
 

(He) immediately phoned NDP campaign manager Jack 
Messer to ask what “wellness” meant. 
 

This is what he was told: 
 

“I was told not to worry about it,” Draper said. “ ‘They (the 
voters) are not going to ask about health care. They just 
want to get rid of . . . Tories.’ Of course he was right.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, yes the 1991 campaign was more about getting rid 
of a government rather than looking at what governments had to 
offer or the political parties really had to offer. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think if you talk to people today, people would really 
as they would think back to that ’91 campaign, would feel 
deceived and would be disappointed in what has taken place 
because they were led to believe that if they voted especially for 
the NDP, that health care would be provided in a more 
compassionate way. But, Mr. Speaker, we are not seeing that. 
 
In fact, Mr. Draper said: 
 

. . . there was no talk in the NDP caucus about health care 
or hospital closures immediately after the 1991 election 
either . . . “Several months later at a caucus meeting, 
Louise Simard dropped the bombshell.” 
 

Several months later. Even the NDP members weren’t aware of 
the fact that the government was already contemplating the 
closing of 52 hospitals, including the Plains health care centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this article the . . . a further quote from the 
article says, “Despite this lack of . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now from both sides of the 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

House . . . Order! It’s not necessary to be having shouting back 
and forth. All hon. members are able to put their remarks on the 
record, where they will stand and be heard. And I’ll encourage 
all hon. members to allow the hon. member for Moosomin to be 
heard when he makes his remarks on the record. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
continue with a couple more comments out of the article that I 
am quoting from, the Leader-Post article, Thursday, May 7, and 
in regards to Mr. Draper’s comments where he said: 
 

There had been no caucus debate on whether this move 
should be made. 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member is just in close 
proximity to the Chair and close proximity to the Speaker. I just 
asked for the House to provide the hon. member for Moosomin 
to be heard, and within about 10 to 15 seconds we have 
members shouting across the floor at each other again. I’ll ask 
for the cooperation of the House to allow the hon. member for 
Moosomin to be heard. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, continuing 
on with a quote from this article. Mr. Draper says: 
 

There had been no caucus debate on whether this move 
should be made. There was no consultation with their rural 
MLAs — not even the one who happened to have three 
decades experience practising medicine in rural 
Saskatchewan. 

 
What that basically says to me, Mr. Speaker, that what the 
minister’s been saying is untruthful, the fact that he’s saying 
there was an open discussion, or the fact that members had an 
opportunity to have some say. And the member from . . . his 
former member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was saying he 
didn’t have that say. He didn’t have the opportunity to really 
express his opinion, even as a long-time experiencing 
practitioner practising medicine in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Despite this lack of discussion, a vote in caucus was taken 
on the rural hospital issue. 
 

And what does Mr. Draper say? 
 

(Mr.) Draper said he was the only one of the 55 NDP 
MLAs who voted against the closures. “Everybody voted 
for it, including the great defector from Shaunavon (Glen 
McPherson, who joined the Liberals)” . . . 
 

The former NDP MLA who all of a sudden is now standing up 
and saying that he is the saviour of the Plains — close the 
Plains Health Centre. He was one of the ones, if he really felt 
that strongly at the time, why didn’t he stand up at the time 
when Mr. Draper did and vote against the closure of the Plains 
health care centre. 
 

The only time the NDP caucus was ever consulted on 
health-care policy, Draper said, was when they were asked 
by Premier Roy Romanow “to suggest the propaganda” 
that would be used to sell to the public their 

already-decided-upon policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for our government, for the Premier, for the 
Minister of Health to suggest that the people, by their elected 
representatives, have had a say or have had a voice or have had 
an opportunity to express their concerns and opinions or even a 
vote on the issue, Mr. Speaker, is not really being honest or 
open with the public because of the fact that we haven’t had that 
free vote in this Assembly. And that’s why we’re calling for it. 
That’s why we’re asking government members to stand up in 
their place and speak out and represent the wishes of their 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why people are getting together, 2 and 300 
at a time at a busy time of the year to address the closure of the 
Plains health care centre. Mr. Speaker, it seems to me very 
appropriate that if the government is listening, if the Premier is 
listening, if the NDP are listening as they always like to tell us 
they are, that they would certainly give the public of this 
province an opportunity to a free vote in this Assembly. 
 
Or even better still, Mr. Speaker, the Premier could go one step 
further and say, I think the people of Saskatchewan have a point 
here. I think the fact that so many people are speaking out on 
this issue, maybe we should sit back. Maybe we should take the 
advice of the opposition and put a moratorium on that. Let’s 
discuss it a little further and determine whether or not the Plains 
Health Centre has a role to play in health care delivery in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker? I think if the Premier took that 
lead or even the Minister of Health took that lead or any one of 
the members, unfortunately they might even make it more 
difficult for the members of the Saskatchewan Party in the next 
provincial election. Because I think the people would say, well 
they were listening. 
 
But I can say, Mr. Speaker, from what I’m hearing, and even at 
meetings such as the one in Whitewood where the current 
government has had a long stand of good, solid, hardworking 
support, as I observed the number of the people at that meeting 
last week, Mr. Speaker, many of those people, some long-time, 
hardworking NDP supporters, were not very happy with the 
announcement of the closure of the Plains health care centre. 
 
And I think members across this province are certainly finding 
that from many of their members. The fact that even in Carrot 
River . . . and we talk about hospital closures, Carrot River 
announcing that they’re going to be cutting the services of acute 
care facilities. And you ask, where’s the member from Carrot 
River Valley? Is he speaking for his constituents? Why doesn’t 
he stand up and represent his constituents. 
 
Or whether it’s individuals in the Living Sky area, the 
community of Lanigan that is losing their acute care facilities, 
or cut-backs in other communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue of closing the Plains is much broader 
than just one facility. The issue of the closure of the Plains 
health care centre in the city of Regina and southern 
Saskatchewan basically speaks to how health care in this 
province is in crisis. 
 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

The fact that doctors are becoming discouraged, nurses and 
individuals working in the health care field are becoming 
discouraged, becoming overworked. The fact that people are 
finding themselves, as one call I just recently had talking about 
being informed a year ago in June that it would be about a wait 
for elective surgery, and now is just calling me recently and 
saying that they’re now informed that it’s not June, that it’s 
probably going to be September, October when that individual 
may receive that surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are seeing that people are becoming very 
discouraged with where we’re going in health care today. And 
the fact that the Plains is an issue at the forefront is just a part of 
the bigger picture. Actually the Plains is part of the iceberg of 
health care and the problems that are facing this government. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the government 
has the opportunity right now to start to turn the rudder to miss 
the iceberg. If they don’t, Mr. Speaker, the government may 
find themselves in the same situation the Titanic found itself in 
a number of years ago, Mr. Speaker, when due to carelessness, 
people’s lives were put in jeopardy because of the big, great 
ship Titanic running into an iceberg. 
 
Well the Plains has become that iceberg that the government is 
running headlong into on the health care debate in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that it would only be 
appropriate that at this time we ask the government to put that 
moratorium on on the closure of the Plains health care centre, 
just as they’ve called for a moratorium on any further rail-line 
abandonment in the province of Saskatchewan. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that would only be right; that would only be fair. 
 
And in order to allow other members to speak to the issue and 
in order to give members the opportunity to vote on the 
question, such as the vote we had earlier this afternoon, I will 
move this motion, allow for the further debate, and I look 
forward to the vote at the end of the debate on this motion, 
seconded by the member from Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to put 
a moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health Centre 
until the matter can be decided in the next provincial 
election. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make 
a few comments today on this issue, an issue that has seen a 
great deal of publicity. I was tempted to say light; I wouldn’t 
say that light has been the right word. I think it’s seen a great 
deal of heat lately. I think in part it’s occasioned by what I think 
is a gross misunderstanding by the opposition parties about this 
particular issue. I’d like in the first instance, Mr. Speaker, to 
offer a few comments about funding or finances. 
 
I have attended meetings that have been organized by the 
Liberal Party to, in their words, save the Plains. And at these 
public meetings there have been a great deal of comment made 

by people about funding — if there were only more funding for 
health care we might be able to approve this. If there were only 
more funding we might be able to keep the Plains open. If there 
were only more funding we might be able to do this, we might 
be able to that. 
 
So funding, even though it’s not an issue that has been 
addressed by the member for Moosomin in making his 
comments, it is something that is on the minds of many people 
who are concerned not only about the issue of the Plains 
hospital, but more generally about health care. 
 
Now I’d like to say in the first instance that this government has 
made a number of decisions over the years with respect to 
health care, not all of which are directly related to funding, but 
that many of these decisions have been made in the context of a 
very difficult financial environment — a very difficult financial 
environment. 
 
Now why is that the case, Mr. Speaker? Now I know that the 
opposition parties will shout out, well if you hadn’t invested in 
Guyana you would have had the money for health care. If you 
hadn’t done this on Channel Lake you would have had the 
money for health care. And I see the member for Melville is 
nodding his head that if you hadn’t made the investment in 
Guyana, that somehow you would have all the money that 
you’d ever need for health care. 
 
Well that then begs the question, Mr. Speaker, on our side, 
whether or not you should be doing any foreign investments. 
And they say you shouldn’t be doing any foreign investment, 
which soon begs the question, you don’t want the profits that 
come from those foreign investments either, which far outweigh 
the losses that we see in situations like Guyana. But that’s part 
of the political posturing and debate that takes place in the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the member for Melfort-Tisdale who’s involved in 
Channel Lake saying that if we, you know, hadn’t made those 
. . . or officials at SaskPower or whoever was responsible hadn’t 
made those kinds of mistakes with respect to Channel Lake, 
then we might have more money for health care. Well I would 
be concerned too if those kinds of mistakes or decisions were 
being made with great frequency. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite prepared, I am 
quite prepared, Mr. Speaker, to put our record, our record of 
public administration, to put our record and to contrast that with 
the party that that member represents; to contrast that with the 
Tory Party and the Tory administration of Grant Devine and ask 
people to choose and to choose on that basis. Do you choose the 
NDP, do you choose the NDP who when they make a mistake, 
openly admit it and try to deal with it as contrasted with the 
discredited, totally incompetent and corrupt administration of 
Grant Devine. 
 
And that is a question that I’m quite prepared to put the people 
of Saskatchewan. Or for that matter, with the record not of any 
Liberal Party or any Liberal government, because we haven’t 
seen very much, but even the record of the Liberal opposition 
while in opposition, who seemed quite incapable of running 
their own affairs and seemed quite incapable of maintaining any 
kind of congruency or harmony within their own party, Mr. 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

Speaker. 
 
So when it comes to those issues, we’re quite prepared to 
debate them, quite prepared to put those before the public, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But those, those, Mr. Speaker . . . And I hate to say it, I hate to 
say it, but the dollars that are represented by the Guyanas, the 
dollars that are represented by the Channel Lakes — and I’m 
using plural and I shouldn’t because essentially they’re singular 
— but the dollars that are represented by those, Mr. Speaker, 
are small change, small change — and I never thought I’d say 
that — are small change compared to the real problems of 
funding for health programs in the province of Saskatchewan, 
recognizing that health care is the number one priority for 
government financing, health care is the number one budget 
expenditure. 
 
So that when you talk about a difficult financial environment, 
you cannot help but have implication for health care in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now one of the things that we might have heard from the 
opposition party, and especially from the previous speaker, is 
the recognition that this difficult financial environment is in part 
occasioned because although we’re spending $1.7 billion this 
year on health care, we are also spending, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And I’m proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I might say that we are also — also, Mr. Speaker — spending 
$725 million, not quite 1.7 billion but $725 million this year on 
interest payments on a public debt, a public debt which was 
rung up in the 1980s by the Conservative Devine 
administration. And we would appreciate, we would appreciate, 
when it comes to discussing these difficult and emotional health 
care issues, a little honesty from the member from Moosomin, 
who was part of that administration, about this difficult 
financial environment would be very welcomed by all 
concerned, and especially by the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also would appreciate that when the Liberal 
Party opposite, Liberal Party opposite enters into debate in this 
issue that they might recognize that part of the difficult 
financial environment that the people of Saskatchewan find 
themselves in is also occasioned by actions of the federal 
government. Those actions were to cut transfer payments to all 
of the provinces in Canada as a means of balancing their budget 
in Ottawa. They cut health care and they cut it massively. That 
was their priority, that was their priority to cut that. 
 
Whereas the province of Saskatchewan, the province of 
Saskatchewan has never made a cut overall in health care 
spending in this province. Why? Because we say it is the 
number one public priority and it deserves the support of all of 
the people. Notwithstanding anything else that’s happening, 
anything else, it deserves our support and we must maintain and 
improve that system unlike — unlike — the federal government 
which saw fit to cut and cut massively into transfer payments 
for health care. 

(1615) 
 
I say shame. I say shame. What is wrong with these people, Mr. 
Speaker, that this in Canada, where the people of Canada, the 
people of Canada, when asked in recent poll what do your hold 
most dearly, what is it that identifies you as a Canadian no 
longer point to the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), 
no longer point to the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation), Mr. Speaker. No. 
 
What is it they point to? They point to health care. And what is 
it that you decided to cut as federal Liberals. Shame, shame, 
shame, Mr. Speaker, cutting health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their silence, whenever this issue is raised, their 
silence on this topic indicates to me and indicates very clearly 
to everyone in Saskatchewan — their silence on this — that 
they favour cuts to health care. They support what it is the 
federal government has done. They like to support any notion 
that makes it more difficult for provincial administrations to 
continue to priorize health care. 
 
Let’s make that clear. Not one word of protest, not one word in 
opposition to the cuts from the federal government. None. None 
whatsoever. No record, no fax, no telephone message, nothing. 
Zip. And that is the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Oh we know all about their approach, Mr. Speaker, all about 
their approach. They favour cuts to health care, they favour cuts 
to health care because we see that with their support for the 
federal government’s actions in this case. 
 
They also, incidentally, support an Americanized — and both 
parties do — an Americanized two-tiered system to health care. 
They also from time to time make it clear that they kind of 
favour a premium for health care that’s much the same as they 
have in Alberta, or where they what? Families are expected to 
come up with 8 or $900 a year no matter what your financial 
circumstances are, to come up with 8 or $900 a year to fund 
health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again let me just summarize this point. Let me 
summarize this point. Health care is for us an important public 
priority. We will continue to ensure that resources are devoted 
to health care to support improvements to our health care 
system. But none of this improvement and none of these 
additional resources have been helped either by a lack of 
honesty on the part of the Tory Party about events in the ’80s 
that impinge on us now, or are helped by the lack of action from 
the Liberal Party which supports cuts to health care at the 
federal level, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I wanted to make that clear. I wanted to make it clear because 
everywhere I go, in all of the meetings that are organized by the 
Liberal Party the issue of funding comes up, the issue of money 
comes up. And I want to make it clear that we will continue to 
support improvements to our health care system and make sure 
the resources are dedicated towards that, unlike those two 
parties, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one comment I wanted to 
make, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we are in 1998, and now the Saskatchewan 
Tory Party is saying you should . . . 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

An Hon. Member: — The reformatories. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The reformatories. You should stop 
what it is that you’re doing with respect to the Plains hospital. 
You should put a halt on it. You should put a moratorium on it. 
As if this is some decision or action which is only been . . . Or 
that they’re asking for a change in a policy or an action which is 
only been commenced within the last few weeks. 
 
There is, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to take a few minutes, I’d 
like to take a few minutes to go back to the history on this. And 
people can judge for themselves where it is that different 
decisions might have been made and which might have seen a 
different scenario and might not have seen us arguing this 
particular question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t know if that’s the case but I’ll be quite prepared, and I 
will be prepared to put before the people that are watching this 
today and for the members of the Assembly, a little history 
lesson on health care services or hospital services in Regina. 
 
And I go back to 1973 when a Dr. Graham Clarkson presented a 
report to the provincial government of the day entitled “Health 
Care Services in Regina: A Study of Health Care Services in 
Regina” which was conducted by J. Graham Clarkson 
Consultants Ltd. in February 1973. That became known as the 
Clarkson report, Mr. Speaker. That particular report was 
commissioned by the government because at that point in 1973, 
the Plains hospital was coming onto stream as an acute care 
facility in Regina. 
 
And although there had been discussions by the other hospitals 
how to better rationalize services, recognizing that not each 
hospital was going to have a cancer ward, recognizing that not 
each hospital was going to have, say, specialities in obstetrics, 
there had been discussions on the part of the health care system 
and the people involved in the other two hospitals how to 
rationalize those services. 
 
Clarkson was called upon by the government to study the 
situation in Regina and to give his report on what he thought 
should happen with respect to rationalization of health care 
services in the city for southern Saskatchewan. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I just might point out 
something, and it’s a little aside, you know, that you get at these 
meetings, and especially in rural Saskatchewan, about the 
Plains is our hospital in rural Saskatchewan to the exclusion of 
any other hospitals; the Plains is our hospital even though about 
half of all the people from rural Saskatchewan that do come to 
use hospital services in Regina — I think more than half — 
actually do go to the Regina General, and the Plains now. 
 
For example, if you’re a person from rural Saskatchewan and 
you need to have the obstetric services that are provided by the 
hospitals, well then you go to the Regina General Hospital. If 
you have cancer then you go to the Pasqua Hospital where the 
Allan Blair Memorial Cancer Clinic is located. And that has 
always been the case. 
 
But it’s also interesting to note that the very first words of Dr. 
Clarkson was that for many years hospital services in Regina 
have been provided by the Regina Grey Nuns, which is now the 

Pasqua Hospital, and the Regina General Hospital. 
 
As medical technology advanced and highways improved, these 
hospitals developed as referral centres for the southern portion 
of the province as well as providing comprehensive hospital 
services for the citizens of Regina and its immediate environs, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So even at that point you have to remember that before there 
was the Plains, Regina hospitals were the referral service for all 
of southern Saskatchewan, okay? So it’s not as if the Plains is 
the hospital for rural Saskatchewan as opposed to some other 
hospital providing the service only for urban Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. And I just wanted to get that out. 
 
But anyway, Clarkson looked at hospital services in Regina and 
made a number of recommendations. I might point out that in 
1973 Regina had 1,254 hospital beds. And I ask members to 
just note that number; and for people who are watching, that in 
1973 there were 1,254 hospital beds in Regina. And even then 
Clarkson was saying that the size of waiting-lists has been a 
source of concern. So even with 1,254 hospital beds, there was 
still a concern about waiting-lists, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I’ll certainly let the 
member know how it is that I propose to vote on this particular 
subject, Mr. Speaker, when I get around to it. And I’ll make it 
very clear — very clear — where I stand on this subject. I’ll 
also make it very clear where I was in the 1995 election on this, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, the assumptions of 1973 and the 
study by Dr. Clarkson became the blueprint, the blueprint for 
improvements to hospital facilities in Regina in the 1980s, Mr. 
Speaker, okay, in the late 70s and the 80s. That then . . . his 
study became the blueprint, Mr. Speaker, as to how hospital 
services were to be improved. And as a result, as a result of 
that, Mr. Speaker, we had a two-phase, two-phase 
improvement, two-phase improvement for hospital services in 
Regina. 
 
And the first phase meant that some funds were expended in the 
late 1970s into improving the Regina General Hospital and in 
improving the Pasqua Hospital. But in 1982, the phase two 
which saw the major, major expansion, or the major 
regeneration of those two facilities and involved about $85 
million, Mr. Speaker, of expenditure, that was supposed to start 
in 1982. 
 
But in 1982 the election of Grant Devine and his Tory PC 
(Progressive Conservative) government, they decided to put 
that on hold, decided to put that on hold, but then came back a 
year later and say, let’s give her snoose. Carry right on to spend 
$85 million in the 1980s — a decision, a decision supported by 
the Devine administration and a decision which is supported by 
the Saskatchewan Tory Party here today to spend 85 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member says that there is 
no Tory Party. 
 
Well I’m confused, Mr. Speaker, if I might digress here for just 
a minute. Because I’m responding, Mr. Speaker, to the heckling 
from the seat. He says that there is no Tory Party. Why is it that 
every time though we talk about the Tory record, they rise in 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

defence of the Tory record? As the member for Moosomin . . . 
(inaudible) . . . I don’t know what that old saying is, but if you 
throw a stick in the dark — is that how it goes? What . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . if you throw a stone in the dark, 
you’ll know you hit a dog. And I think that’s what happening 
here, Mr. Speaker, but . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. Order, 
order. Order, order. Order. Order. Order, order. Order. Now the 
Chair is much pleased to see the enthusiasm for the debate that 
the House has, but I would urge all hon. members to direct their 
enthusiasm to debate on the record, and not debate off the 
record, and to allow the hon. member who’s speaking to be 
heard in an uninterrupted manner with the respect that is 
deserving in the House. Having said that, I’ll recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Victoria. 
 
Order. Now the hon. member hasn’t even been recognized . . . 
hasn’t even stood and already we’re shouting across the House 
again. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t want to blame the Conservative government for having 
made the decision, for having made the decision to carry on 
with the plans which are in a sense the end product of the work 
that Clarkson did in 1970s in terms of how to rationalize 
hospital services in Regina. I don’t want to blame the 
Conservative government. 
 
By the same token, Mr. Speaker, I do not appreciate comments 
from those members about how we should be making different 
decisions today when they didn’t avail themselves of the 
opportunity to make different decisions when they had the 
opportunity to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, perhaps they weren’t aware as the 
government of that time of how medical technology was 
changing. Perhaps they weren’t interested in how home care 
provided much more of an alternative for acute care hospital 
beds; and that in the future as opposed to requiring 1,254 
hospital beds in Regina, we might require something far less 
than that. 
 
Now I don’t want to pin that on them for not having made that 
decision, Mr. Speaker. But also having said that, I wish they 
would recognize and be honest in recognizing that there were 
decisions made in the 1980s that have had a major bearing on 
what is now taking place in the 1990s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because pursuant to this plan and pursuant to an expenditure of 
about $85 million in the 1980s to improve the Regina General 
and to improve the Pasqua Hospital, by 1991 we had the 
following, here’s what another report, which was commissioned 
in 1991 by the Conservative administration of the day, the 
Atkinson report, had to say about what it found, what it found 
in terms of Regina hospitals after this expenditure. After this 
massive expenditure, which was supported by that 
administration, here is what a report which was commissioned 
by a Tory government had to say: 
 

The Regina General Hospital. Built in 1912, the Regina 
General Hospital currently operates 466 acute care beds, 
25 designated long-term care beds. Approximately 70 per 

cent of these are new in-patient beds in programed areas. 
 
Seventy per cent. Here’s what they had to say about the Pasqua 
Hospital: 
 

Built in 1918, was initially the Grey Nuns Hospital, it was 
purchased by the province in 1972. Approximately 80 per 
cent of its 334 acute care beds and programs are new. 

 
(1630) 
 
Okay. So here in terms of the General Hospital, all this tens of 
millions of dollars spent in the ’80s, at the end of the day, the 
report that you commissioned as a Tory government, by 
Atkinson, said 70 per cent of all the Regina General Hospital 
had been regenerated, modern, brand-new; 80 per cent of the 
Pasqua, modern, brand-new. And anybody that’s been through 
those facilities in those days will know the truth of those 
statements, Mr. Speaker, okay . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, those are old facilities but they have been modernized and 
by the time that your massive expenditures were done in the 
1980s this was the situation. 
 
Here’s what it had to say about the Plains Health Centre, and 
when you had the opportunity to make an . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now I know that the hon. 
member is a veteran member and well acquainted with rule 28 
that he’ll want to direct his debate through the Chair as required 
by the rule. And so as to permit . . . Order! So I permit the hon. 
member to continue and I’ll ask all members to cooperate. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think those 
members, those members will also be aware, Mr. Speaker, that 
that particular government didn’t spend any money on 
improving the Plains Health Centre when they had the 
opportunity to do so in the 1980s. And I might say there was a 
window of opportunity there to consider a slightly different 
direction than had been anticipated by Clarkson, which might 
have seen more than expenditure on the Plains to bring it up to 
speed, and perhaps not upgrade the General hospital, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There was that window of opportunity and they didn’t take it in 
the 1980s. But by the time the ’80s were over, their consultant, 
Dr. Atkinson, found this about the Plains Health Centre: built in 
’74, currently operates 267 acute care beds, major structural 
changes are required if it is to continue its role as an acute care 
hospital. And he makes mention of an asbestos abatement has 
been ordered to meet fire code regulations. And something that 
doesn’t get mentioned very often but was also a major part of 
this, the critical care areas urgently need modification, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Okay. That was the situation, that was the situation after 
massive expenditures by the Tory government of the 1980s. 
Okay? Two facilities in the city which had been to a very great 
extent modernized and improved, and one facility which was 
built in the 1970s in major . . . requiring, in his words, majoral 
structural changes. 
 
It’s not my report, Mr. Speaker. This is a report by . . . it’s 
called “More Effective Hospital Care for Regina — A concept 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

for Rationalization of Acute Care Services.” It was delivered in 
April 1992, but it was commissioned by the former Tory 
government and its called the Atkinson report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when George McLeod from Meadow Lake was the 
Minister of Health for the Tory administration, he decided, after 
spending $85 million on improving health care, or hospital 
services in Regina, that maybe they should have one hospital 
board for the city, and to look at sort of this trend of not 
requiring as many hospital beds and how better to rationalize 
these services in Regina. So it was the Tory administration, Mr. 
Speaker, the Tory administration that spelled the doom of the 
Plains hospital, Mr. Speaker. They had different choices but 
chose not to take them. So, Mr. Speaker, that was the change 
that occurred. 
 
Now there was some other major changes that occurred in the 
1980s — major changes. And the major changes occurred in the 
area of health technology. And you will remember that when I 
said in 1973 that Dr. Clarkson said at that time they had 1,254 
hospital beds, that’s what they needed. That’s what they needed 
to provide hospital services for Regina and southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But there were major changes that occurred in the 1980s. Major 
changes which I might say unfortunately passed the Tory 
government by. They weren’t able to pick up on it. They 
weren’t able to respond quickly enough, Mr. Speaker. Or 
perhaps there was nothing that could be done about it and no 
blame should be attached to the Tory government. But then 
again, I say if there’s no blame to be attached to them, neither 
should they be attaching blame in this situation for the 
expenditures that were made in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, the member’s 
asking me how I vote. I vote for improved and better health care 
for Regina and southern Saskatchewan. That’s what I’m going 
to be voting for. That’s what I’m going to be speaking in favour 
of. Mr. Speaker, you won’t see me clinging to the past. You 
won’t see me clinging to a pile of bricks because bricks offer 
nothing. You’ll see me vote for better hospital services. You’ll 
see me vote for better health care services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other major change that occurred in the 1980s 
was the question of technology, okay. Major changes occurred 
in technology. And I venture to say there may be even members 
of this Legislative Assembly who are old enough to remember 
this but maybe not. If not, check with your parents, check with 
your grandparents, as to what might have happened in the early 
’80s if you’d have gone for cataract surgery. 
 
If you’d had to have gone for cataract surgery in the early ’80s, 
the chances are you would have had to be admitted the night 
before the surgery for what’s called pre-op. Then you would 
have had the surgery on the second day and then you would 
have had to remain in the hospital for a solid week — a solid 
week, immobilized, as I understand it, in some special 
contraption so there is no movement of the head and movement 
of the eyes. Attended to hand and foot, literally, because you 
couldn’t look after yourself. And that’s how cataract surgery 
was dealt with in the 1980s. 
 
But there are major changes that took place in technology, in 

medical technology, which meant that as opposed to having to 
be in a hospital for a solid week — for a solid week — 
nowadays, cataract surgery, Mr. Speaker, you go in in the 
morning and you check out the same day. And people think it’s 
wonderful, people think it’s excellent. 
 
I first learned about this on the doorsteps during the last election 
campaign when I ran across a woman on the doorstep. She was 
somewhat older than I was and she had a patch on her eye. And 
I said, what happened to you? She said, well I’ve just had 
cataract surgery. 
 
I said, were you in the hospital for very long? — being a little 
bit naïve about these things. She said, oh no, I went in this 
morning and I came out today. So I just got home from the 
hospital. And it’s great, she says. 
 
Why? Because I used to be a nurse and I knew how long it took 
and I knew what, I know what a tremendous improvement this 
is for people to have these changes in technology. 
 
And it’s just not cataracts. It’s gall bladder. It’s all kinds of 
laparoscopic surgery. Major changes in medical technology. 
 
Now what do all of these things have in common, Mr. Speaker, 
what do they in common? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not just medical 
technology, it’s also in pharmacology. I know for example, that 
there have been many new drugs that have come into use by the 
medical community. 
 
One area that I am particularly familiar with because of some 
relations with people in that community, is drugs that treat 
psychiatric illnesses. Where in the past people might have had 
to be hospitalized far more to deal with psychosis, these days 
because of the administration of the right kinds of drugs, they 
are able to be maintained in the community and on the streets. 
 
But all of this means, Mr. Speaker, all of this means that when 
you no longer need a week-plus in a hospital bed and now can 
have the surgery done the same day, and out the same day, you 
don’t quite need the hospital beds you might once have required 
for the proper care for people in Saskatchewan — or anywhere, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the future, Mr. Speaker, on that — what was it? A couple 
of weeks ago that there was a great deal of discussion about 
some miracle drugs in the area of cancer. These drugs 
apparently, as I understand it, when they’re introduced those 
drugs starve the cancers of blood; that the cancers can no longer 
grow, and because they no longer get the blood supply, then 
they atrophy and therefore the cancer is cured in that way. Can 
you just think for a minute, can you think for a minute as to not 
only the blessing that will be for people that are afflicted by 
cancer — the blessing that that will be — but also the 
implications that it will have for our health care system, which 
still sees far too many people being admitted because they are 
being cared for for cancer. 
 
And so these technologies are evolving and are improving at all 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

times and this is a blessing for the people of Saskatchewan. 
This is a blessing that we receive as the changes in these 
technologies, Mr. Speaker. But, but it does have an implication 
as to how many hospital beds you actually require to perform 
surgeries and to look after people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another change that has occurred during the 1980s 
and is picking up a great deal of steam and I’m seeing . . . I’m 
glad to see that the Ontario government has now come on 
board, is understanding its place too, is their home care, okay. 
 
We’re beginning to understand far more about home care, how 
home care might help people to get well in their homes as 
opposed to having to go to hospitals. And the best example I 
can think of — I have a constituent, Mr. Speaker, who, I have a 
constituent who related to me that because of an infection that 
he had that he required intravenous injection of antibiotics as 
opposed to taking orally, and so therefore he had to be hooked 
up to an intravenous bag which contained the solution that 
contained the antibiotic and he was able to do this at home. He 
didn’t have to go to the hospital. 
 
The nurse came by at 2 in the afternoon. The nurse came by at 8 
o’clock at night. The nurse came by at 2 o’clock in the morning, 
and a nurse came by at 8 o’clock in the morning — every six 
hours — to change the intravenous bag. But it meant that he 
was able to get cured while he was at home, whereas in the past 
he might have required a hospital bed for the four or five days 
that it took to get better. And this is a tremendous improvement. 
 
This is a tremendous improvement for people. Now those 
people, those Tories, can take the position that it’s better, better, 
better to have the old cataract surgery where you laid in a 
hospital bed for seven days. Better to have had the old system 
that you check into a hospital bed simply because you need a 
intravenous drip 24 hours a day, that only needs to be changed 4 
times a day. 
 
You can take the position, if you want, that it’s better health 
care for that to be done in an acute care hospital as opposed to 
doing that kind of thing at home, Mr. Speaker. But I take the 
position that that’s a tremendous improvement in health care 
and again and again . . . Again, Mr. Speaker, it has implication 
for hospital . . . (inaudible) . . . Now again the members will 
criticize, you’re pushing people out the door too soon, and 
home care and all that kind of nonsense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I tell you, like when you look at readmission rates, people 
who are readmitted for the same occurrence after 30 days or 70 
days, it doesn’t bear that out. There’s always readmission. 
There’s always about 11 per cent or so, as I understand it, 
people who are readmitted because the surgery that was done or 
the solution that was administered in the hospital didn’t work so 
people are readmitted because something didn’t go right. 
 
But has there been any major change in this? No, no change. In 
fact if there is any change it’s slightly downward, and that’s 
probably reflective of better surgical techniques than we’ve had 
in the past, Mr. Speaker, but there’s no change. 
 
But all of that has an impact on hospital beds. Even if the 
Conservatives opposite, the Tories opposite, don’t want to 
admit it, the people of Saskatchewan know this. That where in 

1973 you might have required 1,254 hospital beds, by the time 
the Atkinson report came out — and that was authored by the 
Conservative government in the early 1990s — at that point 
they’re talking about 900. 
 
Now the Regina Health District says 675 hospital beds will 
suffice, and we can quibble, Mr. Speaker, about whether 675 is 
the exact number; whether it should be 685 or 95, or for that 
matter whether it should be 665. We can quibble about these 
things, but the fact of the matter is, the fact of the matter is that 
starting in the 1980s, there has been a major trend, a major 
trend of fewer hospital beds required; while at the same time, 
the same time, because we have an ageing population, we’ve 
seen a major increase in the number of surgeries that have been 
done. 
 
And this destroys all of your old thinking about what we really 
require in the way of hospital beds; really destroys all the old 
thinking in terms of what kinds of care you need out there. Even 
though hospital beds are going like this, the number of surgeries 
that are able to be done are going like this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that the 1980s saw major changes in 
health care and those are major changes that health care systems 
now have to deal with. It’s not just a matter that this is a 
blessing for individuals, Mr. Speaker, who are able to benefit 
from fewer days stay in hospitals, it also has implications for 
those who are charged with the public administration of our 
health care system. And they have to respond. 
 
(1645) 
 
Again, earlier I talked about difficult financial circumstances. 
We cannot in the face of difficult financial circumstances take a 
position that somehow we should be oblivious to these things, 
that somehow we can continue to spend money like it’s going 
out of style; that money grows on trees and that we can just 
pluck it from the trees — as the Conservative administration of 
the 1980s used to believe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Oh, Mr. Speaker, before I forget, there’s one other major 
change that happened in 1980s which has had a major impact 
on health care in Regina, okay, and for southern Saskatchewan. 
And that was the decision by the Conservative government of 
the day to curtail funding to the College of Medicine in 
Saskatoon, which caused the College of Medicine to stop using 
the Plains hospital as a teaching hospital, which has resulted 
more so than any other thing in a loss of specialities and a loss 
of specialists for the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I just want to make it clear, want to make it clear that 
everyone understands that little major change that occurred in 
the 1980s because of a decision, a decision made by that Devine 
administration. And every time you mention it, they continue to 
support and offer support for that sort of sorry time in our 
history. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, it was after the 1980s that, after the 
1980s that the Atkinson report, which was commissioned in 
January of 1991 by George McLeod and the Grant Devine 
administration, the Tory administration . . . his terms of 
reference was to develop a blueprint to guide the overall 
planning for programs and services offered by the Regina 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1998 

hospitals after an $85 million expenditure had been made on 
those hospitals. 
 
These recommendations were: number one, the acute hospital 
care in Regina should be consolidated in the Regina General 
and in the Pasqua Hospital; number two, the Plains hospital 
centre should phase out its acute care roles; and number eleven, 
Saskatchewan Health should consider a single governance 
structure for Regina hospitals. 
 
Now those members talk about health districts, and we’d like 
each hospital to have its own board. We kind of like the old 
system where every home care district had a board, every 
hospital got a board, anybody that’s got any involvement in 
health care at all has got its own board — contrary to what their 
own consultants were advising them, Mr. Speaker, and that was 
that there should be a single governance structure. 
 
Now Atkinson pointed out some of the problems with having 
three hospitals in Regina, and again this is not a consultant that 
was commissioned by the NDP. This is a consultant . . . The 
Liberals would be interested to know this, if they weren’t Tories 
in those days of course. Like I don’t know that because we 
generally find that when the Tories were in power we didn’t 
find any Liberals and they were supporting the Tories; they call 
themselves Tories. But anyway, the Liberals would be 
interested to hear that this report which was commissioned by 
the Tory government in Regina, the Atkinson report, talked 
about the problems with having three hospitals in Regina. 
 
They talked at that time about problems with having three 
hospitals in Regina, duplications of positions . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Expensive equipment for diagnosis and therapy must be 
purchased for each site, which could mean that in future some 
new and expensive equipment that cannot be afforded. Where 
shortages of staff exist from time to time the problem will be 
exacerbated by spreading them across three sites. The cost of 
supporting three physical plants is significant. 
 
The number of administrative, maintenance and dietary, and 
other services required creates additional overhead costs. And 
that’s something the public understand, that if you’ve got 675 
beds, that if you can do it over two buildings there’s going to be 
some savings, because well you only need two cafeterias as 
opposed to one. You only need a limited number of 
administrative people for two buildings or fewer than you might 
require for three. You need fewer maintenance staff for two 
buildings than you require for three, and so on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They also mentioned problems with the Plains Health Centre, 
and this was the Atkinson report that was commissioned by the 
Tory government. The Plains Health Centre must be upgraded 
to meet fire code requirements and asbestos must be removed. 
The Plains Health Centre critical care areas are woefully 
inadequate — woefully inadequate, Mr. Speaker. Its design, 
which puts the critical care areas along corridors, is extremely 
difficult and inefficient for nursing and potentially jeopardizes 
patient care. This layout must be changed for the Plains Health 
Centre to be used frequently. And so on and so on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also they talked about emergency services — 24-hour 
emergency services are very costly for any hospital to maintain. 
Having three emergency services compounds the problem of 

physician coverage when specialists are in short number. The 
number of emergencies in Regina does not support three sites 
and travel within the city is not difficult, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this again is the Tory-authored or the Tory-commissioned 
report, Mr. Speaker, coming to those conclusions. And it was 
on that basis that the Regina Health District came to some 
conclusions that . . . and they looked at various scenarios, but 
the bottom line on those was, Mr. Speaker, that after an $85 
million expenditure in the 1980s to upgrade the Regina General 
and to upgrade the Plains, it would require very few additional 
dollars to upgrade the Regina General and the Pasqua — sorry, 
the Pasqua — to accommodate all of the beds and services that 
were then being provided at the Plains. 
 
But significant annual savings and operating costs would result. 
More dollars available for services in progress, fewer dollars for 
dietary, fewer dollars for maintenance, fewer dollars for 
management. Fewer dollars being spent on those things but 
more dollars being made available for important services and 
programs. 
 
They also found, Mr. Speaker, that to close the Regina General 
Hospital, which at that point had been 70 per cent done, and add 
to the Plains, was very expensive because that would require, in 
the case of Plains, building a new tower. If you’re going to have 
the General then you’d have to add the new tower, which is 
very expensive. Which would not offset annual savings in 
operating costs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In any event, the conclusion they came to, based in large part on 
the Tory . . . on the report which is authored by the Tory — that 
three hospitals meant fewer dollars available for services and 
programs. And that’s the decision that has been made and that 
is the background — the genesis if you like — of the decision 
that was made in 1993 by the Regina Health District — though 
the board I guess at that point, before there was a health district. 
 
And again, the concept of having one board for those hospitals 
is not something that came from the NDP. That was something 
too that came from the Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. 
But that is the conclusion they came to. Given so that the 
expenditures of dollars in the 1980s, they had very little option 
but to proceed as they now have done, to improve the General, 
to improve the Pasqua and to move the services and the beds 
from the Plains to those two new and improved facilities. 
 
Now I want to touch very briefly, Mr. Speaker, with some of 
the issues that had been raised. The member talks about the 
impact of the closures of rural hospitals; that somehow this 
should have a bearing on the need for hospital beds in Regina. 
Well I remember one rural hospital which was featured on a 
television show. I think it was in Coronach, and the Coronach 
hospital, Mr. Speaker. Now I have to ask, what difference will it 
make to hospital services in Regina? 
 
Having converted the Coronach hospital to a health centre, did 
it mean that the cardiovascular surgery that otherwise might 
have been done at the Coronach hospital now has to be done in 
Regina? Did it mean that the orthopedic surgery that otherwise 
might have been in the Coronach hospital now has to be done in 
Regina? Did it mean that the ophthalmological services that 
were provided by the Coronach hospital now had to be done in 



May 12, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

Regina? Did it mean that gynecologists would no longer be able 
to provide services for people at the Coronach hospital; now 
had to be done in Regina? 
 
No, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t mean any of those things because 
none of those services were being provided in those hospitals 
and will have zip — no effect — on hospital services in Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. None at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And even Atkinson, the author of the report commissioned by 
the Tories, said all this seems to indicate that there is not an 
untapped patient case-load that will require access to Regina 
hospitals. He’s talking about impact of rural hospitals, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Access has been mentioned as an issue, and I agree. I agree, Mr. 
Speaker, that access is far easier to the Plains hospital for 
people from out of town than it is to the Regina General 
Hospital. But again, you have to remember that about half the 
people that now come to hospitals come to the Pasqua and to 
the General and are able to do so. Okay? 
 
Parking has been mentioned, Mr. Speaker. I think that there is a 
recognition that parking is a problem today. But I can’t say that 
I remember in 1986, when my son was born, that my wife and I 
went to the Regina General Hospital, two, three, four times 
daily to visit our son who was in the neo-natal care unit — and 
received excellent care there — I can’t remember parking as 
having been a big problem there. And I don’t think parking is 
going to be that big a problem that the members like to make it 
is . . . make it out to be, after the consolidation is done, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to deal very briefly with the 
question of a free vote. These members say that there should be 
a free vote. Now in our system of government, Mr. Speaker, 
parties at election time put forward a platform. They put 
forward a platform and they say to the public, this is what we 
want to do. This is what we want to do. And then that party gets 
elected and they have the power to do what it is that they say 
they’re going to do. And there are no excuses that can be 
offered by that government for not having done what it is that 
they say they propose to do. No excuses at all. When they go 
back to the people they can say, this is our program; this is what 
we did; there are no excuses, none whatsoever. So it is a clear, 
clear accountability, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when votes involve money, the government is right to ask 
for support of its members to main integrity of its overall 
programs. A government loss on a money vote in the 
Legislative Assembly is generally taken, or is always taken, as a 
loss of confidence in the government, Mr. Speaker; that when 
there is money involved, to say members should have a free 
vote, to spend money in effect — to spend money — which is 
not provided for, is to argue governments should no longer be 
accountable for how dollars are spent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is to say the government gets elected for their certain 
programs and say this is what we want to do. Here’s our 
priorities. Here’s where we think the money should be spent. 
Here’s where we think the taxes should be cut. And then for the 
opposition to come along and say, well we want to have a free 
vote on an issue that has major money implications and 

therefore the government should still go back and say yes we 
had our program — it doesn’t work that way, friends; it simply 
doesn’t work that way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is a very clear accountability mechanism in our system of 
government, Mr. Speaker. It’s fundamental; it’s a fundamental 
aspect of our system, and government is re-elected on whether 
or not it accomplishes its program, Mr. Speaker, unlike the 
American system which is far less accountable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And these are issues that I would like frankly to have more time 
to dwell on. I support our system but I think at this point I 
would like to move that debate on this be adjourned, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:58 p.m. until 4:59 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 20 
 

Van Mulligen Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Kowalsky 
Calvert Teichrob Bradley 
Koenker Renaud Lorje 
Cline Hamilton Stanger 
Wall Kasperski Murray 
Langford Murrell  
 

Nays — 8 
 

Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
Heppner Osika  
 
Debate adjourned 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1082 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1082 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1082 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1082 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1082 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1082 
  Whitmore.................................................................................................................................................................................1082 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1082 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1082 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1083 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1083 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Free Vote to Save the Plains Health Centre 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1083 
 Government Urges Amendment to the Canada Transportation Act 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1083 
 Health Care Funding 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1083 
 Saskatchewan’s Jobless Rate Falls 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1084 
 Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations Citizen of the Year 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1084 
 Palliative Care Week 
  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1084 
 Saskatoon Eastview By-Election 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1084 
 Kinsmen Club Sponsorships 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................1085 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Carrot River Hospital Closure 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1085 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1085 
 Railway Successor Rights 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1086 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1086 
 Potential Drought Conditions 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1087 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1087 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1087 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1087 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1088 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1088 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1089 
 Potential Wheat Trade War 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1089 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1089 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 220  The Trade Union Amendment Act (Repealing Successor Rights) 



 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1090 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................1090 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Grain Transportation 
  Renaud ...........................................................................................................................................................................1090, 1099 
  Langford ..................................................................................................................................................................................1093 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1093 
  Whitmore.................................................................................................................................................................................1095 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................1095 
  McLane ..........................................................................................................................................................................1096, 1099 
  Stanger ...........................................................................................................................................................................1097, 1099 
  Kowalsky .......................................................................................................................................................................1098, 1100 
 Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................1100 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 4 — Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1100 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1104 
 Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................1111 
 
 


