





























































Hansard: October 23, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2125 
 October 23, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 10:00 a.m. 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present to open this sitting. 
 
Prayers 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I present once 
again the names of people on a petition extremely concerned 
over the situation of our health care with the closure of the 
Plains. 
 

Wherefore the petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided by the Plains 
hospital may be continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures are from Churchbridge, primarily from 
Churchbridge, and I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also have a 
petition this morning from petitioners from communities of 
Bredenbury and Churchbridge. And they also ask that the 
government provide adequate funding to the Regina Health 
District so that essential services provided at the Plains Health 
Centre may be continued. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition here signed by citizens certainly concerned with the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre and how that just goes to 
address the critical problem of huge waiting lists in this 
province. But the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
from the communities of Langenburg and Churchbridge. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise 
again today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to present 
a petition. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 

by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by taxpayers, 
disgruntled taxpayers, from the Churchbridge, Langenburg, 
Bredenbury areas, and I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d be 
happy to present a petition on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer for relief reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads; to enter into 
negotiations with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) for a long-term plan of rural 
road restitution reflecting future needs and to provide 
safety for all drivers as the new trucking regulations 
changes safety factors on these roads. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These come from the area of Shackleton, Maple Creek, and I’m 
happy to present them on their behalf today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 
praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to act to 
save the Plains Health Centre; 
 
Of citizens humbly praying for the government to 
immediately start work in rebuilding our secondary 
highways system to provide for safe driving; 
 
And finally, citizens humbly praying for the government to 
repair and pave the gravel portion of Highway No. 349. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 75 ask the government the 
following question to the Minister of Health: 
 

What comfort level is there for people that are using blood 
and blood products supplied by the new Canadian Blood 
Services; are blood products being brought in from 
England where mad cow disease is still a problem; are 
blood products being brought in from the U.S. (United 
States) to Saskatchewan, and to what extent is blood 
testing of these products a 100 per cent process? 
 

I’m happy to ask that question today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



2126 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 1998 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Student Wins Remembrance Day Poetry Contest 
 

Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last session the 
member from Meadow Lake gave a member’s statement in 
which he said words to the effect that perhaps it is the youth of 
today who are best able to reach across the generations and 
understand the feelings of the men and women who served in 
our world wars. With the 80th Remembrance Day coming in 
less than three weeks, I lend my support to that belief. 
 
I am proud to report that a student in my constituency has won 
the provincial poetry contest and that her poem is now entered 
in the national competition. 
 
Brita Barranieski, a graduate of Hafford Central School, placed 
first out of more than 3,000 competitors. Brita is now 
continuing her studies at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
She was honoured by Hafford School, and she will also be 
recognized by the local legion at the Remembrance Day service 
next month. Her poem will be read at that service and I will be 
happy to share it with any member who is looking for a fresh, 
heartfelt, original material for services in your constituency. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as long as we have thoughtful and creative 
young people like Brita, we are not in danger of forgetting the 
purpose of this very important day of remembrance and respect. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highways in Saskatchewan Contest Update 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
to give the latest report on the Worst Highways in 
Saskatchewan contest. We already have received over 50 phone 
calls and e-mails dealing with this particular subject from across 
the province and in fact, in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s gone 
beyond Saskatchewan. 
 
We had a phone call this morning from a gentleman in Toronto 
who said his local radio station is playing the contest in Toronto 
because people from the east eventually maybe drive through 
Saskatchewan. They need to know which is the worst highway, 
to avoid it. 
 
We had a phone call from a gentleman in Edmonton who says 
that he misses a lot of things about Saskatchewan but he doesn’t 
miss the highways. In fact he wants the prize, if he wins, to go 
to his father-in-law who actually has to drive these roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular issue is gaining a lot of attention, so 
again I would ask the minister: Madam Minister, will you 
please be a judge? Help us determine which is the worst 
highway in Saskatchewan, and then fix it. 
 

Strasbourg Hosts One-Act Drama Festival 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you and 
for you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am happy to announce that 
today and Saturday in your constituency of Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, the play as Shakespeare said will be the 
thing, the thing to see that is. The Last Mountain Theatre 
Company of the town of Strasbourg is hosting the annual 
Saskatchewan One-Act Play Festival sponsored by 
Saskatchewan Lotteries, and by Saskatchewan Community 
Theatre, Inc. 
 
Theatre groups from eight communities will perform before an 
enthusiastic audience and before one stern adjudicator who 
shall remain nameless. 
 
The plays will come from Strasbourg, Bulyea, Prince Albert, 
Yorkton, the Battlefords, Kerrobert, Wolseley, and Swift 
Current. There will be four plays each night with a gathering in 
the green room after the performances for both players and 
audience. 
 
This festival is being held in conjunction with the 10th 
anniversary of the Last Mountain Theatre Company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we sometimes make the mistake I think of 
identifying community vitality with economic activity alone. In 
fact the economy, though very important, is only one piece of 
the puzzle that makes for healthy, interesting and culturally 
alive towns. 
 
Strasbourg is one example of a well-rounded community, and 
volunteers like this group of players make it so. You are lucky, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have such a town in your constituency. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SGI Canada Charity Classic Bonspiel 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — With the almost perfect weather outside 
today I hesitate to even mention winter sports, even if curling is 
one of the top five religions in Saskatchewan. But I think it is 
important to announce that earlier this month the sixth annual 
SGI Charity Classic bonspiel took place here in Regina. 
Spectators were treated to an exciting preview of the curling 
competition we will see this winter, provided by 32 world-class 
rinks. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, over $31,000 was raised and presented to 
KidSport Saskatchewan. This volunteer charity is committed to 
ensuring that all Saskatchewan children have an opportunity to 
participate in community level sports, in spite of any social or 
economic obstacles they may face. At the same time KidSport 
helps children to learn the value of teamwork and 
sportsmanship. 
 
Previous bonspiel recipients have included the MS (multiple 
sclerosis) society, the Saskatchewan Head Injury Association, 
and the Children’s Health Foundation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this charity classic is organized and 
staffed by volunteers and sponsored by SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) brokers and partners. 
 
Curling, voluntarism, and good works are, I submit, a 
combination completely typical of Saskatchewan and I 
congratulate all who took part. Thank you. 



October 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2127 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nifty Noodle Plant 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In our 
ongoing efforts to help opposition members report the good 
news happening around the province, I wish to inform the 
House and the member from Thunder Creek of a success story 
in his own constituency. 
 
He of course, like his buds, is so busy moaning about sick cows 
and bumpy roads that he dismisses the worthy efforts of his 
own people. Nifty Noodles of Mossbank has had something of a 
bumpy ride over the years but persistence and determination by 
owner Jeff Sarsfield and the local people seems to be paying 
off. Upgrades have been made to the plant in the past couple of 
years, helped along by some funding from PAWBED 
(Partnership Agreement on Water Based Economic 
Development), and it is now competing in the flat noodle 
market right across the country. 
 
The plant has been operating on a two or three day a week 
schedule; now it is moving towards a two-shift a day, five days 
a week operating schedule and it expects to have 20 or 22 
employees within the next couple of years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is just one more economic success 
story, a story taking place not in the major centres but in rural 
Saskatchewan, a story which presents concrete evidence of 
what we on this side know, and those on that side deny, that the 
people of Saskatchewan are hard-working, innovative, 
determined, and optimistic, eager and able to compete in both 
national and international markets. 
 
I am happy to congratulate owners and workers of Nifty 
Noodles of Mossbank. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Save the Plains Committee Workers 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to speak about 
two individuals who made the Save the Plains Committee the 
success that it was: Darlene Sterling and Lenore Schmelling. It 
was through their hard work and dedication that the Save the 
Plains Committee was successful in bringing this issue to the 
top of this province’s agenda. They travelled hundreds of miles 
every week just to talk to citizens of this province about the 
closure of the Plains hospital. Despite personal attacks by the 
government members opposite, many of whom arrived at these 
meetings in government vans, they fought on. 
 
Darlene and Lenore received a great deal of support from the 
people they met, and the support wasn’t just moral support. 
People across this province were so angry at this government 
for not listening to them for closing the Plains, that hundreds 
donated money to fight the closure of the Plains hospital. 
 
And now as the closure of the Plains draws near, the nurses who 
fought hard to save health care in this province have fittingly 
decided to donate the remaining funds that were collected to a 
charity called Think First. Think First is a charity that works for 
the prevention of brain and spinal cord injuries among young 

people. 
 
Although all members of this House may not have been in 
agreement with the issue of the closure of the Plains hospital, I 
hope all members will join me in congratulating Lenore and 
Darlene for their dedication to the betterment of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Foster Family Week 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased to 
acknowledge in this Assembly an important group of largely 
unsung heroes who contribute to our province. 
 
This week has been designated as Foster Family Week in 
Saskatchewan. There are more than 800 foster homes across our 
province. This week is a good opportunity to recognize and 
commend the many individuals who run foster homes, for their 
work and their commitment. 
 
Foster families work as part of a team with social workers and 
other professionals to support families and their children. They 
are required to take foster care training as set out by the 
Department of Social Services and the Saskatchewan Foster 
Families Association. The training takes place both before they 
are approved and afterwards. 
 
Foster families make an important contribution to the lives of 
many children and youth within our communities. When 
families experience problems that for one reason or another 
result in them not being able to care for their children, foster 
families are there to help. Foster families give the children in 
these difficult circumstances a safe and secure environment and 
the unconditional love and support that every child needs. 
 
Please join me in commending Saskatchewan foster families 
and their work in contributing to a better future for our children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Globe and Mail Article 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
bring forward to the House an article that was written in The 
Globe and Mail yesterday on page A31, featuring the member 
from Lloydminster. 
 
I rise to tell the House about this, not because I feel pride that I 
was included in that article, but because I want to pay tribute to 
my parents and grandparents who came to this country from 
western Europe because they had hopes and dreams of building 
a better life and a just society. 
 
I believe that in this province it wasn’t only people like my 
parents, there were many people that came to this country who 
tilled the soil, broke the land, and hoped that their children and 
grandchildren would live a better life because they were able to 
do this. 
 
I believe in my whole heart in the province of Saskatchewan, in 
the country of Canada. And I believe that we have built a good 
province. But not only that, I think it’s incumbent to all of us, 



2128 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 1998 

no matter how we vote or who we represent, to continue 
building this kind of country and province. 
 
I believe that to live the legacy of our parents and grandparents, 
it is up to us to continue the work that they started. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Adjournment Motion 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
 
The NDP (New Democratic Party) keep telling us they want to 
go home because there’s nothing left to debate. The fact is there 
are 37 Bills on the order paper, Bills dealing with health care, 
Crown corporation management, child prostitution, highways, 
legislative reform. We are prepared to debate any one of these 
Bills. But what have we been debating over the last three days? 
An NDP motion to go home. 
 
Mr. Premier, when I go home this weekend I’m going to tell 
everyone about the NDP MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) that didn’t want to work. The NDP MLAs that 
wanted to go home instead of debating these important issues. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s not too late. Will you withdraw your 
adjournment motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The session was called for a specific purpose, as 
everybody in the province knows, which is to deal with the 
power strike. That was dealt with Monday. 
 
And the members opposite have said they wanted to debate. 
Well in fact, the facts say the opposite. Tuesday night we asked 
the members opposite would they like to come back and work 
as they were supposed to at 7 o’clock? Not them, not working 
after 5 o’clock. 
 
Yesterday the members opposite said they wanted to debate. I 
stood up in my place and said, let’s extend the clock. Mr. 
Speaker, what’s happening here is clear. As usual the old rump 
Tories are playing politics with taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
You know, yesterday, I think we need to clarify exactly what 
happened. Just moments before the end of the sitting day 
yesterday, the NDP House Leader tried another one of her 
goofy little antics. She tried to extend the sitting hours of the 
House. Did she want more time to debate one of the Bills before 
the Assembly? No. She wanted to extend the debate on the 
NDP motion to go home. You sometimes wonder if the NDP 
House Leader has any idea what she’s doing. At the least the 
guy they had as House Leader before understood the job. 
 

To the NDP House Leader, Madam Minister, we’ll extend the 
House hours all you want. All you have to do is withdraw your 
adjournment motion and let us debate real issues like health 
care, like post-secondary education, like highways, like taxes. 
 
Will you do that today, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, 
personal attacks are not really appropriate, but I must admit it’s 
what I have come to expect from the Saskatchewan Party and 
it’s what the people of this province have come to expect from 
the old rump Tories. 
 
We are quite prepared to debate the issues in this province and 
we do it regularly. We do it regularly in meetings with the 
people of Saskatchewan in the communities of this province — 
spending a whole day in Nipawin, with the people of Nipawin, 
the whole cabinet; spending a whole day in Humboldt, with the 
people of Humboldt, with the whole cabinet. 
 
Now we had business in this legislature. The business is 
completed. At a cost of $30,000 a day, the members are playing 
politics and they’re not even prepared to work when we give 
them the opportunity to work. If they want to work, they can 
extend the debate today at 1 o’clock and work beyond 1 
o’clock, as most people in this province work beyond 1 o’clock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 

Health Care 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
closure of the Plains has claimed its first victims. 
 
Madam Minister, two of Regina’s anesthetists are leaving the 
province, and others are thinking of leaving. They are so 
frustrated with the way your government has handled health 
reform in this province, they don’t know where they are going 
yet but they are just going to leave the province. 
 
Working conditions, administration, and the way your 
government is handling health care reform are all factors. You 
can’t attract nurses. You can’t attract doctors. And now even the 
specialists are leaving the province. Madam Minister, why in 
the world are you driving away the specialists out of our 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s true that the two anesthetists are leaving Regina. That is 
true. I understand that the Regina District Health Board has had 
some meetings with the anesthetists in order to resolve some of 
the difficulties that have occurred. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, even the members 
opposite don’t support the answer from the minister because it 
wasn’t an answer. The question was, Madam Minister, what are 
you doing to stop this? It sounds like nothing. It sounds like 



October 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2129 

again, Madam Minister, you’re uninformed. 
 
Not only are our specialists leaving, Mr. Speaker, we have 
another hospital that’s scheduled to close in southern 
Saskatchewan. The minister’s predecessors, Mr. Speaker, the 
former health ministers have all said the cuts are over, no more 
closures, no more bed closures, no more layoff. 
 
Even the Associate Minister of Health said, and I quote, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

In fact some media reported that Eric Cline wanted two 
messages to emerge from the budget. That nurses and other 
health employees wouldn’t worry about layoffs, and that 
the communities shouldn’t worry about losing more 
hospital and nursing home beds. 

 
Now here, Madam Minister, we have another hospital that 
they’re talking about, the Thunder Creek . . . the health district 
is talking about closing in Central Butte. Madam Minister, are 
you going to step in and pick up where your other ministers 
failed, and stop the closure of the Central Butte hospital. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind the 
member that seven years ago when this government came to 
office there were over 400 individual boards and agencies that 
were involved in the delivery of health services in the province 
of Saskatchewan. At that time, Mr. Speaker, there was 
absolutely little co-ordination and integration between the 
various groups that administered a publicly funded health 
system in the province. 
 
After the Murray Commission we determined that it was 
important to try and integrate and co-ordinate the services that 
were being delivered. Mr. Speaker, there is no question that the 
change that occurred in the past five years has been huge. And 
the task that the district health boards have been given, along 
with the employees and the doctors and all of other health 
professionals, to bring this system together have been complex 
and difficult. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’re making our way through this, and I 
anticipate that at the end of the day we will have the very, very 
best health system in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Rates 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, 
Saskatchewan families have the second highest tax burden in all 
of Canada thanks to your NDP government. The average family 
in Alberta gets to keep over $9,000 more in take-home pay than 
the same family in Saskatchewan. The average family in 
Manitoba gets to keep $4,000 more. That’s a tremendous 
disadvantage, and it’s driving our best and brightest people out 
of this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to start easing the tax burden 
on Saskatchewan families? When are we going to see some 
meaningful tax relief in this province? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, when we balanced the budget 
in 1994, the budget that had been put into deficit by the 
members opposite when they were in power, we began a series 
of tax reductions which are affordable, sustainable, and 
reasonable. In 1995 and ’96, we had cuts to the personal income 
tax rate through the reduction to the deficit reduction surtax; 
1997, two points off the sales tax; 1998, two points off the 
personal income tax. 
 
So we’ve started, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’re going to 
continue down that road. And I might say Saskatchewan people 
know that we go down that road in a reasonable and sustainable 
way. Because do you know what? Every year every individual 
in this province pays $725 in taxes in interest payments alone 
on the debt run up by those members over there. 
 
And the member talks about average families. I’ll tell the 
member what the average family pays — $2,900 a year interest 
payments on your debt, Mr. Member. That’s what the average 
family in Saskatchewan pays for your debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, Saskatchewan has the second highest tax burden in all 
of Canada. Only Quebec is worse, and now Jean Charest is 
promising sweeping tax reductions. 
 
So before long, Saskatchewan will be dead last: the highest 
taxes, the worst highways, the longest waiting lists, the worst 
job creation. That’s the NDP record. It’s no wonder you want to 
shut down this House and go home. I wouldn’t want to defend 
your record either. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve been in office for seven years. It’s your 
responsibility — there’s no one else to blame. How can you 
defend this dismal record? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’ll defend the record of this government, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with pride because this government has 
taken a bankrupt province with no hope and in despair, and we 
have restored to this province through our fiscal planning, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, hope. And what is important in a person’s life 
and what is important in a province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
hope and that’s what we have because we’re going in the right 
direction. 
 
We’re going in the direction of gradual, sustainable, reasonable, 
tax reductions and that’s what we’re going to continue to do. 
 
And I predict, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people of the 
province are going to support us in that because they do not 
want to go back to the 1980s, back to the days when those 
members were opposite. What did we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
We didn’t see tax reductions under them; we saw tax increases. 
 
And not only that we saw the building up of a debt of $14 
billion that we’re still trying to pay off. And we are paying it 
off. The interest payments are going down but it’s still $2,900 a 
year taxes just to pay interest on your debt. That’s the major 
problem we face. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2130 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 1998 

Job Creation Record 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier once said 
that taxes are the silent killers of jobs, and he’s absolutely right, 
of course. And nobody’s killing more jobs than your NDP 
government. 
 
Over the past 12 months NDP Saskatchewan has had the worst 
job creation record in all of Canada. In fact we were the only 
province in Canada to actually lose jobs over the past year. 
 
Over the same period, nearly 50,000 new jobs were created in 
Alberta — 50,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker. NDP taxes are creating 
jobs; it’s just that they’re in Medicine Hat and Calgary. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to do something about the 
NDP job creation record, dismal as it is? When are you going to 
encourage businesses by meaningful tax relief so jobs can be 
created in this province instead of everywhere else? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m amazed at the 
members opposite — the worst, the worst, the worst. On this 
side of the House we’re actually proud of Saskatchewan. We’re 
proud of the fact that in the last five years our economy grew 
faster than any other economy in Canada — bar none. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We’re proud of the fact that we have 
more people working at full-time jobs than ever before in our 
history. We’re proud of the fact that an Alberta-based 
consulting company chose Saskatchewan as the best place for 
youth employment. And we’re proud of the fact that our 
economy is more diversified than ever before in our history. 
 
This group over here perhaps should call themselves the Alberta 
Party. We believe in Saskatchewan, we believe in its future, and 
we are very proud of what the people of this province have 
achieved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Victim Impact Statement Program 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, the province of Manitoba 
recently introduced a victim impact statement into its criminal 
justice system. This gives the victims of crime the right to file a 
statement with a court prior to sentencing. 
 
Once the defendant is found guilty, the victim impact statement 
provides the court and the judge with a clearer picture of how 
the crime has affected that victim. The statement may also be 
considered if the convicted criminal applies for early release or 
parole. 
 
Every province in Canada now has a victim impact statement in 
place, every province but Saskatchewan. Once again we’re 
behind the rest of Canada thanks to the NDP. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Party believes that every victim 

of crime should be given this right, and of course should always 
consider the effect on the victim when passing sentence. 
 
Mr. Minister, why doesn’t Saskatchewan have a victim impact 
statement program? Will you be introducing this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is 
very proud of its victim services program. We have, I think, the 
best program in Canada as it relates to the victim services 
program that we have set up right across the province. 
 
This program covers about 850,000 out of the million people in 
the province. It provides assistance through coordinators and 
volunteers and police to provide the assistance to people as they 
take part in the court process, whether as witnesses or whether 
they are the people that are the victims that are suffering in this 
process. 
 
We have, I think, something that we can be very proud of in the 
system that we’ve got. Victim impact statements, as one little 
piece of all of that, may be something that other provinces have 
done in a very narrow way. We’ve decided that we want to 
provide victim services in a broad way that assists people when 
they go to court. And we are very proud of the work we’re 
doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Minister, you have a program but it’s a 
hit and miss program. And as usual most of the time it misses. 
There’s nothing definite, there’s nothing secure in that. 
 
Section 722 of the Criminal Code establishes the victim impact 
statement and says this statement must be considered by the 
court at the time of sentencing which yours doesn’t. However it 
also says a statement must be prepared in a form established by 
the provincial government. Your government has not set up this 
program, so crime victims in Saskatchewan do not have the 
same rights as crime victims in other provinces. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you waiting for? We believe this 
program should be established immediately. Every crime victim 
should be informed of this right and be given the option of 
filing the victim impact statement prior to sentencing. 
 
Mr. Minister, many people think that our justice system puts the 
rights of criminals ahead of the rights of the victim. This is just 
one more step you could take to balance the scales of justice. 
Will you establish the victim impact statement program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, our victims’ services 
program in this province provides a broad base of service to 
victims. And when we get to the situation that the member 
opposite is talking about, around statements to the court, there 
are various procedures working with the prosecutors and the 
police as it relates to that. 
 
Now the specific question around the format of a victim impact 
statement, if there’s something there that we need to do, we’ll 
do it. 
 
But what I am going to say is that our victim services program, 
this program is one that is the envy of other places. We have 



October 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2131 

expended great amounts of money that have provided a very 
good service right across the province. It also includes our 
special centres in Saskatoon and Regina as it relates to children 
who are victims. And we think that we are doing a good job that 
will provide the best service for victims in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Security and Parking Issues at Regina Hospitals 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, since the NDP announced the impending closure of 
the Plains hospital, there have been all kinds of implications — 
bed shortages, waiting lists, extended waiting lists. 
 
Now more recently there was obvious that there was no plan for 
the concern or safety of staff, patients, or visitors. This is clear 
by the fact that they are forcing people now as a result of 
closing the Plains Health Centre into one of Canada’s highest of 
crime neighbourhoods. That’s sad, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We hear stories now. We are being told by people that are 
reluctant to go and visit their loved ones after dark in the area. 
We hear stories that nurses are being warned not to carry 
purses, only pocketbooks. I’d like to ask the Minister of Health: 
why are health care workers being advised to be extra cautious 
when they are around Regina’s two remaining hospitals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have to say on behalf 
of the government, and I say this with the utmost of respect for 
the member opposite for whom I do have personal regard, that 
this really is stretching an argument to incredulity. 
 
If the argument is that this area where Plains and Pasqua and 
. . . the General and Pasqua are located are dangerous areas, 
now all of a sudden after your debate on Plains you raise it. You 
didn’t raise it last year. You didn’t raise it the year before. You 
didn’t raise it the year before that. You never raised it 
whatsoever. 
 
This has got to be one of the most ridiculous arguments that one 
can ever argue and submit. You have cases for the Plains 
hospital. You can mount them. I don’t adopt them, but this one 
surely sinks to be the very bottom, bottom of the list. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, don’t insult the people of 
Regina. Don’t make this out as some sort of a city which is 
undesirable to live, that doesn’t have compassion and caring 
and crime protection and prosecutors and police as the Minister 
of Justice has talked about. Don’t raise this in one last but failed 
effort with respect to the Plains. 
 
We’re going to have the finest health care system for southern 
Saskatchewan when this is completed in the next few weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. And it’s obvious, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the Premier perhaps missed those times when we 
did bring to the attention of the people of this province and to 
the NDP government the fact that they failed to consult with 
those authorities before proceeding with the plans at the 
General Hospital. 

They forgot to talk to the police about the security problems 
that may face residents, people, persons, visitors, everybody in 
that area — more traffic, more people, more crime — for 
reasons only the Premier seems to think are logical. He is 
closing a hospital in the safest neighbourhood of Regina and 
moving everything into the core of the city. Regina city police 
have said in the media that they were not contacted by your 
government regarding the relocation of the Plains. 
 
I ask again the minister, why did you not consult with the 
Regina city police before you decided to move so many people 
into one area? Why do you not think about the personal safety 
of patients, visitors, and staff? This should have been something 
that had been done a long time ago and we brought it to your 
attention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is, again I say with 
the utmost of respect, one of the most illogical questions I’ve 
ever heard. If the argument is that the Pasqua and General 
hospitals are located in dangerous locations of the city of 
Regina, then the logical extension of that argument is that they 
should be closed and moved to safer areas. 
 
It’s wrong to say more traffic, more people, more crime. More 
traffic, more people, less crime. Where do you think the 
criminals hang out? Do you think they hang out in the busy 
areas? Look, if the question is making sure that there is absolute 
protection that is required or increased protection which is 
required, that would be looked after by the district health board 
and by ministers of Health to do this. 
 
But to argue that by virtue of Plains shifting over to the merged 
Pasqua/General operation, which will provide the finest health 
facility for all of southern Saskatchewan, is somehow an 
increase in crime because there are more nurses walking 
around, more doctors walking around, more nurses’ aides 
walking around, more health care workers around, I think is an 
absolute insult to the people of Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the concerns about the 
safety of people in those areas outside of the security, lighting 
security in the areas of those hospitals, creates great problems. 
What I would like to ask the government, what are their plans to 
alleviate the problems of people accessing the General Hospital 
in the core area? 
 
Right now the parking is horrendous. People are afraid to park 
their vehicles long distances from the main entrance. There are 
people who have difficulty walking that need to see specialists 
and are going for surgery and they have a long ways to walk. 
There is no place to park, and when they do, if they’re not able 
to park in the area where they have security lights, they need to 
walk great distances where there are no . . . nothing other than 
very dim street lights. 
 
How is that issue going to be addressed, the parking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member is 
. . . if the hon. member is talking about the question of parking 
problems for the new area which is under construction, has been 
under construction, this is going to be solved. This is in the 



2132 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 1998 

process of being solved. That’s an entirely different question 
than the first two questions which the hon. member raised. 
 
Accessibility is now well on the way to being told to the people 
of southern Saskatchewan and Regina as to how to get there. 
And the parking situation will be straightened out in due course, 
in full dispatch. 
 
Look, I ask yourselves to frame your questions not for the 
short-term, temporary run that you may try to get a hit, a 
political hit. Look at six, nine months, a year from now, and ask 
yourself . . . 
 
Have you toured that facility? Have you toured that facility? I 
bet you you haven’t toured Pasqua and General. Take a look at 
it. If you toured them you will see what I’m saying. We will 
have the best in health care for southern Saskatchewan in 
Regina by a long shot, with accessibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to 
make a slightly extended ministerial statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

SaskTel Obtains Extension from CRTC 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
in the House today to announce to you, and through you to the 
House, that Saskatchewan has been successful in obtaining an 
extension to SaskTel’s moratorium from CRTC (Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) 
regulation to June 30, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason we negotiated the original exemption in 
1992 was to ensure that Saskatchewan could adopt national 
telecommunications rules in a manner which is more sensitive 
to our unique needs and circumstances. 
 
As a result we have among the lowest communications rates in 
Canada for both residents and small businesses. We have a 
competitive market for the delivery of long-distance services. 
All of the competitors provide their national sales packages. We 
have announced our rules for the delivery of local telephone 
services, with AT&T Canada already announcing its intent to 
enter Saskatchewan in 1999. 
 
As owners of SaskTel we have continued to ensure that services 
are sensitive to the needs of our population. SaskTel provides a 
15 per cent discount on telecommunications costs to 
municipalities and health districts. 
 
SaskTel was the first in Canada to provide access to the Internet 
to our rural residents on the same basis as is available to urban 
residents. Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that we could not 
have accomplished these tasks if we had been nationally 
regulated over the last five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we sought the original exemption because we 
were convinced that national competition policy, which is based 

on market forces alone, would not guarantee equitable and 
affordable participation by all Saskatchewan citizens in an 
increasingly global economy. 
 
The challenge that continues to face this government is how to 
guarantee the right of inclusion for all of the citizens in this 
time of change. This government recognizes that a strong 
telecommunications infrastructure is essential in providing an 
opportunity for all of our citizens to get onto and stay on the 
information highway, to build their social, cultural, and 
economic participation in this new emerging world based on 
electronic transactions. 
 
This extension to June 30, 2000, is not a coincidence. It is 
intended to allow the provincial government to ensure that we 
continue to meet Made in Saskatchewan objectives in this 
regard. By that date, the federal government has committed to 
putting in place a mechanism to address the critical issue of 
affordability of access in rural and remote areas. Such areas 
include most of Saskatchewan. 
 
In April 1998, this Assembly passed a unanimous resolution 
supporting the need for a national mechanism to ensure 
affordable local telephone rates for our rural and northern 
residents. This Assembly recognized that an adequate, 
regionally sensitive mechanism to ensure that all residents will 
have affordable access to basic telecommunications services is 
essential for the survival and development of small 
communities across our province. 
 
The federal government has promised to, and I quote: 
 

Develop a national access strategy to ensure affordable 
access by all Canadians to essential communications. 

 
In addition, it has stated that: 
 

Where market forces cannot provide such services, the 
strategy will identify the means — regulatory, financial or 
otherwise — of providing them to people in rural, remote 
and northern communities. 

 
We will work with the federal government to ensure that it lives 
up to this promise, and we are confident that by June 30, 2000, 
the federal government will have implemented such a strategy. 
In negotiating this extension, we did not believe that we could 
turn the regulation of SaskTel over to the CRTC until our rural 
northern residents can be assured of equal access to the 
opportunities afforded by the new information-based economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that SaskTel 
has continued to operate as an efficient, viable business 
providing leading edge technological solutions to our residents, 
and will continue to do so in the future. 
 
During the transition to CRTC regulation over the next two 
years, the Government of Saskatchewan will continue to 
promote a competitive telecommunications environment which 
is sensitive to our market needs and to the needs of all of our 
citizens, rural and northern included. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



October 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2133 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
interested certainly, and I think the people of Saskatchewan are, 
in the minister’s statement here this morning. Yesterday in the 
House we raised the issue of government advertising within 
SaskTel, and the minister responsible responded by saying that 
they are advertising in a competitive market and therefore it’s 
necessary. And we certainly agree with that. A considerable 
amount of competition has resulted from the deregulation. It has 
also resulted in competition that is going to be difficult to meet. 
No question about it. 
 
The NDP’s calling card that we are hearing this morning is that 
we aren’t ready for competition, unfortunately. Although the 
minister says we’re advertising directly for competition, the 
minister this morning is saying we aren’t ready for competition. 
 
That’s the NDP’s old standby call is the call to fear, saying that 
we can’t compete, that we don’t have opportunity to compete, 
that we’re going to put at peril things like Internet connections 
for rural subscribers — all of those kinds of things. 
 
That just simply isn’t the case. If the evidence is clear in terms 
of long-distance rates here in Saskatchewan, competition has 
resulted in lower rates, not higher rates; not loss of service, 
more service rather than less service. 
 
Just this morning I heard on national television this morning 
that Cantel and its strategic partner is going to be offering 20 
cent a minute long-distance wireless communication right now, 
Mr. Minister. We are going to see that kind of competition. 
That doesn’t exclude subscribers, it adds new subscribers to the 
block that we are going to be competing against. Rather than 
looking at ways to hold off that competition you should be 
looking at ways to meet that competition and beat that 
competition. 
 
Cantel is in the market now and they should be congratulated 
for offering that kind of low rate of service to the people all 
across North America. Their advertising caption was 20 cents a 
minute local calls anywhere in North America. Mr. Minister, 
that’s the kind of competition SaskTel is going to have to meet. 
That’s the kind of competition that the people of Saskatchewan 
will want. That’s the kind of competition that will result in 
lower rates here in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the date given here only a year and a half hence, not 
the initial five-year extension of course which was granted to 
begin with, is a clear indication that Saskatchewan is in fact 
moving to CRTC national regulation. 
 
The issue of course that has been flagged is not whether or not 
we will come under national regulation rather than provincial 
monopoly; rather it is, how can this be done with some degree 
of cross-subsidization to ensure that more isolated areas will 
still have affordable services. 
 
We support the move but we also support the idea that there has 
to be something done to make sure that with CRTC regulation, 
we don’t end up with a system whereby telephone service in our 
cities is cheap and in other areas it is exorbitant, taking people 

out of local service. 
 
The hon. member for Kindersley has mentioned some of the, 
what a few years ago would have seemed quite incredible deals 
in long-distance service. However, of course, the other side of 
that is that local service is going to become increasingly 
problematic. And that is what must be guaranteed, because if 
some regulation isn’t accomplished, many rural people will 
simply not be able to afford basic service. 
 
I think that this year and a half extension is an example of 
co-operative federalism at its best. Our two levels of 
government are working to ensure that there will be affordable 
service in the more isolated areas of our province. That is 
fundamental. 
 
We cannot escape the effects of globalization, but we must 
manage them to the benefit of all so that we do not end up with 
a society of winners and losers. And in this case the losers 
would be our rural and northern residents. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Halt to Closure of Central Butte Hospital 
 

Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 46 to seek 
leave of this Assembly to move a motion of urgent and pressing 
necessity. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to give a 
brief, and very brief explanation of the motion. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reason why this 
is of such a pressing and urgent necessity is one that I outlined 
earlier in question period, the very fact that the NDP has 
already shut down 53 hospitals, 54 counting the Plains. We 
cannot let the Central Butte Hospital be just one more example 
of the NDP abrogating their responsibility for health care. That 
in itself indicates the pressing and urgent need for this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will now read the text of the motion for the 
House: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the provincial government to 
halt any actions to close the Central Butte Hospital; and 
further, that this Assembly urges the provincial 
government to simply provide adequate funding to the 
Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek Health District in order to 
ensure the future of this vital hospital so that it may 
continue serving the health care needs of people in Central 
Butte and all the surrounding areas. 
 

And I so move. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 



2134 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 1998 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon and the proposed 
amendment thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’d like to make a few comments in regards to this 
motion before the Assembly. The motion of adjournment, and 
the subsequent amendment that was presented by my colleague, 
the member from Melfort, has given, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
members of this Assembly, if they really wanted or showed 
some interest in representing their constituents, an opportunity 
to enter into debate. 
 
Now earlier this afternoon we heard the Government House 
Leader, the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld, try to indicate to 
the province that the opposition members were not really 
interested in representing their constituents or entering into real 
debate. 
 
Therefore we have a motion of adjournment in front of us 
brought by the very member who said the only reason the 
Assembly was called was for a specific purpose. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest to you that the 
people of this province are not interested in having taxpayers’ 
dollars wasted in government calling a session, or calling the 
members into session to deal with a specific government 
purpose when there were so many other issues. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s take a look. When has the 
government called a fall session? As we’ve discussed, as my 
colleagues have been discussing, the only other time was last 
fall when the Premier wanted to get his picture in the papers as 
having spoken out in support of the Calgary accord and 
speaking, addressing the constitution. And that was the only 
specific purpose that the government called a session last fall. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you’re aware, while we dealt with 
that issue, there were a number of other issues that were 
addressed as well. 
 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why was the Assembly called into 
session? To meet a specific government objective, totally, 
totally removed from the concerns of the public in the province 
of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reason we 
were called was so the government could legislate government 
workers back to work. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at fall sessions, and I think 
the paper adequately brought it forward, the fact that there are 
many jurisdictions in this country that do have legitimate fall 
sessions that give opportunity for the government to place a 
platform before the public, before the opposition members, and 
give an opportunity then for legitimate debate in the spring 
when the session sits, to address the direction of government 
and the Bills that it would bring forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Government House Leader 
could argue, well there really isn’t a lot on this agenda for us to 
discuss. I would suggest to you that if anyone had the 
opportunity to look through the agenda, there are numerous 
Bills on the order paper for discussion. 
 

But I would suggest as well that the reason we are not entering 
into debate on those Bills is because the only Bills left on the 
order paper are Bills that have been brought forward by 
opposition members in this Assembly — Bills that reflect the 
real concerns of the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at the concerns raised in 
front of us . . . and I’ve got a couple of concerns that I would 
like to raise that I think would be imperative for us to discuss 
and a very legitimate reason why this Assembly should have a 
fall session, is in the area of education. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the communities, two of the communities 
that I represent — actually one of the communities that now is 
in the constituency of my colleague, the member from 
Cannington — have over the past number of years worked 
towards amalgamating school services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the problems they’re facing today 
is the fact that both of the buildings that they’ve worked to 
amalgamate and placing the K to 6 system in, in the community 
of Langbank, and the 7 to 12 in the community of Kennedy, the 
unfortunate realities are both of the buildings have deteriorated 
to the point that they should be replaced. And when you look at 
it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a sound argument that says, well 
you really can’t justify two new buildings. And the 
communities have got . . . have gathered together and there’s 
been community debate. The board has called interested 
individuals to debate this issue and they have arrived at the 
conclusion that the best option to address the problem of 
deteriorating buildings is to build one school in one of the 
communities. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that’s a proposal that is now on 
the desk of the Minister of Education. I would hope that the 
Minister of Education, when they debate expenditures for their 
upcoming budget in the spring of 1999, will give serious 
consideration to this proposal. A proposal that has come 
together as a result of the work of a number of people in those 
two communities, to amalgamate under one building to show 
that they know what it is to save dollars and find ways of 
expanding their educational dollars certainly in an appropriate 
manner that addresses the need to put the education dollars 
directly into programs for the young people rather than just 
bricks and mortar. So rather than two, you talk about one. It 
would give me, as the MLA representing the area, the 
opportunity in a fall session to address that. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker as well we have the issue of 
highways and the ongoing debate about the highway system in 
this province. And the fact that nationally, national TV and 
media are picking up on the contest that is currently running in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we think about this Assembly 
and then think about the debate we are entering into today, and I 
believe the Minister of Agriculture talked about where have we 
been in regards to discussing agriculture. Well we had a debate 
on Tuesday, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If the member would have 
been listening very carefully over the past number of days, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, he would be aware of the fact that my 



October 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2135 

colleagues have spoken to agriculture at length. 
 
But where have the government members been? Where have 
the government members been? The government members have 
sat on their hands and said nothing about . . . because they want 
to go home, they don’t want to sit here and debate this . . . 
debate legitimate concerns. They’re interested in just allowing 
the Government House Leader, the member from Saskatoon 
Idylwyld, to have her way and say, time to go home, we’re only 
going to bring one piece of legislation in, time to get on with it 
and forget it, go back to your constituents and have a good time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the motion, and even 
yesterday the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld, the 
Government House Leader, had indicated to this Assembly, 
well let’s stop the clock. She suggested today that we weren’t 
interested in debating issues. Well I’m not sure where she’s 
been because we’ve been debating the issues. Unfortunately 
we’ve had to debate the issues based on a motion that calls for 
an adjournment of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well I would like to suggest that maybe 
the current Government House Leader should talk to the former 
government House leader, the member from Regina 
Elphinstone. At least that member had a good idea of how this 
Legislative Assembly worked — of how MLAs would work 
together, of consultation. 
 
Since we started this session, our caucus really hasn’t had any 
contact with the Government House Leader regarding the 
adjournment motion. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you talk about adjournment 
motions one would have thought that the Government House 
Leader — as we’ve seen the former government House leader, 
the member from Regina Elphinstone — would go to deliberate 
lengths to consult with the opposition in planning the process of 
the legislative sitting and the issues that we would be debating 
as we’ve brought forward in the amendment, whether its 
agriculture, whether its finances, whether its the taxation in this 
province, whether its health care or education. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find it appalling that the current 
Government House Leader would shows just such disdain for 
this Assembly, for this institution, that she wouldn’t take the 
time to at least sit down with opposition members as we did I 
believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’re aware of in the last fall 
session even though we came and the government had a 
specific agenda of dealing with the constitution. In dealing with 
the former government House leader — the government House 
leader, from Regina Elphinstone — recognized that the 
opposition has a role to play, and as well came up, sat down 
with the opposition and came up with a format that allowed for 
discussion on other issues as well. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
current Government House Leader could have approached the 
opposition. We could have worked out an agreement process 
that would have allowed for legitimate debate on these other 
issues rather than just immediately slamming the opposition 
with an adjournment motion that this Assembly adjourns until 
the call of the Chair. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important the public know that 
the only reason, as the minister from . . . the Government House 
Leader indicated, the only reason we were here is for that one 
specific purpose to legislate SaskPower workers back to work 
and that the government really did not want to debate other 
issues. 
 
They did not want to debate the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre. They did not really want to enter into the debate of 
agriculture because they don’t know where they’re going, and 
therefore the Government House Leader brings in a motion of 
adjournment — a motion that really stymies, in reality, stymies 
the ability of the opposition members to address the very 
concerns — the very concerns — that we heard last night at a 
meeting in Estevan. And I’m sure concerns — I’m positive — 
concerns that were even raised today as the minister . . . as the 
Premier and his colleagues met with the SFL (Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour) at their convention. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s no doubt, there’s no doubt, there’s 
a number of issues. There’s no doubt that the only reason we’re 
debating an adjournment motion is because the government 
really did not want to get to the meat and the very issues, the 
reality of what the public are talking about, people are talking 
about, as I indicated last night whether it’s health care, whether 
it’s taxes in the province of Saskatchewan, or even the fact that 
the way the economy is rolling the jobs just are not here for our 
young people to look forward to. 
 
I think the comment as well about Alberta, talking about a good 
place for youth employment — yes — because the quality of 
the young people in this province. We nicely do a job of 
training them and then they head off to Alberta. And Alberta’s 
just thankful that we have quality young people that they can 
call to meet the demand for the job opportunities that are in that 
province. Why can’t we have them here, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
That’s a good question. That’s a question the public are asking. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest then . . . and I would have 
to say that I’m appalled that the only reason that we have had an 
opportunity to debate has been linked to a government motion 
of adjournment rather than sitting down and negotiating and 
discussing other avenues, and opening up the floor so that the 
interests of the public are represented. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I certainly do support the amendment and 
I will have great difficulty in supporting — in fact I oppose — 
the motion to adjourn to the call of the Chair. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re into our third day of 
debate on a motion to adjourn this House. The government 
determined that it was necessary to recall this legislature to deal 
with one specific example. And for days now we’ve heard from 
my colleagues on this side of the House, the entire opposition in 
fact. We’ve heard of the many problems that exist in 
Saskatchewan. Whether we’re talking about health care, 
whether we’re talking about highways, whether we’re talking 
about agriculture, there are many issues that need to be 
addressed. 
 
Since 1991, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have not had a full fall 
sitting. Our neighbouring provinces on either side of us do have 



2136 Saskatchewan Hansard October 23, 1998 

a fall sitting. And when people look at that kind of approach 
they know that their elected representatives will be able to deal 
with current matters. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s ironic that our 
last recall was back in March. And the adjournment time prior 
to that had been May — a long period of time. Many issues that 
come before the people of Saskatchewan in the months of 
August, September, October, are forgotten about by the time 
March rolls around. And the people of Saskatchewan want 
better representation. 
 
As my colleague indicated, last fall was a classic example of 
dealing with a number of things. The Calgary conference was of 
course the uppermost on everyone’s mind, and we spent a lot of 
time. There were public meetings held right across 
Saskatchewan to gain input from the people of Saskatchewan to 
indeed develop a Saskatchewan position on the question of 
unity. That very same thing could have taken place this fall. 
 
There are so many issues, there are so many questions that the 
people of Saskatchewan have, and this was an opportunity for 
this government to develop new ideas, to bring forth new 
legislation, to indeed change the way things are done in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There could have been, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there could have 
been an opportunity to develop, with opposition, a plan to 
indeed spend a period of time in this legislature and deal with 
issues that are current today. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it was interesting that the Minister of 
Agriculture indicated last week that there was no crisis in 
agriculture, that there was no need for a debate. And yet on 
Tuesday of this week, on Tuesday of this week we spent all day 
debating agriculture. We debated agriculture for the entire day. 
 
And there are questions that still need to be answered, Mr. 
Minister. There are still questions that need to be answered in 
agriculture. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Why is . . . 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, point of order. I hear the Minister of 
Agriculture using language that certainly is not conducive to the 
well-being of this Assembly, and I would suggest Mr. Deputy 
Speaker address the language that is being used by the member 
who is not allowed to use from his seat what he cannot use from 
standing up. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I take this point of order from 
the hon. member from Moosomin, and I must say that the 
Deputy Speaker was tending to other business and did not hear 
the language. So I will from now on take very careful 
consideration of what is coming from the other side of the 
House and from other members of this . . . 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very clear that there is a need to debate 
agriculture, that agriculture is in crisis. And if the Minister of 
Agriculture cannot understand that problem, then he better go 
out into rural Saskatchewan and meet with farmers and indeed 
determine whether or not there is a crisis. Because there is one, 
Mr. Minister. There is definitely one in agriculture. 
 

And the points that the opposition has raised over the last 
number of days point that out very dramatically. The examples 
that we’ve given where farmers are on the verge of losing their 
property because of falling prices, that is a problem. And 
whether the minister wants to ignore whether he said this or 
whether he said that, there is a problem. I think he would agree 
with that. Very clearly he would agree with that. 
 
And it is a time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the minister to do 
something. This session was an opportunity to do something. 
And what did we have from the government? On Monday 
evening of this week we had a motion to adjourn. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not acceptable to the people 
of Saskatchewan. They wanted this government to show 
leadership, to provide ideas, to correct the mistakes that we’ve 
indicated. 
 
We have raised issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re not just 
fabricated issues. They are real issues for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And this government has done nothing this 
week. They have provided us with the motion to adjourn, to go 
home. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think very clearly the people of 
Saskatchewan know that the official opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party, wanted to see ideas come forward from 
this government. They wanted to see from this government new 
legislation that would correct some of the problems that are 
occurring in Saskatchewan. But we didn’t get it. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we know that as the hours continue on, we 
won’t get it. We won’t be getting those ideas; we won’t be 
getting that legislation. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the resolution by the House Leader 
of the government is not acceptable to the official opposition, 
and I believe it’s not acceptable to the majority of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I oppose that resolution. I support the amendment. And I would 
ask that the government members opposite also support that 
amendment and let’s continue putting forth ideas and legislation 
that will help the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
The division bells rang from 11:16 a.m. until 11:20 a.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Wiens MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Mitchell Atkinson Tchorzewski 
Johnson Goulet Upshall 
Kowalsky Van Mulligen Teichrob 
Bradley Trew Renaud 
Sonntag Scott Nilson 
Cline Serby Hamilton 
Junor Stanger Jess 
Kasperski Ward Murray 



October 23, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2137 

Langford Murrell Thomson 
 

Nays — 14 
 

Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Boyd Gantefoer 
Heppner Osika Hillson 
McPherson Aldridge McLane 
Julé Goohsen  
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I 
move that the House does adjourn, I would like to thank all the 
members for coming together on such short notice, and I move 
that the House do now adjourn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House . . . Order. 
The Government House Leader has moved a motion that the 
House do now adjourn. Before I ask the question, I do want to 
take this opportunity to say a special thank you to our pages, 
Graham, Diane, Ellen, and Megan. They volunteered from their 
regular jobs to assist the MLAs here, and I think they have done 
a very good job. They may not do it again but they did for this 
and I think we show them a . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — And I guess a special thanks to 
everyone that had to put a special effort into an emergency 
session as this. And I thank you very much for that and I thank 
you for your decorum. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:23 a.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2125 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2125 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2125 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2125 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2125 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2125 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2125 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Student Wins Remembrance Day Poetry Contest 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2126 
 Highways in Saskatchewan Contest Update 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2126 
 Strasbourg Hosts One-Act Drama Festival 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................2126 
 SGI Canada Charity Classic Bonspiel 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................2126 
 Nifty Noodle Plant 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................2127 
 Save the Plains Committee Workers 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2127 
 Foster Family Week 
  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................2127 
 Globe and Mail Article 
  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................2127 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Adjournment Motion 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2128 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................2128 
 Health Care 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2128 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2128 
 Tax Rates 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2129 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2129 
 Job Creation Record 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2130 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................2130 
 Victim Impact Statement Program 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2130 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2130 
 Security and Parking Issues at Regina Hospitals 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2131 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................2131 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 SaskTel Obtains Extension from CRTC 
  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................2132 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................2133 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2133 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Halt to Closure of Central Butte Hospital 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2133 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2134 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2135 
 Recorded division (Motion) .......................................................................................................................................................2136 
 
 



 

 


