





























































Hansard: May 01, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 895 
 May 1, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from the communities of 
Frobisher, Storthoaks, Bellegarde. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Arcola, Kisbey areas, Mr. 
Speaker, of the south-east. I so present on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions. And reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present has been signed by 
individuals from the Oxbow, Alameda, Estevan, Frobisher, and 
Kenosee Lake areas of Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present a petition. I 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And these come from the people at North Portal, Frobisher, 
Alameda, and Oxbow. I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I too present petitions on 
behalf of people concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Radville. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also pleased 
today to present petitions on behalf of people regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
People that have signed this petition are from Radville. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 
behalf of citizens concerned with the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from Yorkton and the 
area. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I present a petition this morning. The 
prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to relocate Highway 40 to east of the 
David Laird Campground in order to alleviate the 
congestion at the entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 

Your petitioners come from North Battleford, Battleford, and 
Cut Knife. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned over the Plains Health 
Centre closure. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1998 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Mankota, Swift Current, also the city of 
Weyburn, and Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
primarily from Ponteix, and I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has signatures on from the city of 
Weyburn and from Colgate. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
relocate Highway 40 to alleviate congestion at the entrance 
to North Battleford; and to act to save the Plains Health 
Centre; to put a moratorium on the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre; and to have the Workers’ Compensation 
Board reinstate pensions for the disenfranchised widows 
and widowers. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce to the Assembly today two very 
special guests, His Excellency Robert Sabga, the High 
Commissioner of Trinidad and Tobago. If you would stand and 
be recognized. And as well, Mr. Stephen Kangal, the Deputy 

High Commissioner of Trinidad and Tobago. 
 
We had a very interesting conversation this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to the synergies between Saskatchewan 
and their country. We have some very interesting similarities 
and we have made some initial steps to putting together what 
we believe will be some very mutually beneficial dialogue in 
the upcoming weeks. So I ask all members to give them a very 
warm Saskatchewan welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and to all 
members of the legislature, 10 students accompanied by their 
teachers who are involved in the Interchange on Canadian 
Studies. I would like to ask them to stand while I read out their 
names. 
 
The students are Stephanie Seeman from Lampman; Chandler 
Powell from Swift Current; Katherine Ganshorn from Regina; 
Joleen Kayter from Moose Jaw; Melanie Hrynchyshyn from 
Alvena; Shawna Brataschuk from Saskatoon; Ryan Frauchoux 
from Prince Albert; Leah Ritz from Lloydminster; Tymoor 
McKay from Cumberland House; and Marie-France Guerrette 
from Regina. They’re accompanied by their teachers, Dale Reed 
and Heather Marshall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each year 10 Saskatchewan grade 11 students 
have the opportunity to participate in the Canadian Studies 
exchange, and this year these 10 students from all across our 
province, along with their two teachers, are on their way to 
Halifax, or Nova Scotia, which will host this year’s conference. 
 
The theme of this national bilingual conference is “Rethinking 
the Workplace”. Now the students are in Regina attending an 
orientation session and then they’ll travel to Halifax for the 
conference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because I’m introducing Bills I won’t be able to 
meet with these students, but my colleague, the member from 
Lumsden, will, and I’m sure she looks forward to meeting with 
these students. So I’d ask everyone to welcome these students 
to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce in the gallery from the Gainsborough School, six 
students from the grade 7 and 8 class. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
talking quality not quantity here. Along with the students we 
have teachers Patricia Wolensky and Bev Needham who are 
chaperoning today. And I would like to welcome the students 
and the teachers to the . . . I was going to say class, but to the 
Assembly today. I’ve already had the opportunity to meet with 
them, Mr. Speaker, and I hope they enjoy the rest of their tour. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 
a class of students, 60 students from Langham, both quantity 
and quality. Grade 4 and grade 5, they’re sitting in the west 



May 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

gallery. I will be meeting with them at 11 o’clock in room 218, 
and I’m looking forward to that. And the 60 students are 
accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Kasahoff, Mrs. Swayze, 
and Mr. Kolach, and also some of the parents. Please help me 
welcome this group to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m especially 
pleased to introduce some people in the gallery today, some 
very special people. My oldest son, Tim, Pattie Gantefoer, a 
special friend, and also welcome the students on the 
Interchange on Canadian Studies, and especially one young 
lady from Saskatoon, my cousin, and that’s Shawna Brataschuk. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not to be outdone 
— and I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, this is the first time 
there’s been any real dissension in our caucus — I would like to 
introduce my daughter, Pattie Gantefoer, and her friend, Tim 
Draude. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Good News Headlines 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here are five recent 
good news headlines from Saskatchewan weekly newspapers: 
“Booming economy leads to area housing shortage,” The 
Outlook, April 13; “Schaffer Seeds officially opened March 
27,” the Foam Lake Review, April 6; “New livestock business 
for Assiniboia,” The Assiniboia Times, April 6; “Can-oat 
Milling officially opens,” the Saskatchewan Valley News, April 
8; “Canamera expands plant,” The Four-Town Journal, April 1. 
 
These headlines have two things in common, Mr. Speaker. One, 
each is further proof that the Saskatchewan economy and 
Saskatchewan communities, especially our smaller 
communities, are doing quite well. 
 
Two, each story comes from the constituency of an opposition 
member — members who would ignore the good fortune of our 
province. Instead they spend their time praying for bad news 
and wishing their constituents ill, all for the sake of short-term 
political gain. They are as sad, Mr. Speaker, as these headlines 
are happy. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Green Ribbon of Hope Campaign Begins 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to take a 
minute and speak to the members of the Assembly about the 
Green Ribbon of Hope campaign that is launched today by 
Child Find Saskatchewan for the seventh consecutive year. 
With so many important causes out there, I can’t think of one 
more important than a campaign to find missing children and 
return them to their homes. 

An astonishing 57,000 children were reported missing in 
Canada last year. Mr. Speaker, for those in the Assembly who 
have raised young children, I am sure many of us know the 
heart-wrenching feeling, when as a young parent you turned 
around in a store and your little boy or girl was not there. 
Maybe some of us have experienced a defiant teenager who ran 
away from home for a day and then returned home. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I wonder how many of us know the agony of that child 
not being found or that young teen not returning home. 
 
Today we wear green ribbons as a symbol of many things. We 
wear the ribbon to raise awareness of the problem of missing 
children. We wear them as a symbol of hope for those whose 
precious children are missing. And finally, we wear these 
ribbons as a reminder to pray for these children — pray that 
they are safe from harm’s way and that they will one day soon 
return home. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spinal Health Care Week 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 1 to 7 is Spinal 
Health Care Week. During this week Saskatchewan 
chiropractors work hard to educate grade 3 students in 
particular and the public in general about the health and 
economic benefits of preventing spinal injuries. Fundamental to 
the preventative focus of Spinal Health Care Week is the 
important role played by education and physical fitness. This 
message will be shared with over 15,000 students during Spinal 
Health Week. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I . . . order. Order! I 
hesitate to interrupt the hon. member in making her statement, 
but I ask for the cooperation of all members to enable members’ 
statements to be heard audibly. 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think we have all 
experienced back pain at some time in our lives. But few of us 
realize how serious a problem this is. At any given time 
approximately 30 per cent of the population is suffering from 
back pain. In addition, patients with lower back pain represent a 
major segment of those who are chronically disabled. In 
Saskatchewan, 2 out of every $5 of claim costs paid by 
Workers’ Compensation are for spinal injuries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an important health issue. I encourage those 
of us without serious back pain to consider how lucky we are. 
For most of us lower back pain can be avoided through proper 
education and exercise. I think most of us will find that a little 
extra effort will be well worth our while. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s 
Minister of Health will be involved in a conference call today 
with his provincial and federal counterparts to discuss the issue 
of reopening the compensation package for hepatitis C victims. 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1998 

Now it’s easy for provincial governments to simply suggest 
Ottawa should pay, and the Tories indicated in this House 
yesterday that they are prepared to let the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government off the hook. We are not, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let’s not forget that the Krever report underlined the fact that 
federal and provincial governments played a part in the tainted 
blood scandal. And we believe both must do their part to ensure 
all victims of hepatitis C are compensated. 
 
Failing any agreement, the Liberal opposition will be moving 
first reading of a Bill today to strike a hepatitis C compensation 
commission, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This body would be established to identify victims of the 
tainted blood tragedy, develop criteria to determine financial 
impact on the lives of victims, and use these criteria on a 
case-by-case basis to determine fair and reasonable 
compensation for victims and their families. A common sense 
approach, Mr. Speaker. And I hope all members of this 
Assembly will support this Bill. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

“Come Home Safe Tonight” Safety Campaign 
 

Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Farming is among the 
most dangerous occupations in the province. Every spring the 
risk of accidents and injury is increased as farm families work 
long hours to get their crops in. Farm accidents have already 
been reported this year in Saskatchewan. 
 
Given this, promoting farm safety, especially in the spring and 
fall, is a top priority of SaskPower. This is the second year of 
the community-based farm safety campaign entitled “Come 
Home Safe Tonight,” designed to help prevent deaths and 
injury by involving customers in raising awareness about farm 
safety. 
 
The safety campaign will be carried in radio commercials 
province-wide from now until the end of May. The “Come 
Home Safe Tonight” message will also be promoted through 
advertising in weekly newspapers, outdoor billboards in rural 
farming communities, and by posting of information in all 
SaskPower offices, farm implement dealerships, rural coffee 
shops, co-op retailers, rural municipal offices, and grain 
elevators. All three television stations will also air commercials 
to support this safety message. 
 
I know all members will join me in supporting farm safety 
initiatives to encourage farm families to stay safe during this 
busy spring seeding time and throughout the farming season. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Closure of Plains Health Centre 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, recently the big banks took out 

ads to tell us that everything will be okay after they consolidate. 
Not to be outdone, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow just 
sent a flyer to his constituents telling them everything will be 
okay after health consolidation and the closure of the Plains. 
 
Just as people don’t believe the bank, Moose Jaw Wakamow 
residents don’t believe that member. He tries to tell local 
residents services will be the same once the Plains closes. He 
forgets to tell them the NDP already slashed 53 hospitals, 968 
acute care beds, 461 long-term care beds, laid off some 579 
nurses, and now forces some 6,600 people to languish on 
waiting-lists in Saskatchewan. 
 
While the member writes his constituents to tell them what to 
think, we gave them a chance to tell the Premier how they feel. 
One Wakamow constituent writes, and I quote: “Even if you 
felt cuts were necessary, don’t try and claim the system has not 
suffered. It has.” Another says: “I’m a registered nurse and in 
the past four years I’ve seen firsthand how our health care has 
depleted.” 

 
Another writes: “I had life- saving surgery at the Plains. Please 
use our tax dollars to keep the Plains and remember what led to 
your demise in 1982 when you stopped listening to the people.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge the member and his colleagues to 
avoid telling their constituents what to think and start asking 
their views on issues like . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Saskatchewan Jazz Festival 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The great Canadian jazz trumpet player, Maynard Ferguson, 
once said, and I quote: “Trumpet players should play, not talk.” 
By logical extension, jazz fans should listen. 
 
And from June 19 to June 28 this summer in Saskatoon, jazz 
fans will be able to listen to jazz musicians play. For nine days 
every finger will be popping and every toe will be tapping as 
over 500 musicians will be playing at over 200 performances — 
most of them free — on and around the river bank in downtown 
Saskatoon. 
 
Maynard won’t be there, but another great trumpet player, 
Wynton Marsalis, will. As well, local, national, and 
international players of all styles will grace us with their 
performances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the fourth year in a row this is a smoke-free 
festival. It is now the SaskTel Saskatchewan Jazz Festival and I 
want to congratulate our communications Crown for its support 
of our province’s cultural life. 
 
As well I want to commend the hundreds of volunteers and 
organizers without whom the festival would not happen. And I 
want to thank them for the economic impact on our city. 
 
Mostly though, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to a good time, as 
should you and all music lovers. As the great orchestra leader 



May 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

Duke Ellington once said, “We would love you madly” if you 
joined us this June. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

May Day 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the day which 
traditionally launches all of the themes we normally associate 
with spring: fertility, rebirth, youth, romance, even sexuality. 
But this is the legislature and I don’t want to talk about that. 
 
May 1, May Day, is also a special day for working people 
around the world. The international working persons’ holiday. 
It is not a day begun by Karl Marx or Leon Trotsky, as some 
believe. Rather it is a holiday introduced first in North America 
in the last century as a result of workers struggling against the 
Pullman Railway Car Company. Their struggle, Mr. Speaker, 
set the tone for the international effort of workers to gain an 
eight-hour working day. 
 
Coming as it does in the same week in the Day of Mourning for 
killed and injured workers, May Day is a kind of happy 
complement to this other, more sombre day dedicated to 
working people. On one day we remember those who have lost 
their lives in the workplace; on the other, today, we salute the 
efforts of working people the world over — successful efforts 
by and large — to fulfil their aim of equal rights and social 
justice for all. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question this morning is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, this morning you will be meeting by conference 
call with Health ministers from across Canada, and the only 
topic of conversation is going to be the hepatitis C package. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the compensation package you negotiated is not 
fair. Your compensation package turns its back on thousands of 
innocent victims of hepatitis C. And yet when the 
Saskatchewan Party forced a free vote in the legislature on 
Tuesday, you and your colleagues in the NDP lined up and 
voted against extending the compensation package to include 
all victims of hepatitis C. 
 
Mr. Minister, that was wrong. Will you do the right thing this 
morning and recommend to the provincial Health ministers that 
all hepatitis C victims deserve compensation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that I appreciate the position that he has taken 
and his party has taken. And in my discussions this morning 
with provincial Health ministers across the country, we’ll be 

reaffirming, I expect, the position that has been taken by the 
provincial Health ministers and by the federal minister across 
the country. 
 
Be reaffirming that we made some very difficult choices and 
some very difficult decisions, Mr. Speaker. And we recognize 
that there are people today who are not going to be 
compensated in the way in which the package is designed, and 
understand the kinds of hardship that those people will be 
experiencing. 
 
At the same time also wanting to reiterate again to you that the 
health system cannot across the country take responsibility for 
all of the issues that are there. But for those that we believe that 
we have accountability and responsibility for because harm has 
been done, we take that very seriously and will continue to 
ensure that that compensation package is made to those people 
who have been harmed because of responsibilities that the 
federal government and the provincial government and the Red 
Cross didn’t act upon fully or appropriately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, a further question to the minister. 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health in the province of 
Saskatchewan is the Chair of the provincial Health ministers’ 
committee. Mr. Speaker, he is the leader of the group at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s time to show leadership. What is your 
position on the expansion of compensation to all hepatitis C 
victims? What will you be telling the other provincial Health 
ministers when you meet by conference call this morning? Mr. 
Minister, are you going to continue to show a lack of 
compassion for all hep C victims by just confining the package? 
Mr. Minister, provinces across this country have already 
indicated that the package should be opened up. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you demonstrate leadership this morning, and 
compassion, by recommending, as Chair of the Health 
ministers’ committee, that the hepatitis C package be reopened 
to ensure all victims of this horrible disease are dealt with 
fairly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I appreciate, Mr. Speaker, the 
comment that the member makes in terms of providing 
leadership. And I want to advise the member opposite that 
leadership is achieved through the collective participation of all 
of the individuals who are involved in the process. 
 
And so I carry today two responsibilities. One to ensure that I 
express the voice of all of the Health ministers across the 
country, of which I think I have been doing, and say to you that 
the instruction that I’ve received from all of my colleagues 
across the country and from Mr. Rock, is that the package that 
we have in place today is one that we’re continuing to ensure 
remains in place, is the direction that I’ve been provided. 
 
When you say to me that other provinces have said we should 
be opening up the agreement, there isn’t one province that has 
said we should be opening up the agreement that we have. What 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1998 

the provinces . . . what some provinces are saying is that there 
should be a greater responsibility in terms of the financing of 
the package by the federal government. None of the players 
have said that this agreement should be opened up. None of the 
players have said that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
Minister of Health. The NDP may be slowly starting to open its 
eyes on the hepatitis C issue but it still has its eyes shut tight on 
the Plains hospital. In today’s paper, we have one NDP MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) writing a letter to the 
editor entitled: “What health-care cuts?” We have another NDP 
minister saying the Plains is not a big issue. Which begs the 
question: why does the Regina District Health Board have a 
$5,000 three-quarter page ad on page B3 of the same paper 
defending the closure of the Plains? 
 
Mr. Minister, in spite of these ridiculous comments by your two 
members, I’m sure you have some MLAs who are telling you 
the Plains is a big issue. And it’s going to cost them their seat in 
the next election. 
 
Will you give those members the chance to save the Plains and 
try to save themselves by allowing a free vote? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that’s 
there anyone on this side of the House and certainly there are 
people in southern Saskatchewan who don’t agree that the 
services that are provided at the Plains hospital over the past 
several years have provided an excellent service to us, both in 
Regina and southern Saskatchewan. No dispute. No dispute 
about that. 
 
But when you have, Mr. Speaker, now four rallies that I’ve 
attended and the members opposite in the new Tory Party and 
the members opposite in the Liberal Party going around the 
province and saying that there are going to be hospital bed 
reductions, that there are going to be staff losses, that services 
aren’t going to be as good — what would you expect that the 
people of southern Saskatchewan might start to think? 
 
And I say to the member opposite, you need to stop going 
around the province and telling the people of Saskatchewan that 
the services in Regina will not be as . . . better because it’s 
false; it’s a political rally; and it is continuing with the 
Liberal/Tory politics, which are fearmongering to people in 
Saskatchewan. That’s the process, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my question then is for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, why are you refusing to let your MLAs 
represent their constituents? Do the people of Weyburn want 
the Plains hospital closed? Do the people of Estevan want the 
Plains hospital closed? Do the people of Indian Head-Milestone 
want the Plains hospital closed? Will you give those MLAs the 

chance to represent their constituents and save the Plains 
hospital? No. 
 
Why not? Why won’t you allow a free vote on the future of the 
Plains hospital? 
 
Mr. Premier, on Tuesday, the Saskatchewan Party will be 
moving a motion calling for the Plains to remain open until its 
future can be determined in the next provincial election. Mr. 
Premier, will you allow a free vote on that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that the decision about the closure of the 
Plains hospital was made in 1993, made in 1993. And at the 
recent rally in Regina, the recent Liberal rally in Regina, Mr. 
Hermanson stood up and made the comment that the decision 
about the Plains health closure was made in 1993. 
 
It was made in 1993, and we’ve had an election, Mr. Speaker, 
in 1995. We had the election in 1995 with the decision having 
been made. And I say to the member opposite, say to the 
member opposite that our strategy is to ensure that people in 
rural Saskatchewan get the best services they can. And we 
provided that example to the member from Canora when he was 
standing on his podium a few years ago saying that we should 
retain services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This government is about ensuring that people services are 
provided across the province, across the province in a fair and 
equitable fashion. That’s what this government is about, and 
we’ll ensure that in the Regina health care system we’ll 
continue to have the most, the best services that we have for 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Prostitution 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are 
for the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Government of Alberta is warning other 
provinces to follow Alberta’s lead in toughening up child 
prostitution laws. Alberta’s changes have been so successful 
that pimps appear to be moving their child prostitutes out of 
Alberta and setting up shop in other provinces. The last thing 
we need is for Saskatchewan to become a safe haven for this 
kind of disgusting, obscene child slave trade. 
 
Mr. Minister, Alberta’s legislation is working. There is 
currently legislation before this House, introduced by the 
member from Humboldt, that would provide Saskatchewan 
with tough new laws like what Alberta has. This House could 
send a message loud and clear that pimps and johns who prey 
on children are not welcome in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you send that message? Will you pass the 
Bill introduced by the member from Humboldt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of sending a 
message to the adults who will abuse children on our streets, 



May 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

that message has been sent by this Minister of Justice and this 
government loud and clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And let me repeat, Mr. Speaker, should 
any individual in this province be convicted of such a heinous 
crime, they will be dealt with by the full extent of the law. 
There is no mistake about that. 
 
Now the member from Rosthern stands in the House this 
morning and credits the Alberta legislation recently passed with 
having some effect. Now the only testimonial to that comes 
from the Premier of Alberta. Mr. Ralph Klein says his 
legislation is working. Well I understand he’ll say his 
legislation is working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what would work, I’ll tell you what 
would work a whole lot better, is if we had a change to the 
Criminal Code of Canada so that you could run but you could 
not hide, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we need — is change to the 
Criminal Code of Canada. 
 
What is the use, Mr. Speaker, I say of driving some individuals 
from one province to the another province. The true solution is 
stiffening up the Criminal Code of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And that’s exactly what we’re 
after. We don’t want them to be able to run and hide but this 
government seems to want to provide a hiding place. And I 
think that’s unconscionable. 
 
Mr. Minister, I notice today that many members are wearing 
their green ribbons signifying the beginning of the missing 
children month. Many children in this country are missing 
because they’ve been drawn into the child sex trade. We do 
need more . . . to do more than put on green ribbons and make 
speeches about how much we care. 
 
This is a disturbing form of child exploitation that has no place 
in our province. Yet you don’t want to do anything about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, the solution is clear. The Alberta legislation is 
working. The member from Humboldt has introduced a private 
members’ Bill based on the Alberta law. We could get to work 
today passing that Bill and sending the message that pimps and 
johns are not welcome in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister of Justice, every day that you wait as Minister of 
Justice, another child could be lost to this immoral slave trade. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the hon. member 
has been extremely long in his preamble and I’ll ask him to go 
now directly to his question. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question is: 
will you allow second reading of this Bill today so we can get to 
work making Saskatchewan a safe place for children instead of 
a safe place for pimps and johns? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to that 
member, remind him again of the extent of the commitment of 
this government in working with the children, and particularly 
the children at risk on the streets of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not working alone. We’re not working 
alone. We are working with community organizations in Prince 
Albert, in North Battleford, in the city of Saskatoon, in the city 
of Regina. 
 
Reflected in this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, is a new 
commitment to that work, of a half a million dollars, bringing 
us to a total of $750,000 directed very specifically, very 
specifically, to those children who are on our streets, who are 
being abused and who are at risk, Mr. Speaker. That is a very, 
very significant commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We are prepared as a government to 
work with all governments in this country — we are prepared to 
work alone — to find appropriate solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of legislative change, the appropriate 
course of legislative change is not simply to bring a Bill and 
drop it in the legislature but to consult with the communities 
that will have to enforce that law and who will be affected by 
that law. And that’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. We are 
consulting on this and other legislative strategies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Surgery Waiting-lists 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Liberals have 
obtained a report by the Saskatoon Health District which 
indicates how many people underwent surgery between January 
and March and how long patients were forced to wait for 
surgery. 
 
This document contains some very disturbing figures. Let’s 
start with the wait people are forced to endure for elective 
surgery. For general surgery the average wait is 370 days at St. 
Paul’s Hospital, and at City Hospital the average wait is 342 
days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question of course is to the Minister of Health: 
what are you doing to address the fact that people are forced to 
wait more than one year for surgery? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite, that of course he takes the privilege of painting part of 
the picture. 
 
And it’s true that across the province today we have some 
pressures, as I’ve said, to ensure . . . in ensuring that we get the 
kinds of services completed that we need to get completed in 
terms of procedures. But never in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
where there has been an occasion where somebody has required 
emergency services, has that not occurred. Never, Mr. Speaker. 
We have always ensured that that’s occurred. 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1998 

Now when I look at the kinds of services that we provide across 
the province, I want to say to the member opposite, last year in 
Saskatchewan, last year in Saskatchewan, just completed, we 
had 27,400 people who received home care services in this 
province. Up three times the number that we did in 1992. 
 
We had 875,000 days, in-patient days, in hospital care, and 
we’re estimating today about 650,000 emergency room clinical 
services in this province, for a million people. That’s almost 
one every day of every person who lives in this province in an 
emergency room, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, just for a minute that we’re 
not meeting the requirements of Saskatchewan people’s health 
needs is inappropriate and false. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I guess the 
minister doesn’t understand, so I’ll paint some more of the 
picture for him. 
 
The findings get more disturbing as we go. For surgeries 
identified as urgent, the waiting period is unacceptable to say 
the least. The average wait for urgent surgery — for urgent 
surgery — is 34 days. More than one month for urgent surgery, 
Mr. Speaker. Urgent means immediate, right now, is what 
urgent means, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you acknowledge there’s a serious problem 
here? And what answer do you have for people who occupy 
urgent waiting-lists but are forced to wait more than one month 
for their surgery? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — You see, Mr. Member, I think . . . Or Mr. 
Speaker, to the member opposite. We have again an occasion 
where the Liberal member doesn’t fully understand the way in 
which the health care system works. And there are many, many 
occasions that the member in the House has misled the 
information and the facts. 
 
First of all he talked about, a few weeks ago, about the fact that 
there haven’t been resting periods in the system today during 
Christmas and Easter, which has been traditional — has been 
traditional. The member opposite has been going around the 
province and saying there’s going to be loss of beds here in 
Regina, there’s going to be loss of staff, of which none of that is 
true. 
 
And today the member opposite stands up and says that urgent 
is immediate. Urgent is not immediate. Urgent is not 
immediate. Emergency is immediate. Emergency. And 
physicians in this province decide what health care needs 
individuals need. And you need to understand the process. 
 
There are elective, urgent, and emergency. And you need to 
figure it out so that you’ll be able to share that information in an 
accurate fashion with people around Saskatchewan and the next 
Liberal rally that you’re at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clearly evident that 
the minister doesn’t understand. The minister doesn’t 
understand. He’s the one that doesn’t understand, Mr. Speaker. 
There is no one I’m sure in this Assembly who doesn’t 
acknowledge the need to treat cancer patients immediately. 
However that’s not what’s happening in Saskatoon either. I’ll 
paint some more of the picture for the minister. 
 
Cancer patients are being forced to wait an average of 20 days, 
almost three weeks, for surgery that should take place 
immediately. Is this not urgent either? What’s the minister’s 
definition. 
 
Mr. Minister, by any measure of common sense, don’t you 
agree that three weeks is far too long for any cancer patient to 
wait for surgery when that cancer may be spreading throughout 
their body in that time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that he’s forgotten completely, forgotten completely 
that in this province we lead the nation in some of the cancer 
services and treatment that we provide — lead the nation. 
 
And just completed, Mr. Speaker, adding last year $8.8 million 
in the completion of the best cancer clinic anywhere in Canada, 
the Allan Blair. And so when the member opposite stands up 
today and talks about the fact that there are people in 
Saskatchewan who don’t get quality cancer treatment or 
services, it’s absolutely false. 
 
Now I say to the member opposite you should take some time, 
you should take some time and pay attention to what 
Saskatchewan is doing in leading the nation on health care 
services. And you should take it, take some time to write the 
note to your federal, to your federal minister and ask him to 
provide some additional funding to the provinces across the 
piece so that we can enrich even more — even more — the 
quality of service that we provide today across Saskatchewan. 
 
You take that effort, Mr. Member, and make sure that the 
federal government helps participate in some of the costs that 
they’ve reduced over the last period of time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess it’s not that 
the government doesn’t understand, or the minister, it’s that 
they don’t care that people’s lives are being impacted every day 
that they are forced to live with pain or illnesses without proper 
treatment. And the NDP refuses to do what a responsible 
government would begin to do by resolving this serious 
problem and admit that their health reform was ill-fated and 
there was no plan. Will you immediately stop, Mr. Speaker, will 
the minister immediately put a stop to Roy days in which 
operating rooms at City Hospital and St. Paul’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon are closed every third Friday. Will you make a 
commitment that all operating rooms will be open for full 
service at these two hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that when he goes around and talks about the fact that 
there’s been a reduction in services in Saskatchewan he 
obviously hasn’t been paying attention to what’s happening in 
this province and/or around Canada. 
 
The member opposite needs to realize that in this province 
today we have the largest health expenditure that we’ve ever 
had in this province — leading the nation. And where does it 
go, he asks me. Where does it go? Well it goes into providing 
more surgeries today than we ever have in the province. More 
surgeries today. 
 
It goes into tripling the home care services that we provide 
today. It goes into ensuring that we have greater emergency 
services for all of Saskatchewan. It goes into ensuring that we 
have a good air ambulatory service, which we’ve added a new 
aircraft just a couple of years. 
 
And, Mr. Member, the litany goes on and on about all of the 
additional services that are provided. And a new MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) program that’s going into Regina. And 
higher quality services for people who are going to receive 
services in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s where $l.72 billion is going into, and we’re doing it 
alone, Mr. Member — Saskatchewan — without any additional 
money from the federal government, which is your 
responsibility to help sustain some of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, there are more than 6,600 
people presently occupying waiting-lists in this province. We 
know that former NDP premier, Allan Blakeney, found any 
level exceeding 2,000 unacceptable. In fact the former premier 
called his minister of Health onto the carpet and suggested that 
if that number wasn’t reduced to an acceptable level, he would 
find a new minister. Mr. Premier, Allan Blakeney would not 
accept this situation. Will you put the same challenge to your 
Minister of Health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health as 
demonstrated by today’s answers, has a vision which is 
positive, which is caring, compassionate, in rebuilding the 
health care system for Saskatchewan to be absolutely the leader 
for the 21st century — not only in this province, but for this 
country. 
 
We started four years, five years ago. We’ve made occasional 
mistakes and there’s no doubt about it. But we’ve done it on a 
philosophy which is rooted on the basis of buttressing acute 
care, making it the best possible acute care we can get in 
Canada, with the prevention and wellness model which is now 
being followed in other provinces of this country, following the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I say, as the Minister of Health says, to the member opposite, 
this government has full confidence in this Minister of Health. I 
do. He is Chair of the national Health ministers’ conference as 
well. 
 
And I tell you something. What you need to do is to get your 

credibility in this operation by making sure that the Liberals 
share the same commitment to medicare that we have and to get 
your friends in the Conrad Black newspapers fighting your 
campaign, the Tory campaign, to start telling the truth too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Prostitution 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wonder 
how the Minister of Social Services sleeps at night. If he sleeps 
peacefully, he obviously is not being kept awake by concerns 
over the children of the streets. Child prostitution, Mr. Speaker, 
is an issue of stolen youth and it is a form of child slavery. 
 
Child prostitution and its sexual abuse of children by pimps and 
johns will not only continue but it will grow in severity with the 
influx of pimps and johns bringing child prostitution into 
Saskatchewan from Alberta. 
 
To the Minister of Social Services and the Minister of Justice: 
why will you not support legislation that provides prevention 
and help to the sexually abused children whose lives are being 
devastated through this enslavement by pimps and johns, 
legislation that has proven immediately effective in Alberta? 
 
Mr. Minister, give this Assembly and all the people of this 
province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I interrupted the hon. member. 
Her final statement wasn’t on the record because I asked her . . . 
I interrupted to ask her to go directly to her question, to put her 
question very briefly, and immediately. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I ask the 
ministers of Social Services and Justice to give this Assembly 
and all the people of this province a direct answer to the 
question: why will you not support legislation that has proven 
immediately effective in Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker the effectiveness of 
the Alberta legislation is yet to be determined, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
tell you what is not to be determined — what is not yet to be 
determined — is the commitment of this government to share 
with that member, to share with all members, in dealing with 
this very tragic and difficult circumstance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I repeat again, I repeat again the commitment of this 
government through programing, to meet the needs of children 
who are actually on the street, is firm. There’s no question 
about that. The resolve of this government in dealing with those 
who will abuse the children on the streets is firm. There is no 
question about that. 
 
In terms of any piece of legislation, we need to consult with the 
people who will need to enforce that legislation and with those 
whose lives will be affected by it, Mr. Speaker. We’re doing 
that. We’re doing that with that member’s Bill, with some 
legislative suggestions that have come from Manitoba, and 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1998 

elsewhere. Again I repeat, changes to the Criminal Code, which 
will govern all provinces, would be most effective. 
 
Now I do have to say, Mr. Speaker, just it’s Friday and it’s the 
end of question period, I think I want to respond to the 
member’s first question. She asked me how I sleep at night — 
always with my wife. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Increased Funding to Saskatchewan’s 
Public Prosecution Service 

 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, keeping our community safe 
is a top priority of this government. On March 19 my colleague, 
the Minister of Finance, announced an increased investment of 
5.9 per cent by this government in the Justice budget. Part of 
that investment involves increasing the number of prosecutors 
working in the justice system throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an effective public prosecution service is an 
essential component of an integrated justice system. As such, 
prosecutors have the same objective as police and the courts. 
They must all enforce the laws our society has enacted to 
preserve social order and ensure public safety. The prosecution 
service in Saskatchewan is staffed by highly competent 
professionals who perform their duties in an increasingly 
demanding environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to advise the members of this 
Assembly that in 1998-99 the Government of Saskatchewan 
will invest 1.1 million in increased funding to public 
prosecution. This investment will provide an overall funding 
increase of 14 per cent to public prosecutions; increase 
prosecution staff serving northern Saskatchewan by more than 
40 per cent; provide base funding for additional resources added 
in 1997-98; and increase office automation and library 
resources. 
 
In 1997-98, three additional prosecutor positions were created 
and assigned to Crown offices in Regina, Saskatoon, and North 
Battleford. Other resources added in 1997-98 included the 
establishment of economic crime units in Regina and Saskatoon 
with teams of prosecutors specializing in prosecutions of 
white-collar crime. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, on March 30 this year, I announced a 
$1 million investment in establishing a serious crime task force 
in Saskatchewan — a partnership between police and 
prosecutors to put gangs out of business in this province. Our 
investment in new prosecutor positions in 1997-98 and again 
this year supports this important initiative. 
 
Our government will also invest more than 1.1 million over two 
years to establish the serious and habitual youth offender 
comprehensive action program. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan are fair-minded and responsible. They believe 
people should be held accountable for their actions and they 
want us to deal swiftly and effectively with those who do not 

respect the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have said before, keeping our communities 
safe is a top priority of this government. Working with police 
and prosecutors to make this province inhospitable to criminal 
gangs, protecting the public from serious violent and chronic 
youth offenders, and ensuring an effective prosecution service 
are key pieces of this strategy. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With reference to 
the information that we were just given about some changes 
coming to the Justice department, I think to the extent that those 
changes increase the possibility of shortening the time that it’s 
going to take people to get through the courts and getting that 
whole thing lined up, particularly the beginning of that 
document that talks about the number of prosecutors working in 
the province will be increased, I think those are good. 
 
However it’s unfortunate that the Justice department is working 
in dribs and drabs — we don’t fix it, we just tamper with it. I 
think the kinds of things that need to be addressed are the sorts 
of things that we already discussed to some extent this morning. 
If we just took something like the member from Humboldt and 
passed that particular piece of legislation, we’d get a lot further 
down the road than just dealing with prosecutions and throwing 
people in jail. 
 
I think what we need to do is deal with the situations that cause 
crime. That would be one of the ways that I think we could 
address this, and these line-ups would be a whole lot shorter, 
not because we spent more money into putting more people into 
the system, but we’d have done something significant to keep 
people from being into the system in the first place. 
 
Also as we’ve seen this morning, it seems that there’s a major 
mix-up, Mr. Speaker, between the Justice department, Social 
Services department — neither one knows who’s running what. 
And I think maybe if we made sure that things such as young 
offenders was totally under Justice, things would work a whole 
lot more smoothly and more effectively. And we could 
probably achieve the results the people of this province want 
without spending all that money. 
 
There is, as I said, little new in this. It’s a repeating of things 
we’ve heard earlier on. One of the questions we will have later 
on, and that is with the statement that’s here that we’re going to 
increase prosecutions staff in northern Saskatchewan more than 
40 per cent. It raises a number of questions for which we will 
want the answers, and that is the justification for that. 
 
Have we done such a poor job in the past? Is there a higher 
crime rate or are we just being very ineffective in that particular 
area? Why is that major boost in northern Saskatchewan 
needed? The answer hasn’t been given. It will be something that 
we’ll be looking forward to finding out in the near future. 
 
So to the extent that this will probably shorten some of the 
line-ups that are there, I think we probably support that. To the 
extent that it does nothing to really address the problem of 
curbing crime in Saskatchewan, we have some concerns that it 
is not going in the right direction. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



May 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, certainly it is impossible to argue 
against the initiative taken by the Minister of Justice this 
morning. And it will be, it will be gratefully received. However, 
I think it will also fuel in some respects the unease we see in 
our province by some of the statements the minister has made. 
 
I think there is enormous concern out there that the direction 
our province appears to be headed is that in each succeeding 
year we will spend more and more on police, on jails, on 
judges, on prosecutors, on house insurance, on car insurance, 
and none of this is resulting in safer communities. Indeed, the 
Minister of Justice says it is resulting in the opposite effect, or 
to quote his statement, “It is resulting in an increasingly 
demanding environment”. 
 
I would like to give just one example if I may, Mr. Speaker, in 
all seriousness, and that is the issue of fetal alcohol syndrome. 
That has not been addressed in any way, shape, or form. We all 
know that fetal alcohol syndrome is a growing problem in this 
province. We all know it has no cure. It must be stopped at 
source. And we all know that once we have the problem of fetal 
alcohol syndrome, no amount of money spent on courts, on 
police, on jails, on social workers, on counsellors or anything 
else will eradicate the basic fact that fetal alcohol syndrome 
results in antisocial behaviour, and there is no cure. 
 
So I would ask that the government address some of the core 
causes and accept that more and more money on facilities is 
going to burden the public treasury but not give us the safer 
communities we all seek. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1100) 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 41  The Teachers’ Dental Plan 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 41, the Teachers’ Dental Plan Amendment Act, 1998 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Teachers’ Life Insurance 
(Government Contributory) Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 42, 
The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) 
Amendment Act, 1998 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 744 — The Hepatitis C Compensation 
Commission Act 

 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 
744, The Hepatitis C Compensation Commission Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly to move 
second reading of Bill No. 742, The Protection of Children 
Involved in Prostitution Act. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Scott that Bill No. 32 — The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today on this particular Bill as it deals with all of 
Saskatchewan and a very important resource that we have in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — our wildlife. It’s one of those 
resources that brings a lot of people to Saskatchewan. It allows 
us the opportunity to show off our province, Mr. Speaker, as 
people come in all summer long to have a look at our birds and 
our animals, and also unfortunately though, Mr. Speaker, gives 
them the opportunity to see what our roads look like. 
 
And we do get people coming in once, Mr. Speaker, but a good 
many of them take one look at our roads, take one look at our 
gasoline and fuel prices, and simply get out of Saskatchewan as 
quickly as they can. 
 
We need to do a lot of work, Mr. Speaker, with our wildlife. We 
need to utilize it as a resource to bring people to Saskatchewan 
time and time again, not just one single time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we generally agree with the intent of this 
particular Bill but we see several areas in it that are in need of 
addressing. 
 
As the minister pointed out, the Bill does three main things: it 
increases the maximum fine for all major hunting offences to 
$100,000; it strengthens legislative references to night hunting; 
and it strengthens the Crown’s power to seize and cause 
forfeiture of articles involved in hunting offences, such as 
vehicles. 
 
Clearly all of us in this Assembly should be concerned about 
the growing problems with night hunting and other hunting 
offences. When people are involved in hunting offences, Mr. 
Speaker, and the taking of game illegally, it deprives the 
province of its resource and it deprives those who wish to enjoy 
that resource from their opportunities to do so. 
 
Our province’s natural resources are a vital part of our 
environment, our tourism industry, and our overall quality of 
life. It is a valuable commodity that we must protect at all 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1998 

times. 
 
Many people talk about hunting as an integral part of the native 
way of live. And that is certainly true, Mr. Speaker. In addition 
I think we should all acknowledge that hunting and fishing are a 
part of the Saskatchewan way of life no matter whether you are 
native or non-native. 
 
And that way of life has increasingly come under attack by 
poachers, night hunters, animal parts exporters, and other 
hunting criminals who kill off our wildlife in an unethical and 
unsustainable way. 
 
That way of life, Mr. Speaker, has also suffered another attack, 
and that was with Allan Rock and his Bill C-68, the Liberal gun 
control law that they brought in in Canada that the regulations 
have just come down on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That particular 
Act, Bill C-68, is also an attack on the Saskatchewan way of 
life just as much as the illegal hunting activities that take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the takers of our wildlife in unethical and 
unsustainable ways need to be punished. And to that degree we 
certainly support what this Bill is attempting to do. However, 
there are several areas where we believe there needs to be some 
improvement. 
 
First, the original Act described a range of penalties for 
different sorts of offences. Some incurred fines of up to $500 
while others went up to as much as $25,000. I think that we can 
all agree that in many cases these maximum fines were clearly 
too low, which is supported by the fact that other jurisdictions 
had much higher penalties. The fact that our penalties were so 
low, Mr. Deputy Speaker, encouraged people to carry out these 
illegal activities in the province of Saskatchewan because the 
potential profit returns more than offset any costs of fines. But 
by increasing the penalties, that offset has been eliminated, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Nevertheless, the approach of this Bill seems to be a bit 
peculiar. Instead of creating a new range of fines, it simply 
jacks up all of the fines to $100,000. That seems to be a little 
excessive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve all heard the word Draconian applied to tough 
legislation, and I think it’s very apt in this particular case. For 
those of you who don’t know the story, the ancient Greek 
legislator Drakon established a law code where the penalty for 
every offence was execution. When asked why he did that he 
said, well I thought the minor offences deserved it and I 
couldn’t think of anything tougher for the major ones. 
 
You have to wonder if sometimes some of the minor offences 
or first offences are now going to be covered by this $100,000 
limit and whether or not they really deserve such an onerous 
fine. 
 
As legislators we always have to be mindful to ensure that the 
penalties fit the crime, and our caucus is not convinced that this 
Bill accomplishes this goal. At a minimum our caucus will want 
to hear assurances from the government in committee that this 
Bill will be accompanied by regulation that will spell out a 
definite schedule of penalties within that $100,000 upper limit. 
 

If for the first offence of some minor infraction of the game 
Act, Mr. Speaker, I think a $100,000 penalty is excessive. 
Certainly a penalty is warranted, but $100,000 seems to be a bit 
excessive and hopefully within regulations, there will be a 
schedule of fines laid out. 
 
This is especially important because fines and penalties like this 
are often subject to abuse at the enforcement level. While we 
want to do everything we can to ensure that illegal hunting is 
stopped, none of us would want to see law-abiding hunters 
being harassed by the provisions of this Bill. 
 
It is this kind of bureaucratic abuse that has made firearms 
legislation such a flashpoint and we don’t want to see it 
repeated here in the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
The official opposition also wants to take this opportunity to 
repeat our call for a complete and unequivocal end to night 
hunting. We appreciate that the government is trying to do 
something about that in this particular Bill, however it is still 
uncertain whether they have the cooperation of the Metis 
Society in enforcing it. More can, should, and must be done to 
ensure that this dangerous and abusive practice is eliminated. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on the provisions that 
increased the Crown’s power to seize and expropriate vehicles 
and other articles that are involved in hunting crimes. Again this 
is an important power to have when dealing with criminals but 
we have all heard horror stories of one hunter or another who 
got involved in a minor hunting infraction or who was accused 
and later cleared of that infraction who nevertheless lost his 
vehicle, had it impounded for a long period of time. As I 
mentioned earlier, whenever we look at punishing criminals, we 
have to be sure we are not punishing innocent people at the 
same time. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our caucus would like to 
examine this Bill further. I move that we adjourn debate on this 
Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 26 — The 
Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems that 
Friday is my duty day. Mr. Speaker, this is an entirely new Act 
replacing The Pipe Lines Act as it was passed in 1978. This 
particular Act deals with construction, operation, alterations of 
all pipelines not covered under the National Energy Board Act 
or The SaskEnergy Act. 
 
The old Act simply stated that the legislation applied only to 
those pipelines that were completely within the province of 
Saskatchewan. This exemption for pipelines under . . . the 
exemption for pipelines under the SaskEnergy Act I think 
though, Mr. Speaker, is worthy of some questions and 
consideration in dealing with this Act. 
 



May 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

Surely all pipelines are relevant in coming under this Act, Mr. 
Speaker. We have one set of rules for the pipelines owned by 
one individual corporation, Mr. Speaker, when there are many, 
many companies who operate pipelines in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think we need to take . . . ask the minister and take a very 
careful consideration of why one corporation’s pipelines will be 
treated differently in this province compared to those owned by 
everyone else. 
 
It appears that SaskEnergy gets to play with a different set of 
rules than the others do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think that is 
worthy of some questions. And I’m hopeful that the minister, 
when we reach Committee of the Whole, will have the proper 
answers available for those particular questions. 
 
This Act also deals with pipelines that are wholly situated 
within plants. Again, I believe that’s a bit of change, Mr. 
Speaker; that previously, pipelines were considered as delivery 
transportation systems between two particular points, not just 
moving fluids around or gases around within a particular plant. 
 
Does it also cover flowlines though, Mr. Speaker? That seems 
to be an area that has not been particularly closely addressed in 
this particular Act. It needs to be dealt with because we have a 
good, good many flowlines in this province. 
 
If you ever had the opportunity to look at a flowline map or a 
map of all the pipelines that are in the ground in the south-east 
corner, in the Swift Current area, or up in the Lloydminster 
area, it looks like a very huge spider web, Mr. Speaker. There 
are lines running every direction that you could possibly think 
of, and a good many of them are stacked one on top of the 
other. So all the lines need to be dealt with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1115) 
 
Under the old Act, a permit had to be issued by the minister for 
the construction or operation of a pipeline. And the new Act 
refers instead to a licence — not to construction and operation, 
but simply to a licence. 
 
Under the old Act, no reference was made to an application fee 
for a permit. With the new Act, it expressly states that a fee 
must be paid to the department when applying for the licence. 
The fee is not stated, so we have to assume, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that it will be set out in regulation. 
 
I guess the questions that have to be asked there, Mr. Speaker, 
is: how will that fee be determined? Will it be determined on 
the material that’s being carried in the pipeline? Will it be 
determined based on the size of pipe in the ground, by the 
volume that it’s carrying, by the pressure that it’s running 
under, the various types of material that it could be constructed 
of? There are a number of very different variables here, Mr. 
Speaker, and no place in the Act does it seem to set out how a 
fee determination will be made, simply that a fee will be 
applied. 
 
Again that’s another area, Mr. Speaker, where the minister is 
going to have to provide some answers and some explanations 
as to what the intention of the department is and how easily that 

is going to be able to be changed. If today pipeline A is charged 
a set fee for a licence, will tomorrow pipeline B, which is 
similar to A, be charged the same licence, or will it change? 
 
A company which is intending to construct a pipeline other than 
a flowline, but is otherwise exempt from this Act but desires to 
have the authority to expropriate land under this Act, must 
apply for a licence. So if you want to expropriate some land, 
Mr. Speaker, you have to apply for a licence and pay the 
licensing fees even though you may be exempted under the 
particular provisions of this Act from being forced to do so. 
 
Again we are looking at some changes in the expropriation of 
land in this particular Act, I think, which bears very serious 
consideration. Because as I mentioned in the previous debate, 
we see expropriation under Bill C-68. Expropriation is a very 
controversial issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know that a number 
of members in this Assembly are aware of the expropriations 
that took place by SaskPower in the Condie power line 
situation. 
 
Many of the producers in that area were not happy with the 
power line going through their property, and the government 
expropriated that, without very many qualms I would suggest 
— simply walked in and took the land that they needed. 
Expropriation is a very heavy hand of government, Mr. 
Speaker, and it needs to be questioned very seriously. 
 
The circumstances under which the minister may refuse or 
approve a licence application will be set out in the regulations. 
In the old Act there was very little detail given anywhere under 
which the minister could refuse a permit application. The new 
Act also gives the minister the opportunity . . . not the minister, 
the landowners, the opportunity to appeal the matter before the 
Oil and Gas Conservation Board. 
 
Well at least that’s one extra step in the process, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s a good thing. But the questions have to be asked, who 
appoints the people to the Oil and Gas Conservation Board? 
How are they selected, what’s the criteria for membership, and 
what kind of power does their recommendation have? It would 
seem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that while they can make 
recommendations, the Oil and Gas Conservation Board can 
make recommendations dealing with a particular expropriation 
or a licence, the minister still has the final authority on that. 
And again, we need to ask further questions on that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The old Act made references to highways when discussing the 
process for construction of pipeline. The new Act refers to 
roads instead. It states that the minister, and the minister alone, 
may give approval for a pipeline to be built on, across, over, or 
under any road. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this makes it appear that 
the RMs, the rural municipalities, do not have to even be 
consulted or even informed about this construction. 
 
I can see a lot of difficulties with that particular area, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because RMs know how deep their ditches 
have been dug. They know where the pipelines are. They’re the 
ones who have been dealing with the whole process up to now. 
They need to continue to be into that loop, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The RMs need to be given the opportunities to have some input 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1998 

into this, both through consultations and directly at the time that 
the pipelines are going in. There may be some particular reason 
why it’s inappropriate for a pipeline to be placed in a particular 
area. There could be RM water wells that are in close proximity 
to the pipeline going in. There may be other issues that have to 
be dealt with within the RM and they need to be carried on in 
the loop, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The expropriation clause has been rewritten. And instead of 
laying out the conditions and the time frame for expropriation 
of private lands, as is the case in the old Act, the new Act 
simply refers to procedures under other Acts. 
 
Easements will conform with The Public Utilities Easements 
Act, and expropriations will fall under The Expropriation 
Procedure Act. Moreover, the old Act refers to procedures 
under The Expropriation Act, which seems to have been a more 
onerous procedure than for expropriation. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems that we’re lessening the power that 
the people have to resist some of the changes that are taking 
place in their lives. In south-east Saskatchewan in my 
community, we face a lot of these issues, a lot of the problems 
that arise from the oil and gas exploration. 
 
And while a good many people want to have that carried out in 
their area, want to have an oil well on their land, there are those, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, who do not. And they need to be given the 
opportunities to express their concerns and their desires not to 
have any kind of foreign activity taking place on their property 
— on the land that they rightfully own and hold title to. That’s 
why the expropriations Act needs to be looked at and the 
procedures by which people have the opportunity to express 
themselves and where they can go to appeal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is a common carrier section in the new Act. But it does 
not apply to pipelines for the transportation of natural gas. If the 
minister declares a licence holder to be a common carrier, while 
the definition of common carrier is not entirely clear in this 
legislation, it generally means that a licensee who is declared a 
common carrier must, for payment, provide transportation or 
delivery of any fluids that are normally carried by the pipeline 
where capacity is available and at rates that are comparable to 
what the common carrier charges other customers. The licensee 
has no choice but to provide this service. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in most of these areas you have one 
common carrier for the transportation of crude oil and possibly 
for liquid natural gases. But I find it surprising that this also 
doesn’t apply to the transportation of natural gas. Again I guess 
it goes back to the SaskEnergy Act, which gives SaskEnergy 
different rules and regulations than are faced by all of the other 
pipeline operators in this province. 
 
Again that’s an area, Mr. Speaker, where we hope the minister 
will have some explanations as to why this Act does not apply 
in a common carrier classifications to those who transport 
natural gas. 
 
Under the new Act, no person shall cause a ground disturbance 
within 30 metres of a pipeline without giving notice to the 
operator of a pipeline. 
 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you would on the surface think that 
this is a good amendment to the Act, because some of these 
pipelines do carry fairly high pressures — anywheres up to 
1,200 pounds. And if for some reason that line was punctured 
you would have a major explosion, fire, and would almost 
certainly have some personal injuries. 
 
But when you say, shall . . . no person shall cause a ground 
disturbance within 30 metres, or roughly 100 feet, of a pipeline, 
you have to ask, what about the guy cultivating his field. He’s 
certainly causing a ground disturbance even though he, in every 
case virtually, will not be anywheres near that particular 
pipeline in depth. It should be significantly lower than what a 
person would be cultivating. 
 
Is he going to have to get a permit every time he wants to go out 
and work up his summer fallow or work up his stubble, pick 
rocks, whatever the case may be. I think there needs to be some 
very serious answers here from the minister on what kind of an 
effect this is going to have on agriculture. 
 
Certainly if somebody is going to go out subsoiling in areas 
where there’s pipelines, for their own safety they should be 
inquiring and letting the operators of the pipelines know what 
they’re doing, where they’re doing it, so that the land can be 
marked. 
 
I worked for a pipeline company, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I 
got elected. And there was many times that we had to go out 
and mark pipelines for people who were doing ground work, 
who were digging rocks with backhoes, or trenching water 
lines, and all those sorts of things. 
 
It’s very easy to do, Mr. Speaker, but it does take advance 
notice and it does take time. And I’m sure that both the farmers 
and the operators of the pipeline companies would not consider 
it appropriate time spent if every time the farmer wanted to go 
cultivating he had to notify the pipeline company and the lines 
had to be marked. 
 
As usual the Act concludes with a long list of instances in 
which regulations will apply. There is also an equally long list 
of occasions when ministerial orders apply. Included in the 
regulations is the option to exempt any person or pipeline from 
this Act; prescribe terms on which the land can be entered; and 
prescribe measures for the protection of life, safety, and fees for 
licences. 
 
Ministerial powers are granted for those pipelines that do not 
require licences and they cover the general specifications for the 
construction, maintenance, and operation of these pipelines. 
 
Again, it gives the minister considerable amount of power and 
latitude to make determinations. I think it’d be important, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have a standard set of rules and regulations 
that the pipeline industry has to fall into and meet within certain 
categories. And that within those categories you meet the 
standards. 
 
The fines for contraventions of the Act have been increased 
significantly. And summary convictions for those who do 
damage to pipelines or otherwise hinder their construction have 
been raised from a maximum of 500 to a maximum of $5,000. 



May 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

Well the previous Act that we were dealing with, The Wildlife 
Act, fines went there from $500 up to $100,000. This area 
seems to be somewhat more conservative. Those who 
contravene this Act, where a penalty has not been laid out, face 
a maximum fine of $5,000 a day for each day the contravention 
continues. That’s up from $1,000 a day. A significant increase, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The fine for obstructing a minister or his representative in 
carrying out their duties under the Act . . . face a fine of $5,000 
up from $500 — again a significant increase, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a lot of questions to be 
asked. There are people contacting us with their concerns about 
this particular Act. I know that other members of the House also 
want to address this particular Act, Mr. Speaker, therefore I 
would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 25 — The 
Pipelines Act, 1998 be now read a second time 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re 
dealing with again the same industry and oil and gas and 
pipelines Act, Mr. Speaker. And all of the same comments 
apply as I commented in the previous Bill, Mr. Speaker; 
therefore I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1130) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 13  The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I will invite the minister responsible for 
the Liquor and Gaming Authority to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated beside me 
is Dave Innes, the president and CEO (chief executive officer) 
of the Liquor and Gaming Authority; and immediately to my 
right is Lorna Chomyn, legal policy analyst, licensing, of 
Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Welcome, 
Mr. Minister, to you and your officials. Bill No. 13, changes to 
the alcohol and gaming regulations, I have a number of 
questions. 
 
And first of all I’d like you to sort of describe the consultation 
process you’ve gone through prior to bringing forth these 
amendments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. The consultation took place 
primarily with the hotels association and many of the charity 

groups. The one component of the Bill, as it pertains to the 
fines, was actually an amendment recommended by the hotels’ 
association. So that’s to a large degree why we have the Bill 
before the committee today. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m wondering . . . 
The hotel association then of course is in agreement with it. Are 
the bingo hall operators and the organizations who use them 
also in agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. We’ve consulted them fairly 
extensively. And some may be opposed to it, although we’ve 
not heard any opposition to it at all. So we are assuming 
generally that they would be in support of it, though I don’t 
want to categorically say that all are in support. There may be 
some who are in opposition but we’re not aware of it at this 
point. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Was the draft of the legislation sent to all the 
owners of bingo halls, the operators of them, so that they all had 
an opportunity to review it before it was passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No, it was not. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And the hotel association itself is in agreement 
with it. But do you know if the bar owners all on an individual 
basis were aware of the Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To our knowledge, through the hotels’ 
association, yes they would all be aware and generally in 
support of it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me approximately 
how many suspensions do your department hand out each year 
to bars and lounges under the current Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We don’t have that specific detail with 
us today. The suspensions are only in the most severe cases and 
this would — I caution the member — this would just be a 
guess, but in the past year would be in the range of two to three 
dozen; so that would be the magnitude of the number of 
suspensions. That would be the maximum. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. My 
colleague has just been called out for a few moments, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
A couple of questions that I’d like to ask you, Mr. Minister, 
though, on this same line. You’ve indicated that suspensions are 
in the most severe cases and we understand that. You’re saying 
that somewhere between two and three dozen is the possible 
likelihood. Under the old Act, were warnings issued as a system 
of dealing with the not very serious type of infractions? And the 
number approximately, if you could make a guesstimate of the 
number of warnings that were issued in one fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’ll just try and run through the process 
as well just to complete the answer. 
 
First of all, normally what would happen is they would receive 
a warning, either verbal or written, from the director of the . . . 
branch director. They might possibly receive a second letter, 
and then in fact a third letter would come possibly under the 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1998 

president’s signature. And then lastly, we would go — after 
consultation with them — we would move to the actual 
suspension, whereby then they have the right, of course, to 
appeal that also. 
 
Again the exact number we don’t have with us here today, but 
I’ll again step out and guess that we’re in the range of about a 
hundred per year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again. Under the new provisions, 
will you still be using the warnings or will you be going directly 
to the fine system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We’ll continue to use exactly the same 
process. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Then what time will you start using the fines 
instead of the warnings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We would consider the use of fines after 
the warnings that I’ve gone through — first, second, and third 
warnings. So then we’d consider the use of fines in place of the 
suspensions now. So that would be the change. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Currently, what are 
the types of infractions that warrant a suspension for a bar or a 
lounge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just on the previous question as well — 
I think it’s worth clarifying a bit more — that the use of fines 
would be before suspensions. It’s not intended to replace 
suspensions; so if there’s continued abuse, suspensions will 
follow. 
 
Okay, typical violations would include serving alcohol to 
minors, and that’s the most severe; overcrowding, consistent 
overcrowding usually, because normally there would be a 
warning as well if there was overcrowding; and lastly, 
over-service. So that would be three of the most common 
violations. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, right now under the current 
legislation, is the maximum penalty closure — permanent 
closure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You’ve read the old Bill correctly; 
that’s exactly right. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Okay, what will be the maximum . . . What 
type of infraction will incur the maximum suspension under the 
current Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The new Act essentially isn’t going to 
change that at all from what existed under the old Act. 
Consistent service to minors, consistent overcrowding after 
repeated warnings and a number of suspensions — that will 
constitute closure the same as it does now. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, if somebody comes into a small 
bar 12:30 on Saturday night and it’s considered overcrowded, 
does that mean that they will get a fine or a suspension now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Typically if it’s their first offence, they 

would receive, as I’ve gone through, they would receive the 
first warning by way of either verbal or by letter from the 
branch, from the branch director or in fact even the inspector 
might notify them of that. Then they get . . . if it happened 
again, there’d be read a second and thirds, and then we’d move 
to recommended fines. And lastly, if there’s consistent violation 
again, then comes the suspension. 
 
(1145) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, now that stripping is illegal once 
again in Saskatchewan, what type of fine will a bar pay if they 
bring in strippers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The process would be exactly the same. 
If the question is what the maximum fine might be, once we get 
to the level or to the stage of actually fining an operator, the 
maximum fine that we’re recommending under the new 
legislation would be $10,000. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Has there been any case of strippers in bars 
since the court ruling made it illegal again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The answer is yes, there have been. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you give us an idea of how many? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The information that we have . . . with 
the information that we have with us today it’s our 
understanding that there is one. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, how many investigators are 
employed by Liquor and Gaming to watch over bars and 
lounges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We have, across the province we have 
12 inspectors. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Across the entire province? Are complaints 
against bars or lounges launched as a result of the complaint by 
police or through direct observation by one of your officers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — From both, and in fact from the public 
as well. And it’s not uncommon to receive complaints from the 
industry itself. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, how many times under the 
current Act can a bar or lounge receive a suspension before they 
are permanently shut down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Each case is different so there’s no sort 
of model for each case. So each case is different. But again 
closure would only result after continued violation and blatant 
after continuous . . . after warnings and blatant continued abuse 
is what I’m trying to say. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So then depending on how an owner would get 
along with the investigator, they could have . . . they could be 
shut down sooner in one area of the province or by one officer 
than they could . . . may happen by another officer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The warnings and suspensions aren’t 
issued by an inspector. So we would send an inspector in to 



May 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

report to us if we found or there was reports of concerns. 
 
In most of the case I guess I want to re-emphasize that 
violations reported to us are not done through the inspector 
process at all. We would send them in afterwards. But they are 
all, in my view, to be professional people and they would have 
no influence on how suspensions are handled at all. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I guess I’m wondering if each officer then is 
given some flexibility to deal with each individual case. Or is 
there specific guidelines laying out saying that after so many 
suspensions . . . or that they receive a, you know, something 
more drastic will happen? I’m wondering how much flexibility 
each of the officers are given? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The suspensions are issued by the 
president of the Authority and the inspectors in the field have 
no influence on that at all, other than reporting to us. If we’ve 
sent them in to investigate the particular establishment, they 
would investigate for us if we so requested but they have no 
impact on how suspensions are issued. The president will issue 
the suspension order. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Maybe I misunderstood then, but I think you 
said previously that there wasn’t any exact number or times that 
there could be an infraction before they would be shut down, or 
I think it was shut down. There was a little bit of flexibility. 
 
So I’m wondering is that true then or once your . . . once this 
gentleman has got a number of infractions or complaints then at 
this time, and then all of a sudden they are shut down. Is there 
an exact number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There needs to be some flexibility so 
there isn’t anything cut and dried. And when I say there needs 
to be some flexibility — for instance, if an establishment was 
found to have 20 or 30 juveniles or under age children in it, we 
need to be able to react immediately. 
 
But generally the policy that we follow is the three letters of 
warning. Then under the old Bill, it would have gone from after 
the third warning to suspension. Under the new Bill, it will be 
the three letters of warning, fines, and then possibly to 
suspension. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, with this new Bill, do you 
foresee that there will be specific fines for specific infractions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It is contemplated that the regulations 
would set that out. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So there will be a specific fine structure in 
place then for . . . so that the Authority won’t be able to 
arbitrarily hand out fines on a case-by-case basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The short answer to that question is yes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I understand that the maximum 
fine is $10,000. Can you tell us what would warrant a $10,000 
fine? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Repeated and blatant violations would 
constituent a fine of that magnitude. 

Ms. Draude: — Or one occasion of bringing in a stripper? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again I say, we look at each case based 
on the facts that are presented to us. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you tell me how the appeal process 
currently works and if it will change with these new 
amendments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me answer the second part of the 
that question first. First of all, no, there won’t be any change in 
the process as it pertains to the appeal process as it pertains to 
this new Bill. 
 
First of all, the fines and suspensions that would be levied . . . 
and once they go to the appeal process, the appeal process, the 
commission operates at arm’s length, and that process then will, 
that process then will levy onto them, I suppose, a new, a new, a 
new verdict. And they have to live by that then. But they . . . it 
operates independent of the Authority. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So is it a board that actually looks at each 
complaint or each issue at a separate time, or is a group of 
people? How many, how many are on the committee, or is it 
actually a committee that meets at a regular time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It’s a four-member quasi-judicial board. 
They only meet on issues that are actually appealed, and they 
meet on an as need, as need’s basis. 
 
Ms. Draude: — How many appeals of suspensions of bars and 
lounges were dealt with last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Now I’m going to be guessing a little bit 
here again, but your question was as it pertains to bars and 
lounges. 
 
The total number of appeals that were heard last year was 56. 
But I advise the member that that pertained to liquor and 
gaming. So we’re assuming that roughly half of them, half of 
the appeals would have applied to bars and lounges. So 
somewhere in the magnitude of 25. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And can you tell me how many suspensions 
were overturned on appeal? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As it applies to the liquor component, 
there were two that were changed by the commission. So they 
would have varied the penalty that was recommended by the 
Authority. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve got a few 
questions dealing with bingo halls and I’m wondering if you 
can tell me at the current time how many are operating in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We’re not absolutely certain, but we 
believe it’s 38. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you tell me how this number compares 
with the number of four or five years ago? 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There has been a rationalization within 
the bingo industry to reduce costs. And several years ago it 
would have definitely been within excess of 50 halls, so their 
down to what we believe is 38 right now. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you give us a breakdown of the number of 
halls between Saskatoon and Regina and the rest of the 
province. Meaning how about the larger centres — do they have 
a bigger percentage of them and if those numbers have changed 
in the last five years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There are 18 halls in the two cities, 
Regina and Saskatoon. The balance are outside of the two 
centres. But in both situations, Regina/Saskatoon and the 
outlying areas, the number of halls have seen a reduction. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you tell us how many suspensions were 
handed out to bingo halls last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It’s our belief that there weren’t any 
suspensions to bingo halls last year or . . . yes, last year, I 
believe that was the question, yes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, with the bingo halls, a number of 
them have callers that are perhaps below the age of 16 or are 
there . . . Is it possible to have a caller that is below the age of 
16? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m reluctant to answer that question 
only because we don’t know for certain. But we would 
endeavour to get that to you in writing if that’s okay with you. 
Okay. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. I’ve been listening to the 
line of questioning and the questions very carefully, I simply 
wish to say I’m having difficulty relating the questions to the 
Bill. I think the questions are very appropriate in the estimates 
for this department when they come up. I’m not at this point 
ruling the questions out of order, I want to state that. But I do 
ask the hon. member to relate her questions to Bill 13 as 
directly as they can be linked. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And I’ll do that, but before I’ll do that since 
the minister had agreed to get a number for me, I’m going to 
ask him if he’ll also get one more answer for me and answer if a 
player can be younger than the age of 16. 
 
For my next question I’m wondering if you can tell me what 
kind of infractions would warrant the closure of a bingo hall. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — For bingo halls it would be much like 
other establishments, continued violation of key components of 
the licence. And a couple of examples that we would suggest is 
use of the profits from bingo for non-charitable purposes, and 
also continued lack of financial reporting to the Authority. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us if all the 
infractions by bingo halls result in the actions of the owners or 
the managers, or that the organizations who use the halls 
actually break the rules themselves? 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Certainly the answer is both could be in 
violation, and we would issue sanctions, letters, suspensions, to 
whoever is in violation of the Act. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Under this Bill only the owner of the hall can 
be fined and not the organization using the hall. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You’re correct. Under this amendment 
only the hall can be dealt with. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So if it’s the organization who actually breaks 
. . . who’s using the hall and breaks the rules, is it fair that it’s 
the owner that’s going to incur the fine? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As it exists, the hall operator would not 
suffer any of the penalties; we would be dealing with the charity 
themselves if they were in violation. And I guess that’s the 
answer. We’d be dealing with them directly if they were in 
violation of the Act. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Then I guess I misunderstood because I 
thought you said a minute ago that it was the owner of the hall 
is the one that would incur the fine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think there may have been some 
confusion. When I answered the question I was referring to the 
amendment itself. So under the entire Act, whoever is in 
violation, whether it’s a bingo hall, or whether it’s the charity, 
whoever is in violation, that’s who the fine is . . . or I shouldn’t 
say the fine but that’s who we’ll be dealing with. The 
suspensions won’t be levied against the hall if the charity is the 
one that’s in violation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So then just to clarify for our own purposes 
then, if there is a problem and there’s a suspension — well I 
guess it can’t be a suspension — the fine would actually be 
against the charity if that was who had caused the infraction. If 
it warrants a suspension then the hall owners themselves are 
going to be the one that’s in trouble. Or they wouldn’t be 
allowed that; they would only get a fine. Is that what you are 
saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay let me try it again. With a hall 
owner we would go through the whole process of letters of 
warning and all of those things, the fines and suspensions. So 
that’s the range of penalties and notices of violations that would 
be applicable to a hall if they were in violation. To a charity, 
really our only recourse would be temporary or permanent 
suspension, and in most cases that would work. 
 
Ms. Draude: — That would be temporary or permanent 
suspension of their permit. Okay. And they would never get a 
fine then, they’d only get their permit suspended. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — That’s correct. The charity would be 
suspended. We can’t fine them at all. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you for that clarification. For both the 
bars and the bingo halls there is a three-year statute of 
limitations in which your department can take action on an 
infraction. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — That’s correct. 



May 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

Ms. Draude: — What would be the purpose of this statute of 
limitations of this length? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think for purposes of clarification, 
because it is a bit technical, I’ll quickly just read through the 
exact wording, okay. 
 
The Bill allows the Authority or the commission to impose a 
penalty within three years after the date of its knowledge of the 
violation. Valid reasons exist for the three-year time period. 
 
First of all, that this type of provision exists in other provincial 
legislation that imposes sanctions for violations. As it relates to 
penalties, this time limit can be found, for example, in The 
Forest Resources Management Act and The Trust and Loans 
Corporations Act, 1997. 
 
Secondly, and most importantly, a limitation period often states 
when proceedings can be commenced or initiated against a 
person. The limitation period in this Bill is different. All 
proceedings must be completed — and that’s the key difference 
— within three years from the date of the Authority’s 
knowledge of the violation. Therefore all investigations, 
hearings, and appeals must be completed before a penalty can 
be assessed by the commission or the Authority. 
 
Thirdly, the period of three years was not simply selected at 
random. This provision reflects the investigation responsibilities 
of the Authority and the procedural process that must be 
followed before a penalty may be imposed. 
 
And I can provide just some details about the investigations that 
must be carried out before a penalty is imposed. 
 
External sources such as the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) and city police or a member of the public may initiate a 
complaint about a violation to the Authority. It would be 
irresponsible for the Authority to accept a complaint at face 
value, so the Authority must carry out its own thorough and 
independent investigation, and obviously that takes some time. 
 
Expert investigative tools may be necessary. And again, as an 
example, liquor analysis may be required or forensic accounting 
may be needed to analyse financial information submitted by 
gaming suppliers. And clearly the Authority needs to properly 
investigate an alleged violation before initiating any action. 
 
And lastly, the existing procedural process included in the Act, 
instituted for the protection, is instituted for the protection of 
permittees and gaming suppliers, requires additional time. 
Appeal periods, adjournments of proceedings, hearings, and 
court appeals can cause time delays. And for these reasons the 
three-year time period in the Bill is, in our opinion, reasonable 
and based on solid principles. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So the appeal has to 
be finished within three years. And it sounds to me like there 
can be a lot of work required to bring it forward. So if 
somebody brings forward a complaint after two and a half 
years, does that mean that you have to do all of that work within 
the last six months in order to fall within your Act? 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — That’s not quite right. It’s three years 
from the time that the Authority becomes aware of the 
violation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is it reasonable to assume that even the most 
minor infraction can be dangling over the heads of a bingo hall 
owner for three years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Minor infractions would almost always 
be dealt with simply by letters of warning. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials. I just have a few questions perhaps 
of clarification. 
 
I want to first of all say that I’m pleased to see that there has 
been consultation with the industry prior to moving in the 
direction you have taken. And I believe that’s important 
whenever there are any laws that are changed or brought into 
force that do affect private industry and people who need to be 
guided by authorities and regulations. So I’m happy to see that 
there was consultation. 
 
One thing that we’ve always been concerned about is the 
reference to . . . we will subsequently, as the government 
always says, once the law is in place we will deal with putting 
together the regulations. And that’s always been a concern since 
we do not then have an opportunity to debate what regulations 
will in fact complement the legislation that goes into force. 
 
And I guess what I want to ask you for is your confirmation, 
affirmation, that in effect you will be consulting with the 
industry when determining the regulations, the range of fines, 
the specific violations, that you will have the broad industry 
involved that will be affected by these regulations and by this 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, any time any member 
opposite compliments me I should thank you for that, thank you 
for the compliment regarding the consultation. I want to ensure 
that in fact it has always been our, it has always been our plan 
to consult with the industry as it pertains to the regulations. 
 
Mr. Osika: — All right and . . . but you did not confirm that 
you will undertake, in your deliberations for the regulations that 
are not yet in place, dealing with the range of fines that will be 
. . . You have a maximum of a $10,000 fine, but there may in 
fact be fines in between for a variety of infractions — I believe 
I’m correct in that assumption — that will in fact perhaps be 
dealt with in the regulations. Is that my understanding? There 
are regulations yet to come, is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I got so carried away with my thanks for 
your compliments that I maybe didn’t explain well enough. I 
can undertake and confirm for you that we will, and has always 
been our plan, to consult with the industry as it pertains to the 
regulations and the range of fines. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I thank you for that, Mr. Minister, and I’m sorry 
I kind of threw you off. I recognize the fact that people on the 
other side of the House seldom get any compliments for . . . 
 
You mention that you have 12 inspectors for the entire 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1998 

province. I just wanted to — and I don’t recall, this may have 
been asked previously and perhaps I should be aware of it — 
but what type of training do these inspectors go through? First 
of all I should ask, what would be the qualifications for an 
inspector on behalf of the Authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, we look for people with 
investigative experience such as retired RCMP. So if your next 
election experience turns out not to be so good, come and let us 
know. Also the training certainly involves investigative 
training. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Is there a formal training program that the 
Authority provides or is this something that you expect people 
to come with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The answer is essentially both. We do 
formal training, but if we can find people that already have 
investigative experience, that’s certainly the candidates that 
we’re looking for. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, and you point out with 
my previous experience perhaps if things go awry . . . I’m 
happy to hear that. Usually defeated politicians become 
consultants, and I . . . (inaudible) . . . or judges or whatever . . . 
(inaudible) . . . or researchers. Anyway I believe you’ve 
already, you’ve already responded to the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena that there will not be any frivolous type of 
infractions that will be held over the head of operators of public 
establishments. 
 
You mention that there is an appeal process and it is . . . you 
responded it’s a four member quasi-judicial panel that sits. 
Does that panel include members from the industry, from the 
hotel industry, from charities? Are any of those people involved 
on the panel in the hearings — in the appeal hearing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Currently members on the commission, 
there’s none who are involved in the industry directly right now 
but it’s our understanding that a number of the members have 
had or several of the members have had past experience in the 
industry. Though currently in the industry acting on the 
commission it certainly would be conceived or perceived as a 
conflict. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s pretty well all 
the questions I had. The move in this direction is one that the 
industry has welcomed I understand, and I’m sure that the 
Authority will work within its proper parameters when coming 
up with the regulations. I’m pleased to hear you confirm that 
you will be talking to the industry when coming up with those 
regulations. 
 
The three-year limitation period, I appreciate your explanation. 
The concern was that there was anywhere up to three years that 
the Authority could initiate some action. And I’m pleased to 
hear that you’ve confirmed that’s not the case. It’s a matter of 
having that process completed during the three-year period. 
Those were the confirmations I was looking for and responses. 
 
I thank you and your officials very much. Thank you, Mr. 
Chair. 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Before I make that motion I want to 
thank both of my officials and the opposition members for their 
good questions. And appreciate the opportunity — since this 
was my first Bill before the House, I appreciate your 
cooperation. Thank you very much. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(1230) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
immediately to my left is John Law, president of the Sask 
Property Management Corporation. Seated directly behind him 
is Debbie Koshman, vice-president of finance and corporate 
services. Seated to my immediate right is Al Moffat, 
vice-president of commercial services. Seated directly behind 
me is Garth Rusconi, vice-president of accommodation 
services. And seated directly behind Al is Barb Loveridge, 
acting-director of financial planning. 
 
Subvote (SP01) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
Welcome, Minister, and officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to start off in the general sense to see 
where the general direction you’re taking the department is. 
And I want to ask you, first of all, if you see any significant 
shifts in the way the department is functioning since you’ve 
become the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’d like to say that things have improved 
dramatically since I became the minister, but I think we 
continue to operate a good quality service as it pertains to 
accommodation services in the best interest of the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, can you share with us, do you do 
an analysis of your occupancy rate, vacancy rate, the 



May 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

comparative costs of properties in different locations? I guess to 
start, you know, what type of analysis do you do of your 
properties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We certainly do an ongoing analysis of 
the market. In each location it will be a little bit different. We 
are currently operating in 200 different communities in the 
province here in Saskatchewan. So some communities that are 
fairly small, there would be not much analysis done unless, 
obviously, there is some significant changes that are taking 
place within that community. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Do you have reports that are available that 
would, in the major centres, make comparisons between 
properties that you’re responsible for in terms of the cost 
recovery on a square footage basis as to compared what the 
commercial market may be at, at that particular time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The short answer to that again is, yes we 
do. We do ongoing analysis for operating costs and that to a 
large degree will determine whether we own or lease a property. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I’m pleased to hear that you do it, and I ask, 
are those reports, are those comparisons available in a summary 
form or a comparative form or in a form that could be made 
available to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The information that we currently have 
in the reports that are developed are . . . have been historically 
for management purposes and largely that is a result of the 
industry requiring that this information remain confidential. But 
what we will do is we will endeavour to try and provide a bit of 
a summary, a report, for you if that’s okay. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, minister. Where I’m heading on 
this is to try to understand if the department on an on-going 
basis makes a determination of the appropriateness of the rates 
you charge, for example, to third parties or to clients of the 
property, to see if they’re comparable to an ongoing, shifting 
industry standard in the open market-place, if you like. 
Certainly in the real estate business in my experience, there can 
be a fair bit of volatility in terms of fair market value of . . . 
depending on availability of space and all the rest of it. 
 
So I’d appreciate if you could do it in terms of at least the major 
centres, and say the going rate for properties or office properties 
in Regina is X number of dollars a square, and our comparative 
rates are X plus 10 per cent, X minus 10 per cent — some type 
of a comparison. I appreciate the confidentiality of individual 
properties, and things of that nature would likely be 
inappropriate, but to sort of get a gauge of what’s going on in 
the different communities. And so if you could do that, I’d very 
much appreciate that. 
 
The other area is, do you do an analysis about — I guess the 
best word would be, is — the ongoing appropriateness of your 
continued ownership of property? Do you do a comparison to 
say, for example, we have 10,000 square feet of property in this 
location and that we have an opportunity, or perhaps we should 
explore an opportunity, to sell that to the private sector and 
move out of this. 
 
Do you do an ongoing analysis of the appropriateness, I’d like 

. . . I guess for a lack of a better word, or the desirability of you 
to continue to be the owner of the property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. You had a number of 
components to your question, and first of all, yes, we can 
provide a general report for you that you asked for. Essentially I 
want to answer it this way. We . . . 
 
(1245) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. I invite members that wish 
to carry on conversations to either step behind the bar and lower 
the volume significantly or, or step completely outside of this. 
The minister and the hon. member from Melfort-Tisdale are 
unable to hear each other. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We don’t actually operate as it pertains 
directly to the markets. We simply react to the markets; so ours, 
our analysis is always based on a . . . simply a cost recovery. 
The second component or second part of your question, 70 per 
cent of the facilities that Sask Property Management 
Corporation owns, owns are . . . or operates I should say, are 
program based, such as schools, correctional centres, and 
therefore most of the, most of the time in those cases it is most 
prudent to be owning those facilities. But in the other 30 per 
cent, there’s an ongoing analysis done to determine whether or 
not we should be owning or leasing those spaces. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — In that 30 per cent area that you speak of, 
Minister, have you bought or sold properties that would fit into 
that broad category in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Okay, it’s not common that we would 
actually buy properties but if it makes sense and we believe it 
. . . and it does make sense for the taxpayers then we will in fact 
pursue actually buying a, buying a building. And most recently, 
I think just April 1 of this year, we bought the federal building 
in Estevan. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:50 p.m. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................896 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................896 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................896 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................896 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................896 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................896 
  Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................896 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................897 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................897 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Good News Headlines 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................897 
 Green Ribbon of Hope Campaign Begins 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................897 
 Spinal Health Care Week 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................897 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................897 
 “Come Home Safe Tonight” Safety Campaign 
  Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................898 
 Closure of Plains Health Centre 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................898 
 SaskTel Saskatchewan Jazz Festival 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................898 
 May Day 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................899 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................899 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................899 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................900 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................900 
 Child Prostitution 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................900 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................900 
 Surgery Waiting-lists 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................901 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................901 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................903 
 Child Prostitution 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................903 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................903 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Increased Funding to Saskatchewan’s Public Prosecution Service 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................904 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................904 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................905 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 



 

 Bill No. 41  The Teachers’ Dental Plan Amendment Act, 1998 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................905 
 Bill No. 42 — The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Amendment Act, 1998 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................905 
 Bill No. 744 — The Hepatitis C Compensation Commission Act 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................905 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................905 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................905 
 Bill No. 26 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1998 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................906 
 Bill No. 25 — The Pipelines Act, 1998 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................909 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 13  The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................909 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................909 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................909 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................913 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 13 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................914 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation — Vote 53 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................914 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................914 
 
 


