





























































Hansard: May 06, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 977 
 May 6, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Weyburn. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition to the Assembly and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the community 
of Radville. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are from Weyburn, 
Moose Jaw, Radville, and Ceylon. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I too rise to present a petition and 
I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

This is signed by the people of Lake Alma, and Radville, 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition about people concerned about the impending 

closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Radville. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased as well to 
present a petition to the Assembly this afternoon dealing with 
the closure of the Plains hospital and the situation concerning a 
moratorium. The petitioners come from the Radville area of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has signatures on it from the 
community of Ituna. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Weyburn. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a petition 
on behalf of concerned citizens in Saskatchewan over the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The people who have 
signed this particular petition are from the communities of 
Ituna, as well as Hubbard, Foam Lake. And I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I present petitions this afternoon 
from people of Saskatchewan distraught over crumbling health 
care under the NDP (New Democratic Party) and particularly 
about the impending closure of the Plains Health Centre. Your 
petitioners this afternoon come from the communities of Ituna 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

and Homefield. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forth petitions, people 
throughout the province, in their efforts to stop the closure of 
the Plains hospital: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petitions that I 
have today are from the Assiniboia, Viceroy, and Limerick 
area of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today 
to present petitions with regards to the twinning of the No. 1 
Highway: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

From the communities mostly of Medicine Hat, Alberta. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a few from Fox Valley, from Hilda, from 
Drumheller, and from Alsask as well. I’m happy to present 
them on their behalf today. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise again on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
seeking justice for men and women who have lost their 
spouses in job-related fatalities: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows, widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) on October 27, 
1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, people have signed this from not only Regina but 
North Battleford, Medicine Hat, and other communities. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan petitioning the 

Assembly on the following matters: the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; to save the Plains Health Centre; 
to put a moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre; to have Workers’ Compensation Board reinstate 
pensions for disenfranchised widows and widowers; and to 
relocate Highway No. 40 to alleviate congestion at the 
entrance to North Battleford. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure and 
duty to present the fifth report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown Corporations which is as follows: 
 
Mr. Speaker, your committee, in examining the matters of the 
acquisition, management, and sale of Channel Lake Petroleum 
Ltd. by SaskPower and the payments to Mr. John R. Messer 
when he ceased to serve as president of SaskPower, has 
concluded that expert assistance is required in order for this 
committee to fully carry out its terms of reference. 

 
Your committee recommends therefore, that the Assembly do 
authorize the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations to 
enter into a contract with an independent oil and gas industry 
expert who shall be directed to do the following: 
 
(1) Evaluate the terms of the long-term gas supply contract 
awarded to DEML (Direct Energy Marketing Limited) as part 
of the sale of Channel Lake Petroleum to determine whether the 
contract is within industry standards; and 
 
(2) That if the long-term gas supply contract is not within 
industry standards, to provide information to the committee as 
to what those industry standards are. 

 
I do now present my report, and with leave, Mr. Speaker, I 
would move concurrence. 

 
The Speaker: — Leave is not required and the hon. member 
. . . it is in order to proceed to the motion. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I do now move: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 

 
I move that, seconded by the member from Regina Coronation 
Park. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Economic and Cooperative 
Development: what criteria has to be met to establish a 
new REDA, regional economic development association; 
when the south-west was split with one REDA existing 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

within the other, what were the benefits foreseen; what was 
the division of the south-west, or has the south-west 
accomplished so far; how has this affected the one-window 
approach formerly supported by the minister; and has there 
been any problems with the divisions of money and 
power? 
 

I so submit. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
gives me great pleasure to introduce three people who are in the 
east gallery this afternoon. Two are from Thom Collegiate. 
They’re grade 12 students who joined two of their classmates 
to interview me about the role of MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly). 
 
They are, and I’d ask them to stand, Mike Tomchuk and Tyler 
Kellett. And they did a superb job and asked very, very 
thoughtful questions. I invited them to attend and observe us in 
action. So I’d ask everyone here to give them a warm, warm 
welcome, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — And while I’m on my feet I would like to 
introduce someone who probably doesn’t need much of an 
introduction to many of us here, a familiar face, my former 
assistant, Jonathan Denis, who has been very, very busy since 
he graduated with his Bachelor of Administration last June. 
He’s just completed his first year of law school at the 
University of Saskatchewan, will be resuming work at the bank 
for the summer, and has been asked to return by the Fraser 
Institute to participate in some events in June. 
 
So I ask everyone to warmly welcome Jonathan once again. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery I would 
like to introduce Mr. Dale McAuley, the mayor of Cumberland 
House. Dale, Mr. McAuley, was here for a CRTC (Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) 
hearings in relation to the North. And as well, Mr. Speaker, we 
reminisced about the famous Cumberland Bridge. And now of 
course, he was presenting to me this idea of improving the 
Cumberland Road. 
 
So I guess, Mr. Speaker, things always keep on improving, and 
I would like everybody to welcome Dale to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce a guest seated in the east gallery from the 
community of Canora, a businessman and the alderman 
councillor in the town of Canora, Mr. Glenn Leeson. I ask 
members to join me in welcoming him to the House today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the House, a person that I work with 
daily and has provided much guidance to our caucus. It’s Jim 
Fodey — he’s sitting in the west gallery — our chief of staff in 
administration. I don’t think he’s been introduced to the House 
before, and, Jim, we want to thank you and welcome you to 
question period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my 
caucus I’d like to also welcome our guest, Mr. McAuley, the 
mayor of Cumberland House. I’m sure glad to see him here 
today and I understand he’s also going to be talking and 
meeting with the minister on Highways issues, especially in the 
Cumberland House region. And I with all my heartfelt effort, I 
want to wish him best of luck because he’s certainly going to 
need it. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Beauval Comes to the Aid of Bereaved Families 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to pay 
tribute to the resiliency of the people of the northern village of 
Beauval. In recent weeks there has been funeral after funeral in 
this community of a thousand people. And time and time again 
the community has risen to the occasion and helped the families 
through their terrible losses. 
 
The people of Beauval realize that they’re not the only 
community to go through such hardship, but I know that this 
community has done tremendous volunteer work that is a good 
example of people helping out people in their time of need. 
 
As their MLA I’m very proud to represent a community that has 
compassion and care for each other. My sympathies go out to 
the Aubichon family on the loss of Pierre; to the Gauthier 
family on the loss of Armand; to the Roy-Laliberte family on 
the loss of Janice; and now to the Burnouf family on the loss of 
Jules and their son-in-law, Gabe Kyplain of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, losses of this magnitude are certainly challenging, 
but many acts of kindness and support, as displayed by the 
entire community of Beauval, encourages all of us to have faith 
and continue on with confidence. It is a tremendous display of 
the values of all northern people as a whole, as all other 
communities in the North do the same for their families in their 
time of need. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Sends Fire-fighters to Alberta 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatchewan 
words like cooperation, working together, and compassion are 
words we put into practice and not just into fancy phrases. 
 
An example can be found on the front page of today’s paper. 
The headline says, “Sask. sends firefighters to Alberta.” And 
the headline tells the story, Mr. Speaker, unlike some of the 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

headlines I’ve seen lately. 
 
As we have seen on the news, some of the worst fires in 
Alberta’s history are sweeping throughout the north-west and 
Alberta’s fire-fighters are under tremendous pressure. More 
than a hundred fire-fighters from Saskatchewan are helping 
them. And we are checking our resources to see if we can spare 
more. 
 
I should add, Mr. Speaker, that our forests are under . . . are 
very dry too, and under threat. Usually at this time of year 
there’s about 43 fires. Now the number is up to a hundred. 
 
It’s one thing to share when you don’t need something at the 
moment; it’s something else to extend yourself when you’re 
natural impulse is to hold on to what you’ve got. But the 
Saskatchewan way is to offer help. 
 
And I congratulate our fire-fighters and our department for 
sharing their expertise and their resources and to the people of 
Saskatchewan because they would want us to do this. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal Party Policy on Medicare 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, recently I let the Premier know 
where the Liberal caucus stands on medicare. I said the NDP 
members were losing their ability to care but I still thought they 
listened. Well after listening to the Premier and others 
yesterday, I’m again worried they don’t listen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my caucus colleagues and our leader spent last fall 
consulting with Saskatchewan residents and our supporters to 
develop policy. On November 23, resolutions which originated 
from those consultations were passed by the Liberal convention. 
 
One states that we “uphold the principles of the Canada Health 
Act and support a publicly funded, publicly administered 
universal medicare system and oppose those who seek to 
undermine it with a two-tiered health system.” 
 
Instead of wrongly implying we don’t support it, NDP members 
should be glad Liberals solidly support medicare. If we didn’t, 
Mr. Speaker, this province would be left with the reconstituted 
Tory Saskatchewan Party that wants two-tier medicine. Or it 
would be left with this NDP government that brags about how it 
protects medicare, then shows how it really doesn’t care by 
closing 53 hospitals, 968 acute care beds, 461 long-term care 
beds, lays off over 500 nurses, and leaves 6,600 people to 
languish on waiting-lists in the province. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should simply be glad 
that at least one party in this House truly supports medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Boom 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) television aired a piece 
entitled “Swift Current Boom.” I would like to take a few 

moments to inform the Assembly of the great things going on in 
my constituency. 
 
In the last few years Swift Current’s population has grown by 
over 1,000 people. By the year 2000 the city officials project 
Swift Current’s population will swell to 18,000, making it 
Saskatchewan’s fifth largest city. 
 
The sustained boom is fuelled by the oil and gas, agriculture, 
and manufacturing industries. The restructuring of oil 
classifications by this government has greatly contributed to the 
booming oil industry. Oil companies are no longer moving in 
with trailers but are becoming involved in long-term leasing and 
construction. 
 
The agriculture industry is doing so well that workers are being 
recruited from Manitoba, and three new grain terminals have 
opened in the Swift Current area in the past few years. 
 
At the same time, the manufacturing industry is sky-rocketing 
and workers are being brought in from the Maritimes to help fill 
the demands of the growing economy. 
 
The increase in population has meant an increase in 
construction as the city’s vacancy rate is less than 1 per cent. 
Two new motels are in the works and new homes and 
apartments are rapidly going up. A 40,000 square foot Real 
Canadian Wholesale Club is also being planned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Swift Current is booming. This boom is being 
sustained by long-term commitments of oil companies, a strong 
agricultural sector, new small businesses, a growing 
manufacturing sector, and good government policies. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Beechy School Wins Drama Festival Awards 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan has 
again risen to the top in the Rosetown-Biggar constituency. I 
would like to congratulate the Beechy School Drama Club for 
their outstanding performance over this past weekend as they 
competed at the Saskatchewan Drama Association’s Provincial 
High School Festival. 
 
The drama club won the top award for best overall play for their 
performance in It’s Not the End of the World . . . But You Can 
See It From Here. The Beechy School Drama Club was one of 
the 11 schools competing in the provincial festival, including 
clubs from Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, Swift Current, and Prince 
Albert among others. 
 
The play, which was written by the students themselves, was 
about what it is like to be a teenager in rural Saskatchewan and 
portrayed a typical rural lifestyle — long school bus rides, farm 
accidents, harvests, as well other aspects of rural life. 
 
In addition to the best overall play award, Beechy was the 
runner-up for best visual presentation, captured three 
certificates of merit awards, and had two members receive 
awards — Daniel Flynn for acting and Ashley Meston for the 
major technical award. 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

Once again, congratulations to: cast members, Shannon Baxter, 
Logan Conner, Brandi Danroth, Kristian Danroth, Melissa 
Danroth, Daniel Flynn, Allissia Hanke, Kate Housek, Jesse 
Schellenberg, Denise Stroeder; stage manager Ashley Meston; 
crew members, Kris Braun, Cody Sander, Mike Jansen; and to 
directors Glenda MacFarlane and Karen Richardson for their 
hard work, energy and dedication which resulted in outstanding 
success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kinistino Dealership Wins Excellence Award 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Farm World serves 
farms in the Kinistino area, including parts of my constituency. 
The New Holland dealership has been recognized with the Parts 
Excellence Award. 
 
In winning this award, Farm World has demonstrated the 
highest level of commitment to serve their customers. The 
management, knowledgeable staff, and the greater availability 
of parts were all part of New Holland’s decision to give the 
award to Farm World of Kinistino. 
 
This is not the first time Farm World has been honoured with 
the Parts Excellence Award and it won’t be the last. 
Congratulations to Dave Cook and the staff of Farm World on 
being number one in North American parts. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SGI-CAA Child Safety Program 
 

Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
residents are among the most safety conscious in Canada when 
it comes to buckling up. But getting young children to use seat 
belts safely is a challenge. 
 
An SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) survey showed 
that 75 per cent of children under the age of one were not 
properly restrained in a moving vehicle. One-third of all 
children under five were not belted in properly. 
 
SGI’s new traffic safety awareness campaign aimed at 
increasing the proper use of child restraints will run through 
May and June. CAA (Canadian Automobile Association) 
Saskatchewan is participating in the program. 
 
The program, called One Safe Trip Deserves Another, 
challenges the parents to test their knowledge about the correct 
use of child restraints. 
 
A grand prize trip for four to Universal Studios, Hollywood and 
SeaWorld will be drawn from all the entries courtesy of CAA 
Saskatchewan Travel Agency. People can attend drive-in 
inspection clinics across the province through May and June to 
learn how to properly use child restraints. 
 
SGI is proud to be part of a program that will help protect 
Saskatchewan’s children from injury. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower’s Proposed Investment in Guyana 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskPower. Mr. 
Minister, it looks that we’re still not through paying for 
Guyana. The Attorney General of Guyana has now announced 
that they intend to sue SaskPower for damages that could reach 
$3 million Canadian — $3 million. That’s on top of 1.4 million 
you already blew in Guyana. 
 
By the time you get through paying the legal fees defending 
yourself, Saskatchewan taxpayers could be out $5 million. 
That’s about the same amount that you lost in Channel Lake 
because you couldn’t read the contract. The NDP has no money 
to keep hospital beds open but you have millions to blow on 
hare-brained schemes like Guyana and Channel Lake. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re in over your head. You really don’t know 
what you’re doing. Will you announce today an immediate halt 
to all of these foreign gambles like Guyana before taxpayers 
lose any more money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that he should not be so gleeful about the potential of a 
legal suit. He asked the same question last week and I informed 
him that there was no legal action from Guyana to the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and there isn’t now. 
 
And what he should do if he wants to ever have credibility — 
which he obviously doesn’t have in his own political party, and 
didn’t have as a Liberal, and doesn’t have now as a 
Conservative — if he ever wants to have credibility, is not take 
your sources for information from the Conrad Black press. You 
should wait. You should find out the facts before you ask the 
questions. At this point there is no legal action from the 
Government of Guyana to the electrical company here in the 
province. 
 
And I also say to the member opposite, if there were a legal 
action, it’s our legal opinion that we will not be responsible for 
any payment, any more than the Guyanese government would 
be responsible for our due diligence of the project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, the Attorney General of the 
Government of Guyana is the person who said he was intending 
to sue you for your act of negligence, and now you’re calling 
his credibility into question. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is 19 opinions that you can probably hire on 
any one day. The copy of the lawsuit is going to be lost on the 
basis of a memorandum of agreement that you signed to 
purchase the Guyana power company. 
 
Section 11 states, and I quote: “The law governing this letter of 
intent shall be the law of the Co-operative Republic of 
Guyana.” Mr. Minister, who did your legal opinion for you. Are 
they experts on the Guyanese legal system? Do they really think 
that a court in Guyana is going to be sympathetic to your lame 
excuses, or is SaskPower going to be taken to the cleaners again 



982 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

just like you did in Channel Lake? 
 
Mr. Minister, the question is: who gave you the legal opinion 
and what expertise do they have in Guyana? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve come some 
distance from the member from Kindersley last week saying, 
release your legal documents so the people from Guyana who 
are intending to sue you, can have a look at what your defence 
is going to be. That was his argument. 
 
Today the member from Melfort gets up and in his first 
question says, there is a legal action that has been started. In his 
second question he says they’re considering it. Now when you 
talk about credibility, sir, the member from Melfort, when you 
promised the people of Melfort that you would never leave the 
Liberal Party, and sign the documents saying that and then jump 
ship, and I might say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Now all hon. 
members will recognize that the Deputy Premier is not located 
all that far from the Chair, and the Chair is having some 
difficulty being able to hear the answer being provided. I’ll ask 
that the . . . Order. I’ll ask all hon. members to provide for the 
House the opportunity to hear the conclusion of the response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your 
comments. But I say to the member opposite, the member from 
Melfort, when he speaks to the credibility, I want to say this. 
 
He lost all of his credibility when he left the Liberal Party, 
having promised that he would never do that, without a 
by-election — without a by-election — and left to join the 
Conservative Party. 
 
And I can understand why those in the Conservative Party 
didn’t elect you as leader — because you don’t have the 
credibility. And I say you proved that in your first question by 
saying legal action had been commenced and then changed your 
story to say it’s being considered. Where’s your credibility, I 
would ask? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Every day that there’s disclosures about 
your handling of your ministry, your credibility absolutely is 
disappearing. Mr. Minister, I would like to let you discuss, if 
you would, the fraudulent activity that seems to be coming 
aware in the sale of Channel Lake Petroleum. 
 
We already know pages were switched in the final sales 
document after they were signed by SaskPower officials. We 
already know that the final sale price was misrepresented by 
Lawrence Portigal to SaskPower officials and the SaskPower 
board. Today we found out that Lawrence Portigal was on 
DEML’s payroll at the same time as he is working for 
SaskPower to complete the sale of Channel Lake to DEML. 
 
Mr. Minister, given all of this information, what action are you 

taking to protect SaskPower shareholders, the people of 
Saskatchewan? Have you turned over the Channel Lake file to 
the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say in terms 
of the file of Channel Lake, has now been turned over to a 
committee that that member sits on and asks questions. But I 
want to challenge him on one thing and I want to challenge the 
press on something, that they should ask that member — the 
Conrad Black paper in particular — he has accused DEML of 
fraudulent action today here in the House under immunity. 
He’s done that. 
 
I challenge him and I challenge the press to ask them to accuse 
DEML of fraudulent actions that he has said here in this House, 
do it outside the door if you have credibility. I challenge you to 
do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, through the testimony that 
the committee has heard, it is obvious that the people who can 
best judge if investigation should proceed are the RCMP. Will 
you make the commitment to turn that file over to the RCMP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again, the 
legislators on that committee have credibility. I believe that 
fundamentally. You may believe that the elected members 
don’t have credibility and I understand your opinion about 
democracy in this province — that that’s your opinion, and the 
member who runs Public Accounts. They understand that. 
 
The issue here is your credibility. You said DEML had 
committed a fraudulent act. You said that here today in the 
House. I challenge you immediately after question period to 
step outside of the House and say that about the officials of 
DEML. 
 
Now they’re not unable to defend themselves in that court 
outside of the Assembly. But if you have character and 
credibility, I challenge you, and I challenge the Black 
newspapers to challenge you when you step outside the House, 
to say that DEML is fraudulent in their activities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Yesterday in this House the Premier made the 
unequivocal statement: the Plains will close. It reminded me of 
Allan Rock’s heartless statement about hepatitis C victims — 
the file is closed. The Premier and Allan Rock, that’s quite a 
pair, Mr. Speaker. Two tin men of Canadian politics — no 
compassion and no heart. 
 
Mr. Premier, you then ordered your members to block a free 
vote on the future of the Plains by talking all day on a 
meaningless NDP motion patting yourselves on the back for 
health care. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Party will continue to call for a 
free vote on the future of the Plains hospital. I’ve a very specific 
question: when will you allow that vote to take place? 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 
can continue to call on anything that you want to call on, just 
like the member from Melfort called on the RCMP to look at 
the allegations of fraud surrounding DEML. And whether he 
will say that outside the Chamber, it’s about as credible as that 
statement. 
 
I say with respect to the Plains situation, the announcement was 
made by the government on the Plains three, four years ago. We 
are now months away from having more space in hospitals 
without bed loss, the best renal care, best heart care, cardiac 
care. No bed loss. No bed loss. No bed loss as a result of this 
change whatsoever, and you know that to be the case. 
 
We’re going to have the finest health care system in Regina and 
southern Saskatchewan contrary to the Saskatchewan Party — 
sorry — the Tory Party’s commitment to defeat and destroy 
health care. 
 
Keep in mind that it’s your leader, Mr. Hermanson, who’s 
talking about private, for-profit hospitals. It’s your leader that’s 
talking about two-tier health care systems. And it’s your leader 
who is taking $24,000 a month of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Talk about credibility in here? Not a chance; you don’t have it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, last 
night at the Plains meeting in Melville, one of the people there 
made an excellent suggestion. He said we should change the 
name of the Plains hospital to the Tommy Douglas trauma 
centre; then the NDP will keep it open. Well we’d even go for 
that, Mr. Premier, if that’s what it takes to keep the Plains open. 
 
Mr. Premier, I understand your members’ problem. They can’t 
vote to close the Plains because their constituents would never 
forgive them. And they can’t vote to save the Plains because 
you would never forgive them. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you take off the gag order today? Will you 
allow your members to vote freely on the future of the Plains, 
and will you allow that vote to take place next Tuesday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the phoniest argument 
advanced is this argument about free votes — will you let your 
ministers and members take free votes — while these people 
get up and vote unanimously without dissent on anything. 
 
They vote for two-tier medicine. They vote for private, 
for-profit hospitals. They vote for their leader getting $24,000 a 
year and not even having, not even having the veracity to run in 
an election coming up in Saskatoon. No wonder The Estevan 
Mercury and the . . . (inaudible) . . . story says today, “New 
leader advised to get out of trough,” referring to Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
And this member talks to us about free votes. This member 
talks to us about credibility. This member, these Tories, these 
Saskatchewan Party right-wing extremists who want to make 
Saskatchewan Alabama North, they would have anybody in this 

province believe they’re for medicare. 
 
If they believe anybody buys them that, I’ve got one of seven 
bridges they can buy in Saskatoon real cheap. I can provide that 
for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Highways 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the people of the North want to be part of Saskatchewan. They 
want their government to come up there and see what the NDP 
neglect has brought to people of the North. The roads have been 
called everything from Grant Devine’s golf course to a bombing 
range. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we don’t want the minister to fly up; we want 
him or her to drive up, drive up and see the conditions that you 
have left the roads in. When will the Minister of Northern 
Affairs or the Minister of Highways drive up to the 
communities of the North and apologize to the people of the 
North for 20 years of neglect and tell them when will they get 
their roads fixed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in relation to the question, I 
would like to say that the largest budget increase that the North 
has ever seen in regards to highways was done this year with 
$17 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, his own constituency on 
Turnor Lake, $1.2 million improvement on the road in Turnor 
Lake. In his own constituency, $5 million going in on the road 
to Pinehouse, Mr. Speaker. In regards to another 5 million in 
relation to the area in the forestry development in around Canoe 
Narrows and those areas, Mr. Speaker, that is what this 
government is doing. 
 
When we have the mayor from Cumberland House . . . when we 
put on the Cumberland bridge we’ve asked for federal support 
in regards to highways. They have neglected their duty right 
across Canada and Saskatchewan. In northern Saskatchewan 
they used to pay 60 per cent. They pay nothing now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The federal Liberals — that’s where he should be looking at 
and raising this question to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this type of politics is very 
demeaning to the people of northern Saskatchewan. And if the 
minister wants to play the game, we have a list of all the federal 
funding in highways in northern Saskatchewan. And I’ll have a 
page take it over to him for records. I think the very important 
point you want to make is this type of politics is insulting to the 
northern people’s intelligence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the small hamlet Patuanak send approximately 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

$100,000 per year to your government for driver licence fees, 
licence plates, and vehicle insurance, just for those three 
categories. They are desperate to get Highway 155 between 
Green Lake and Beauval and on to Patuanak repaired. 
 
Local industry depends on that road. It is an economic lifeline 
to the communities that are isolated. And they want the road 
fixed not just for the economy, Mr. Speaker, but for safety 
reasons as well. People want these roads fixed. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you fix our roads? Yes or no? The buck stops 
here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I will reiterate. We put $17 
million into northern Saskatchewan — quite a bit in that 
member’s own constituency. He’s trying to run away from the 
fact that the federal Liberals — even the Conservatives put in 
money in the North — the federal Liberals have not. And they 
should be putting money . . . They take money and extract 
money in regards to mining and forestry and they don’t put a 
penny back in there, Mr. Speaker, other than part of the 
payment in regards to the Athabasca Road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what that member should be doing. He 
should be going to the federal government and asking for the 
federal government in joining with us and saying yes, the 
federal government needs to partner with this province and 
northern Saskatchewan and make sure we improve the North, 
the roads in the North. And that’s exactly how to deal with the 
issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I was very pleased that this was the second question in 
eight weeks that the member raised in regards to the North. 
That’s how much those federal Liberals care and the Liberals 
from over that side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Concerns 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Whether it was Conrad 
Black or whomever, Mr. Speaker, an editorial in today’s 
Leader-Post suggests that the time has come for a little 
sensitivity training for the NDP government. It points to the 
member from Lloydminster snickering when we raised 
concerns about a seriously ill Regina man, and suggestions by 
the member from Regina Centre that the closure of the Plains 
hospital is no big deal. 
 
The member from Regina South took it one step further 
yesterday when he said question period is becoming like the 
Jerry Springer show. He says that the Liberal opposition should 
be raising real concerns. Well, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, are 
you so out of touch, sir, that you don’t understand that people 
are coming to us with real concerns which we are raising on 
their behalf? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have been in this 
Legislative Assembly for a good number of years. I’m very 

proud of that record. I’m very proud to have been of service. 
And I think it is an important role of all MLAs, on government 
and opposition side, to raise concerns on behalf of their 
constituents. There’s no problem in that regard whatsoever. 
 
I do however, urge the Liberal leader in the House here to 
follow one rule when a concern or a complaint by constituents 
is raised. And that is that all of the relevant facts surrounding 
the specific issue be brought to the attention of the ministries 
and of the government so that we can provide, as fully as we 
can, the proper answer. 
 
Now the member from Lloydminster had a personal 
conversation with Mrs. Prystupa as a result of the matter which 
you referred to on Monday — I was not in the House — and 
explained the situation in this regard. And as it turns out, as I 
understand it, the question of the operation surrounding this 
patient, this person, was a matter of elective surgery determined 
by the doctor of the person involved. 
 
That was not raised by you folks. We didn’t make that decision. 
Nobody in this government did. Elective surgery. So all I want 
to say, Mr. Speaker, is I urge all of us, and on behalf of all of us 
on the government side, if we have offended Mr. Prystupa or 
Mrs. Prystupa, that is not warranted; it is not justified. 
 
The member has apologized and expressed that directly. I do so. 
I think we need to treat each other with civility and treat the 
public with civility and make sure that the facts that are put here 
are put fully and completely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, each and every one of the 
members from Executive Council and from the NDP 
government are more than welcome to attend the meetings that 
we are holding throughout the province. And they can hear 
directly. There are far too many to be individually referred to 
any particular minister. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina South should 
have put it in park. Instead, he put it in lurch and proceeded to 
insult all rural people who have raised concerns about accessing 
the General Hospital if the Plains is allowed to close. He told 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and it’s in Hansard, that I don’t 
believe that people are so dumb that they can’t find the 
hospitals. People are voicing legitimate concerns about finding 
their way to the General in an emergency. And because they 
raise these concerns, the member suggests they are dumb. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, how can you sit by as your 
members call people who raise questions and concerns about 
being dumb and not knowing what they’re talking about? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, members 
of this Legislative Assembly, I said a few moments ago, owe it 
to this Assembly, to this institution . . . I’ve been here 30 years, 
off and on, and I know in the course of debate words are used 
which ought not to be used on reflection. That is in the course 
of the debate. I’ve done it. Everybody here has done it. I even 
dare say you have done this. 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

The central thought of this issue that the member has spoken to 
during the course of the debate is that concerns surrounding the 
location of General and Pasqua are being addressed and will be 
addressed and people will be able to understand that. That is the 
situation. 
 
Now you may not like the choice of words. Perhaps I don’t like 
the choice of words. Maybe if the member had to do it over 
again he’d use another choice of words. But please do not 
splice, please do not splice words and elevate them into a case 
which is not justifiable. 
 
I repeat again, we must deal with all concerns of Saskatchewan 
people compassionately and honestly and as carefully as we 
can. And that has been the motto of my life politically and it 
continues to be the credo of my caucus and government today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drought Contingency Plans 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, 
as you are aware, since July last there have been areas of this 
province reported to have had less than 2 inches of total 
precipitation. I hate to be the one to cry wolf, and I know it’s 
early in the season, but I think it’s time to cry puppy, and we 
have to take a look at what you’ve got for contingency plans for 
people in areas like the south-west, contingency plans 
particularly for the cattle producers. 
 
At this stage you know, Minister, that hay supplies are low; that 
the possibility for a hay crop is very likely not going to happen; 
that we have grass shortages for cattle to go on pasture. What 
contingency plans do you have, Minister, for the trucking of 
cattle, for the movement of hay, and for the listing of hay 
services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Well I thank the member very much for 
that question. This is day 40, I believe, of this session and it’s 
the first question that I’ve been asked about agriculture. I guess 
that tells you where the other parties are, Mr. Speaker. So I 
thank you very much for that. 
 
What we are doing is what we’ve always done. We have a feed 
listing service — they don’t want to ask the questions for their 
seats, so they got to ask them from their seats when somebody 
else does. That’s interesting — we’ve got a feed listing service; 
we’ve got Sask Water has water funding service; we’ve got like 
the feed and forage I said; we’ve got the NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) programs in place; and crop insurance 
we’ve reduced, so what we’re doing . . . I understand the 
problem. 
 
The first concern is the feed and we have those services 
available. We also can trigger the federal program that allows 
farmers to sell their breeding stock and not be taxed on if they 
buy them a year later; so those are the things we’re doing. It’s a 
potential problem so right now we’re monitoring it and trying to 
stay on top of it very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental for the same minister or perhaps the minister in 
charge of Water Corporation. In the past, Ministers, we’ve had 
situations where dugouts have been empty and we’ve engaged 
pumping programs where we’ve moved water from rivers and 
other lakes and that sort of thing into dugouts. Do you still have 
those kind of contingency plans in place? Do you have pumps 
available? If you have pumps on paper, do you actually know 
where they physically exist since 1988, probably the last time 
they were used. 
 
I’m hopeful that you will take a look and let us know as to 
whether or not you have lists of where these things are available 
and could you also provide us with a written list of the services 
available that you mentioned in your first answer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Yes, thank you. We can do that. We can 
provide you with lists and my department, as I said, is 
monitoring this situation. We have concern, quite a lot of 
concern, because the pastures aren’t starting in some areas and 
that will be the first problem; so the water situation is the 
critical one there. 
 
What we have to do in turn is what I’m doing, is on a weekly 
basis and sometimes more than that, making sure that I get 
reports from the department on the situation, talking to the 
people in rural Saskatchewan who I talk to on a very regular 
basis in different areas, and that way, keeping on top of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we have to ensure is that we 
have some cooperation though. We’ve seen — and we’re 
talking to the federal government about this — we’ve seen the 
support for the ice storms in Quebec. We’ve seen the flood 
support in Manitoba. We’ve seen the fishermen’s support from 
the federal government in Ottawa, and we are going to be very, 
very hard-pressing, considering the fact that they’ve reduced 
their support significantly for Saskatchewan. We put a half a 
billion dollars or more into this agricultural province . . . into 
agriculture in this province — five times more than the federal 
government is. 
 
We’re watching the situation. We’re going to let Ottawa know 
what’s needed from their part and we’ll do what’s our part. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 48  The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 48, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 1998 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Saskatchewan Assistance 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 49, 
The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1998 now be 
introduced and read the first time. 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Bill No. 744 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to make 
a statement to the House. 
 
On May 1, 1998, Bill No. 744, The Hepatitis C Compensation 
Commission Act, was introduced by the member for Arm 
River. The Bill is presently standing on the order paper for 
second reading under the heading, private members’ public 
Bills and orders. 
 
I want to quote from a ruling from June 4, 1996 in which a 
Speaker noted that it is a duty of the Speaker: 
 

. . .to review all Bills in respect of Rule 36 of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
This rule states, in part, that any bill which proposes to 
impose any new or additional charge upon the public 
revenue or upon the people, must be first recommended by 
the Lieutenant Governor before it is considered by the 
Assembly. The principle underlying this rule is 
fundamental to our constitution. Because the executive of 
government is held strictly accountable for all public 
expenditure, it must also be solely responsible for initiating 
legislation involving the imposition of new or additional 
charges upon the public revenue, or upon the people 
through taxation. 
 

The question to be addressed here is whether Bill No. 744 
contravenes the parliamentary principle of the Crown initiative 
in financial matters. The Bill No. 744 seeks to establish a 
hepatitis C compensation commission”, to be composed of three 
commissioners tasked with first, identifying those individuals 
who have contracted hepatitis C as a result of receiving tainted 
blood products, and secondly, to determine fair and reasonable 
compensation for those individuals. 
 
Clause 4 of Bill No. 744 provides for the appointment of 
persons by Executive Council to a hepatitis compensation 
commission. With respect to this clause, I refer members to a 
ruling of the Speaker dated December 23, 1975, when it was 
ruled that the creation of a commission and the appointment of 
commission employees by the Executive Council constituted an 
expenditure of public funds. I also refer members to Erskine 
May, 21st Edition, page 713, where it is stated that charges 
upon monies to be provided by parliament for salaries and other 
expenses caused by the imposition of novel duties require a 
royal recommendation. 
 
Clause 7 of Bill No. 744 provides for payments of 
compensation to victims identified by the commission. 
Undoubtedly the source of such payments would be the General 
Revenue Fund as no other funding mechanism is stipulated. 
This would constitute a new charge upon the public purse and 
therefore requires a royal recommendation. 
 
Therefore I find that Bill No. 744 requires a recommendation, 
and because the member for Arm River is not a member of the 

Executive Council, I must rule that the said Bill is out of order 
and advise the Assembly that it will be removed from the order 
paper. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 36  The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur les services de l’état civil 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Vital Statistics 
Amendment Act, 1998. The main purpose of this Bill is to 
improve the way vital statistics works with its stakeholders. 
 
Specifically this Bill will streamline the way we register births 
and deaths in Saskatchewan. We are updating obsolete 
technology and streamlining inefficient processes. Overall, we 
are modernizing the program that has been unchanged for 
decades and preparing it to meet the new century. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is a better customer service. For 
example, we’re amending the current birth registration process. 
Currently vital statistics cannot register a new baby until the 
mother and/or father completes and delivers the registration of 
live birth. 
 
The amendments, Mr. Speaker, would allow the physician and 
other attendants at the birth to notify vital statistics of the birth. 
Vital stats gets the information sooner and the new parents can 
concentrate on taking care of their baby, not paperwork, in 
those first important days. 
 
The mother or father will still be asked to fill out the 
registration of live birth, but they’ll have more time. They’ll be 
able to take the form home with them instead of having to 
complete it before the mother leaves the hospital. In doing so 
they can think about important decisions, for example, like the 
naming of the child. 
 
The amendments will make the birth process more efficient in 
other ways, Mr. Speaker. First, new parents will be able to send 
information directly to vital statistics instead of going through 
district registrars. And second, health districts will have a 
greater flexibility to help parents complete the live birth 
registration form. This should improve the quality of data. This 
is important not only for vital statistics, but for the health 
districts and the use of data in developing and delivering other 
programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also proposing amendments to improve the 
current death registration process. Currently when someone 
dies, there is no clear time frame in which the physician or 
coroner must provide the cause of death. The funeral director 
can’t obtain a burial permit until this is done. 
 
The amendments will provide a definite time frame so that the 
disposition of the body can occur quickly. The amendment will 
also allow vital statistics to directly register a death and issue a 
burial permit. This will be done through the use of an 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

automated, electronic process and this will eliminate the need 
for district registrars in registering some 90 per cent of the 
deaths. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the amendments will more clearly 
define when a body can be buried, cremated, or otherwise 
disposed of. This is important in cases where a doctor is 
awaiting autopsy reports or where a coroner needs further 
information to determine the cause of death. 
 
Such amendments should help prevent evidence from being lost 
or destroyed in cases where the cause of death may still be in 
question. 
 
The third set of amendments, Mr. Speaker, involves the 
appointment of district registrars. Currently, Mr. Speaker, every 
clerk or secretary-treasurer of a municipality is a district 
registrar. To say the least, this is very cumbersome. The 
amendments will give vital statistics the flexibility to appoint 
any person as a district registrar when and where they are 
needed in the system. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments will also give vital statistics more 
flexibility to change its forms as needed. We have to protect the 
integrity of the documents and the information that vital 
statistics collects, but at times the requirements for data 
collection change. Often, to address these needs, the forms have 
to be amended quickly. This Act will allow vital statistics to 
respond promptly to clients’ needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the main provisions of the Bill. I am very 
pleased to propose these measures to take vital statistics into the 
new century or the next century, and to improve the services to 
the public and other stakeholders. Accordingly, I hereby move 
second reading of The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a few 
comments I’d like to make regarding the Bill before us, The 
Vital Statistics Amendment Act. As I was listening to the 
minister and just a quick review of the legislation, what I note, 
it’s quite a lengthy amendment to The Vital Statistics Act. 
 
As the minister indicated, it deals with everything from the 
registration of newborns to changes in marriage forms, death 
certificates, and coroner’s statements, and burial permits. So it 
certainly covers a very broad area. 
 
As the minister was indicating, the minister talked about the 
piece of legislation attempting to streamline these certificates 
and permits that are needed at so many different areas in our life 
and for the ability of vital statistics to work so that there is a 
true picture that we have available to us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if it indeed cuts down on the red tape, if it 
cuts down on the paperwork, and if it saves money it’s 
something that I’m certain that our caucus is more than willing 
to support. We’re more than willing to take a very careful look 
at it. 
 
And I think for many people, especially in the area of when it 
comes to death certificates and grieving families, there are 

difficult periods that families have to live with. Especially at a 
time of bereavement, that paperwork becomes very tedious and 
difficult and we would certainly want to take a close look at the 
legislation and determine whether or not it indeed makes that 
process and makes that time a lot easier for family members 
when they face that situation in their lives. 
 
As well the minister talked about changes to the registration for 
children. I think for young parents, or parents regardless of 
what age, when a newborn comes into the home, you’re not 
always prepared. And I don’t think any family member or any 
parent looks forward to having to all of a sudden have a pile of 
documents thrown in front of you to fill out when you want to 
enjoy the birth of that new child or that new member that has 
entered the family. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I look at the piece of legislation, as I’ve 
listened to the minister, it certainly appears that this is an 
attempt to streamline a process that I think has become far too 
bureaucratic, far too complicated; and for many people it just 
interferes in their daily lives. And it would seem that that would 
be fair, would only be right. And I think even for the vital 
statistics, for the department, and for the area of government to 
streamline the process as well, I think is important because it 
becomes a tedious job for them as well. If you have a lot of 
paperwork that isn’t necessary, it just makes the process of 
getting your vital statistics in order that much longer. 
 
So we’re certainly looking forward to further debate. We’ll 
have some questions, but I think it would be appropriate as well 
for us to review the legislation, in view of what the minister is 
telling, indicating, to us the intent is, how we’re reading the 
piece of legislation. Want to take the time to review it, to indeed 
determine whether or not the legislation meets all those 
requirements. And if there are any changes, we’ll certainly be 
willing to discuss them in committee of the whole. But to allow 
for some time to review it, I would now move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The SaskTel Pension Implementation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to move 
second reading of The SaskTel Pension Implementation Act. 
This Act provides authority for the establishment of a new, 
non-statutory pension plan for current and former employees of 
the SaskTel communications company who are members of the 
existing Saskatchewan Telecommunications superannuation 
plan. 
 
The SaskTel superannuation plan is a defined benefit plan and 
includes only those employees and former employees who 
joined the telecommunication company prior to 1977. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act will implement an agreement between 
SaskTel and its union, the communications energy and 
paperworkers union, to administer the SaskTel superannuation 
plan under The Pensions Benefits Act, 1992. In this way, 
SaskTel pension agreement and arrangements will be more 
consistent with other pension plans in the telecommunication 
industry in Canada. 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

Under this Act, the SaskTel superannuation fund will be 
disestablished, a new pension plan will be created under The 
Pension Benefits Act, and all the assets, liabilities, and 
agreements pertaining to the superannuation fund will be 
transferred and assigned to this new pension plan. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the board of SaskTel superannuation 
fund will be reconstituted as the administrator of the new 
pension plan. The administrator will hold the assets of the plan 
for the purpose of providing lifetime retirement benefits to both 
current and former SaskTel employees whose pensions were 
governed by the SaskTel superannuation fund. 
 
As hon. members know and may know, the issue of pension 
management became a bargaining issue between SaskTel and 
the CEP (Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of 
Canada) during the 1996 labour discussions. As part of the 
settlement, SaskTel and CEP set up a joint management-union 
committee to determine what legislative amendments could and 
should be mutually agreed upon and presented to this Assembly 
for our consideration. 
 
The SaskTel-CEP committee recommended a process to in 
effect repatriate the SaskTel superannuation plan by 
establishing a new pension plan administered by SaskTel and its 
union. The board of the new plan will be appointed by SaskTel 
management and CEP and will include representatives of the 
SaskTel retirees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act delivers on that agreement and will allow 
the SaskTel pension plan to be operated in a new, businesslike 
fashion and more within the realms of a collective bargaining 
environment. 
 
This Act also flows from a commitment made by our 
government in the Crown corporation review last year, in 1996, 
Mr. Speaker. And on June 25, 1997 my colleague and the 
former minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) corporation, reported the 
findings of the most extensive review of our corporation 
completed in the history of Crown corporations and in the 
history of our province. 
 
One of the commitments we made at that time was to make 
changes to the governance of Crown corporations to ensure that 
they operate more independently in particular market-places. 
Mr. Speaker, this Act delivers on one of those important 
commitments. 
 
So to conclude, Mr. Speaker, this Act will implement the 
agreement between SaskTel and the CEP to administer 
SaskTel’s superannuation plan under The Pension Benefits Act. 
It is consistent with the goals of SaskTel and CEP to allow 
pensions at SaskTel to be governed more by the collective 
bargaining process than by legislative process. 
 
And finally, it is consistent with the policy and direction of the 
government’s Crown corporation review report in allowing 
Crown corporations to operate in a more businesslike fashion. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in closing and finally, I move second reading 
of An Act to Implement Certain Provisions Respecting a 
Pension Plan of Employees of Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications and Others and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts. I so move. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to respond to the 
minister’s good speech. At least he tells me he gave us a good 
speech. And he probably did. 
 
But in regard to the pension plan and the changes that are 
coming about, the minister talked about the fact that back in 
1996 there was SaskTel negotiations or discussions regarding 
bargaining and the strike that was as a result of breakdown in 
bargaining. 
 
And part of the bargaining had to deal with pension plans. And 
I know pension plans have been a major, and continue to be a 
major concern, and a major issue, especially as individuals look 
back and are aware of the old defined pension benefit plan. And 
the number of employees who had the privilege of living under 
that plan and who are now retiring. In many cases, a number of 
SaskTel employees will have . . . or will be retiring with that 
old plan in mind. And then the employees who are just coming 
on and are living under the agreements involved in the new 
superannuation plan. 
 
And it seems to me, if I understand the minister correctly, an 
agreement reached between the employees and between the 
union tried to draw, I guess if you will, define a plan that 
everyone would be treated equally. And that’s what I’m 
understanding the legislation before us is doing right now, and 
that the funds from the old plan transferred to the new plan that 
everyone is in general agreement with it. 
 
One of the concerns that we would have is the fact that of 
employees that are retired or have been retired for a few years 
. . . And I believer SaskPower, there are some employees retired 
under SaskPower have some concerns with their plan, of the 
fact that it hasn’t kept up to inflation I believe. And there’s a 
few concerns raised in that area. And we’d want to raise those 
questions. 
 
And for that matter, Mr. Speaker, this new piece of legislation 
may be dealing with that. And of course we can raise that and 
ask the minister to see whether or not all the concerns that have 
been addressed by superannuates to this date, the fact that they 
feel they have been finding out that agreements have come in 
place and then they haven’t been followed through, whether or 
not that is a concern here with SaskTel workers as well. 
 
I guess on the other hand, the Saskatchewan taxpayers need to 
know, and as individuals who use the SaskTel network and 
patrons of SaskTel, we would like to know as well whether or 
not this is a cost, will be a cost to patrons down the road. Will it 
cost the taxpayers. Or is the legislation that is before us today 
basically putting in place a mechanism that meets the needs of 
all of its employees while at the same time doesn’t create an 
extra burden for the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
I think that is an area that we certainly need to be aware of and 
certainly need to keep in mind. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, I think if it becomes a burden to the 
taxpayers, it becomes a burden to governments down the road 
and then you run into a major problem where governments have 
to deal with legislation that was brought forward in the past. 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

That creates a problem. Especially if it creates a monetary 
problem, then you’re . . . a former government is left trying to 
correct a situation that should have been corrected in the first 
place. 
 
So those are, those are some questions that we certainly will 
want to raise and make sure that this piece of legislation, as it is 
brought forward, deals with the concerns of the employees. 
Makes . . . Also addresses the fact that taxpayers are not left on 
the hook. And that at the end of the day, governments are not 
left on the hook and having to address something that happened 
in the past. 
 
So we would certainly want to look into that. We’d want to take 
a bit more time to address some of those concerns, those issues. 
And indeed with that in mind, I think it would be appropriate 
for adjournment of debate. Therefore at this time I move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 27 — The Public 
Service Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From all appearances 
most of this Bill is pretty routine. Our caucus of course supports 
the concept of a professional, independent civil service. Most of 
this Bill serves only to clarify and update several aspects of the 
old Bill and thereby strengthens these aspects of the civil 
service. 
 
However, there are a few areas of this Bill that raise some alarm 
bells. First, the summary that accompanied the Bill makes a 
rather bold pronouncement. It says: 
 

This new Act is required to facilitate the process of human 
resource management transformation, a process currently 
under way which will ultimately redesign a human 
resource management function with respect to governance, 
structural design, and changes to systems and processes. 
 

That’s a pretty sweeping statement, Mr. Speaker. The official 
opposition will want considerable more detail on what this 
involves before we agree with this Bill. Especially considering 
that the minister was relatively vague about what the 
transformational process is. 
 
In reading the Bill, one area where the new vision becomes 
clear is in the new section on the purpose of the Act where it 
states that one of the purposes is “to strive to develop a public 
service that represents the diversity of the people of 
Saskatchewan.” Clearly what this indicates is that this Bill is 
headed in the direction of affirmative action initiatives of some 
kind or another. 
 
The value of affirmative action to the civil service and to 

society in general is always a hot topic. It is one that is raised in 
the United States for many years with no end in sight. The key 
question in this debate is, do we try to hire civil servants that 
are best qualified to do the job or do we use the civil service as 
the tool to achieve other social ends? 
 
(1445) 
 
If the answer is the latter, that is something that the public has 
to be aware of. If we are putting efficiency and professionalism 
second to other goals, no matter how worthy, then we are in 
danger of not spending public funds as effectively as we can. 
 
What is especially disturbing about this clause is that it is very 
vague. Exactly what aspects of the diversity of people will we 
been striving to bring to the civil service? Will it be based on 
gender, race, ethnic groups, sexual orientation, etc., and what 
will the criteria be? The Bill doesn’t tell us and the minister has 
not deigned to let us in on this plan. 
 
We do know that this Act will no longer give special treatment 
to one group in society. In the definitions for this Bill, the 
definition for war veterans has been mysteriously dropped off. I 
think that it speaks poorly of this government and its priorities 
that it would line up a raft of other groups for special hiring 
privileges while at the same time turning its back on people 
who have risked their lives for our country. 
 
Of course none of this represents the main thrust of the Bill. 
The recurrent issue it addresses is its procedures for the 
commission to delegate its powers and responsibilities basically 
to anyone it sees fit. It also gives the commission extensive new 
powers to make grants, enter into agreements, hire advisers, and 
the like. 
 
Anyone who has ever been in a managerial position knows the 
importance of delegation, but it’s a concern that always has to 
be tempered. Ultimately someone has to be held responsible for 
the actions of the commission. We’ve seen several times this 
session how poorly the government serves the people when no 
one is willing to take responsibility. 
 
The entire reason for the Channel Lake inquiry is that everyone 
involved is pointing fingers and avoiding blame. This is a stark 
example of how delegating duties can be a danger. 
 
We should therefore approach this issue in this Bill with 
considerable caution. Whether by regulations or by legislation, 
it needs to be clearly set out that the commission will be 
responsible for all actions taken under its name no matter who 
have been delegated to do the job. 
 
Another aspect of this Bill that is particularly alarming is the 
section on the commission’s regulations. A new clause there 
gives trade unions the power to review and comment on any 
regulations before they are passed. As a legislator, I have to say 
I find this very offensive. I don’t understand why an outside 
organization like a trade union should be given any special veto 
powers that supersedes this Assembly and the taxpaying public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think if you put a clause in The Department of 
Finance Act stating that no new regulations could be passed 
until the business community approved them, you’d get quite an 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

outcry from the members opposite and their followers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final authority on regulations must continue to 
rest with the elected officials. These sorts of special privileges 
to interest groups run completely contrary to democratic 
government. Further, I would suggest that they run contrary to 
the entire intent of this Bill, which is to strengthen a 
professional and independent civil service. The civil service 
will not be independent if they have politically motivated union 
bosses proofreading all their work. 
 
Speaking of political influence, this Bill also contains a 
revamped version of a traditional public service protection from 
political influence and restructuring from political activities. 
The reason for changes to this section compared to the old Bill 
are not clear. As far as I can see, this Bill simply rearranges the 
clauses and wording of the old clause. Our caucus will want to 
explore in depth, more, the reasons for this apparent cosmetic 
change. 
 
But of course the real issue behind political influence activity is 
how sincere it is. It is well-known that the NDP have extensive 
partisan ties and influence throughout the civil service. It’s one 
thing to put it on paper that the public service is free from 
political influence, but it’s quite another for this to be sincerely 
enforced. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, our caucus has concerns about this 
Bill and I move that the debate on this Bill be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 33 — The 
Provincial Court Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
speak today to The Provincial Court Act, which among other 
things establishes an independent commission to determine pay 
levels for our provincial judges. 
 
I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that we all know in many respects 
this retroactive legislation is long overdue. I don’t think, Mr. 
Speaker, that I need to remind the members of the Assembly of 
the rocky relationship created between the Executive Council 
and the judiciary branches of the Saskatchewan government. A 
rocky relationship created by the former minister of Justice 
when he disestablished the independent commission headed up 
by the Saskatoon city commissioner, Marty Irwin, to determine 
a pay increase for judges. 
 
Not only did the former minister not accept the 
recommendations of the commission that we all believed to be 
binding at the time, but he passed retroactive legislation to 
disestablish the commission. And it seems apparent, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is a ongoing pattern of this government — say 
one thing, do something exactly the opposite. 
 
Appointed an . . . they appointed an independent commission 
and then when the didn’t like their recommendations, they just 
simply voted them out of existence. Kind of like shopping 

around for the kind of legal opinion that you want and then 
going forward with it. And for good measure, add to the 
legislation that the government can’t be sued for breaking its 
own laws. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, nobody is above the law in this province or 
this country. And that is what the members opposite, I think, are 
starting to find out. So now the government believes that they 
can fix this relationship through this new piece of legislation 
and through the creation of a new commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say to the members opposite that with 
their track record of establishing commissions and then getting 
rid of them, why in the world would the people of 
Saskatchewan or our provincial judges have any faith that 
they’ll not turn around and do the same thing again? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is what this government fails to understand. 
Perception is everything, and so is trust. When the people no 
longer trust you, when they don’t believe that you are doing 
what you say you are going to do, this is when you as a 
government begin to be in big trouble. And that is the position 
that this government finds itself in today. 
 
Besides the issue of trust, there are certainly many other 
important issues embedded in this legislation which we need to 
talk about. Whenever we are discussing the appointment of 
judges, the payment of judges, and the pensions that we give 
judges, we are talking about the public trust and public funding. 
 
I see that the government has extended the period of 
membership in the Canadian bar from five to ten years and I’d 
like to say that I think that that’s a positive step. But other than 
that, I see very few changes in this legislation which will deal 
with the appointment of judges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice speaks of the independence 
of the justice system and he says that while — pardon me — 
and he says that this is why he has introduced these changes and 
created this independent commission to determine judges’ 
salaries. But, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the members opposite 
that in the minds of most of Saskatchewan people, the way we 
appoint our judges plays a much greater role in creating that 
view of independence. 
 
So I’m very interested, Mr. Speaker, to hear what the Minister 
of Justice has to say about this important issue during the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
I would like to point out a couple of clauses in the Act that we 
have concerns about. Clauses that certainly beg answers during 
the Committee of the Whole. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, 
that although I realize some of the answers to these questions 
may not be answered until the commission meets to determine 
salary issues — and that is a step towards a more independent 
judiciary — I would say that we would have some problems 
passing a piece of legislation and leaving the ultimate authority 
in the hands of the members opposite to regulate these 
important issues without consulting the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the first questions I think the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
want answered is how much this new commission will cost 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

them. This is important not only because we are spending 
taxpayers’ dollars, and that’s always important, but because you 
spent a great deal of money creating and eliminating the 
previous commission. 
 
Second, despite the creation of this commission there does seem 
to be many clauses in the legislation which gives an incredible 
amount of authority to Executive Council to dole out patronage 
positions and then dole out indiscriminate amounts of salaries. 
 
Let me look at a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker. First of all, it 
seems that . . . just a moment, Mr. Speaker. Just as the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan are choking on many things these days, I’m 
having a little difficulty. 
 
Let me look at a couple of examples with respect to this 
legislation. First of all, it seems that by removing the details of 
the early retirement package and by stipulating that section 22, 
clause 2, that any judge who is less than 65 and who has served 
as a Provincial Court judge for two consecutive years is entitled 
to a pension for life . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite will say, if they have 
indeed read the legislation, that this section goes on to say that 
this will be done in accordance with the regulations. But, Mr. 
Speaker, please allow me to be a little bit suspicious when it 
comes to this government’s abusing patronage positions. 
 
Does this not allow the government to give one more of theirs 
— let’s say, for example, a former minister or a former minister 
of the Crown or a former head of a Crown corporation — a 
judgeship? 
 
And let’s just say that this judge retires after two years. Does 
this allow this person to collect a hefty pension paid by the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer? Maybe not. But certainly, given the list 
of former lawyers in the NDP cabinet ranks, I think it’s an 
important issue that must be addressed. 
 
Further, I’m very interested in hearing the minister’s 
explanation regarding the power given to the Executive Council 
under section 27(1) to provide for supplementary allowances in 
any amount and subject to any terms and conditions that the 
Executive Council considers advisable. 
 
And you’d think, given this government’s track record in terms 
of severance in the last few months, they’d be very, very 
reluctant to get into that sort of thing again. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to know exactly how far and how wide-reaching this power 
is and just how often this government intends upon using it. 
 
The best place to discuss most of these issues will be, Mr. 
Speaker, in the Committee of the Whole and we’re not quite yet 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because this is such an important piece of 
legislation, I think we need more time to analyse and consult 
with stakeholders before we are prepared to move it along. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 3  The Public Utilities Easements 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before we entertain clause 1, I invite 
the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to have with me 
Darcy McGovern from Saskatchewan Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Good 
afternoon, Mr. Minister. I’d like to welcome your official here 
this afternoon. 
 
Just have very few questions on this. I guess the first one is, is 
why this particular change is being made at this time, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This Bill is being introduced to put the 
flexibility necessary to consider accommodating new 
technologies and new types of companies as they develop. It’ll 
permit a prescribed company to receive prescribed rights in the 
form of a public utility easement from the landowner. For 
example, the CO2 pipelines will be expressly included in the 
regulations as a prescribed right for which the public utilities 
easement could be granted by a landowner. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Aside from the CO2 pipeline, is there 
anything else on the horizon that has made these changes 
necessary at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Something on the horizon would be the 
cable industry and some of the requirements that they have. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Has the fact that 
this legislation has not been amended in so many years caused 
any problems for the private companies? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s only recently that we had some 
requests from some of the private companies to take a look at 
this Act. Up until this point, they were using caveats as opposed 
to easements. And that was working but there were some 
concerns about the long-term use of caveats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you describe 
to us the process for requesting easements and whether this will 
change the amendments? Or how do you go about the 
easements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This won’t change the process at all. I 
think the key point is that these are voluntary. And so what it is, 
the company and the landowner will negotiate and come up 
with an agreement as to what they want. What this does is then 
allow that voluntary agreement to be registered as an easement. 
And that’s basically the whole purpose of the Act. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — What happens in the case of a CO2 
pipeline? For example, if there’s a property owner who will not 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

grant the easement rights or not go along with what you’re 
negotiating, what happens? Does this automatically mean 
expropriation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There’s nothing in this legislation that 
relates to expropriation. Everything here is voluntary. And there 
would be other legal remedies, I suppose, if that was a 
necessity. But in this particular legislation, this only deals with 
situations where there is a voluntary agreement between the 
parties. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s really all 
the questions I had at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d like to thank my official for helping 
me on this one — he’s going to help me with the next piece of 
legislation — and I also appreciate your questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Good afternoon, Mr. Minister, and welcome 
to your official. I wonder if you could very briefly outline the 
complete impact of what we’re discussing here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This Bill is made to correct drafting 
mistakes. The last time we did this was in 1996. As the years go 
on, the legislative drafting division of Saskatchewan Justice 
hears comments about punctuation problems or naming 
problems or references to Acts that aren’t in existence any 
more. 
 
Those things are then recorded, and then once every couple of 
years an Act like this is brought forward to make the 
corrections. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I believe specifically, as you 
mentioned, we’re adding a couple of commas. I’m wondering 
how many staff people have been working since 1996 to find 
these errors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — These particular errors are found as 
legislation is being worked on or used; or if legislators or 
lawyers or somebody else notice something, letters are received 
by the department. There’s not staff specifically sitting around 
looking for these particular corrections. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I guess that’s somewhat 
reassuring, that we don’t have a whole horde tucked away in a 
basement there that is trying to scrounge out a comma that got 
lost some place. 
 
The question of commas and grammars and this sort of thing, I 
guess raises another interesting point. Obviously these are not 
being found by the people in your staff. I’m wondering, why 
did they show up in the first place? Like this legislation by and 

large isn’t that difficult. Who do we have writing these things 
that can’t handle the English language? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll take that as your opinion, and thank 
you very much for it. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. It was an opinion. Like basically 
when we’re writing what end up as statutes and we’re writing 
laws, we know that dotting i’s and stroking t’s and commas are 
very important. And it’s a little frightening to know that maybe 
we’re running around with legislation that, because of 
grammatical structures, may mean all sorts of things we don’t 
intend it to mean. 
 
Having made that comment and asked two questions of great 
import, that concludes the information that I requested on this. 
Thank you for your time. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, before I move it I would like to once 
again thank Darcy McGovern from Saskatchewan Justice and 
the opposition for their question. And I move that we report this 
Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Physical Therapists Act, 1998 
 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 
official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
today, Mr. Drew Johnston, who’s with the policy and planning 
branch of the Department of Health. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, a few questions 
regarding The Physical Therapists Act that we’re discussing 
before us. And it appears to me that this Bill is very similar to 
The Occupational Therapists Act the Assembly passed last year. 
And I’m just wondering, are there any real differences between 
the two Bills in terms of the organizations or accountability 
aspects? In many ways there seems to be a lot of similarities, 
but do we have some specific differences as we talk about 
physical therapists and occupational therapists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I think the 
member correctly identifies that basically the two Bills are 
almost identical to each other in terms of content. The reality is 
that the professions practice a bit differently but the Bills are in 
fact the same. 
 
Mr. Toth: — The fact that there’s a fair number of similarities 
and that this piece of legislation is before us this spring versus 
last spring, is this Bill here as a result of The Occupational 
Therapists Act last spring? The fact that physical therapists saw 
that piece of legislation, took a look at it, and determined that 
maybe it would be appropriate that their association had a 
similar piece of legislation to identify how they ran their 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

association? Would that have had some impact on the reasons 
for this piece of legislation being before us this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, what we’re really doing is 
updating all of our professional Bills, professional statutes, 
bringing to the new legislation that we’ve been using over the 
past three or four years . . . and what this does, what this 
legislation does, is really brings in line this statute with the new 
professional legislation that we’ve introduced a couple of years 
ago. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, will there 
be other changes to other Acts that would be following the same 
guidelines coming up in the future? And if so, wouldn’t it be 
appropriate to try and do them all at the same time, especially in 
the area of health, dealing with all the professions on the same 
basis and bringing them in together versus staging them over a 
period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think the member makes a good point, 
and what we’re trying to do of course, is try to bring them to 
fruition at the same time as much as . . . about 95 per cent of 
them are likely of the same nature; 5 per cent of those have 
some different discrepancies or changes in them. And 
accordingly what we try to do is to bring that practice and use 
that practice but our attempt will be to do that on a regular 
basis. This isn’t the case here. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, as a result of the changes, will there 
be any major costs to taxpayers as a result of this change in 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — No, there will be no additional costs to 
taxpayers on the changes that we’re making in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Toth: — The fact that this legislation is before us today, 
Mr. Minister, how has the profession of physical therapy been 
governed up to this point and this piece of legislation? Has it 
changed the way they’ve governed themselves in any major 
way with the results or are there major changes that are now 
taking place and that are, I guess if you will, just bringing them 
in line with I think what you talked about, the legislation you 
talked about, and the changes to the Act? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well what I might do is just sort of 
highlight — because it might be important to recognize the 
different changes that are being made in the Act — and just 
outline for the member that there are about 400 physical 
therapists that are practising in the province today that have 
been regulated under The Physical Therapists Act, which dates 
back to 1984. And so this is what we’re doing today, is of 
course bringing up those regulations or the pieces of legislation. 
 
Included in that piece of The Physical Therapists Act there are 
about five or six bullets that I think that are important here to 
recognize. 
 
Number one is that we include newer public accountability 
provisions such as public representation on the council, open 
disciplinary hearings that require . . . and an annual report to be 
filed with the Minister of Health. So there would be three issues 

there. 
 
The second bullet would be, require bylaws potentially 
impacting the public to be approved by the Minister of Health; 
the reservation of title of physical therapist for registered 
practitioners. 
 
Number five, it sets out a clearer and more effective discipline 
process than what they had in the past. And finally, it allows for 
flexibility in setting registration requirements in bylaw and 
issuing restricted licences. 
 
Those would be I think, probably the six areas that would be 
where there are actual changes within the legislation to bring 
this Act in consistency with the new legislation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, how will this Bill change the 
organizational aspect of the college of physical therapists? Will 
there be any changes whatsoever as a result of the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — No, it will not change its stature at all. It 
will remain still as a separate entity of the college. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I understand as well the legislation deals with 
discipline and investigatory procedures that are in place at this 
time. And I wonder if you could just explain those procedures, 
Mr. Minister, and reasons for the changes, if any. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Overall I think that the new process really 
shortens, it shortens the process period and there are several 
provisions here that I think . . . which were added to assist that. 
There is explicit recognition now that mediation can be used, if 
it is agreed by the complainant and a member, to resolve the 
complaints and then that’s under section 25. And secondly, the 
professional conduct committee, which does the investigation, 
and the discipline committee now have the necessary new 
provisions to properly conduct those hearings. And those 
processes are also more clearly laid out for the member and the 
public. 
 
And the appeal process has, in our opinion, been simplified a bit 
by taking out that necessary provision where they would go to 
the minister. Or could go to the minister to be involved in 
individual disciplinary matters. They can now . . . that process 
would be void; that could go directly to the council and/or could 
go directly to the Court of Queen’s Bench. So we’ve taken out 
that central step. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess when we talk 
about disciplinary action or investigative action, to this point, 
what recourse has the public had against physical therapists 
who they feel have been guilty of malpractice or any type of 
error that has been made? 
 
Can you just give us a bit of an explanation of the process that 
was there before? And the fact that in many cases the public in 
general have not felt that they have been truly represented or 
have been able to voice their concerns or their feelings in 
regards to therapists who they may have felt have not conducted 
themselves wisely. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well as is with most instances with 
professional legislation, the public can in fact lay a complaint. 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

And in this case, if it was in relationship to the practice of the 
physical therapist, the public would lay a complaint with the 
college. And then of course the college would then proceed 
with the investigation. 
 
And of course, today now we have in our legislation, suggesting 
that we would have the processes of mediation. And that of 
course, in our opinion, provides for a broader public 
accountability of the, of a malpractice or an issue that the public 
might raise in terms of the professional conduct of an individual 
or of the profession. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess 
one of the areas of concern . . . and you talked about mediation. 
I think you also mention that certainly persons could go before 
the courts. We’re all aware of the fact that courts, going before 
the courts may be fairly expensive. Or even raising a question 
of concern about practice or malpractice with the college itself. 
 
Sometimes I think many people feel that when you’re dealing 
directly with even that profession versus an individual 
practising that profession, the feeling is that if you raise an issue 
of concern or raise an issue of malpractice that you may not, on 
many cases, may not feel that you’ve really been listened to; 
that the profession itself may be trying to protect its members 
more than it is trying to listen to the public and I guess that’s 
why I like the idea of explaining the appeal process of the 
mediation process. 
 
And the question I would have in regards to that is, number one, 
I think it’s important that there be a mediation process and that 
there be an agency outside of the profession itself. I believe 
each profession has an appeal mechanism within their 
profession to deal with concerns, but if people feel they haven’t 
had their concerns addressed with . . . fairly, that there is a 
process outside of that profession. 
 
And when you’re talking of mediation, are we talking of a 
mediation process that is outside of the physical therapists? So 
if you do have a concern, if you’ve raised it with the profession, 
and then you felt that your concern wasn’t dealt with 
appropriately, is this a mediation process outside of the 
profession so that people can feel that they have genuinely had 
a fair and open opportunity to deal with their concerns in an 
independent way? So that the profession itself isn’t left trying to 
address concerns that its members may run into and feel that 
they are on the hook; or even that individuals themselves feel 
that they are just beating their heads against the wall? 
 
Is that mediation process you’re talking of here outside of or 
totally independent of the profession itself? So that the public in 
general can feel that they have had a fair opportunity to voice 
any concerns they may have regarding either how the 
profession deals with situations, or even whether or not they 
may feel that therapists they’re dealing with are indeed 
conducting themselves wisely? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think the member points out exactly 
and precisely some of the rationale in terms of how the 
legislation and the Act more clearly represents the opportunity 
for the public to ensure that there is in fact due diligence if 
someone needs to be disciplined, or in fact there is a practice of 
the profession that needs to become, I think better identified, for 

a better term. 
 
I think that when the members talks about the significance of 
the public representation, and here we have now, we have three 
individuals from the public who in fact are on the committee as 
well as we have one individual who sits on the disciplinary 
committee. 
 
So with this new legislation you have now broader participation 
of the public, which I think then addresses the question that the 
member has, and that is that if you’re going back to your own 
profession or to the college, which is really your own peers, 
looking at providing that kind of disciplinarian action that might 
be required without a public participatory opportunity, asks or 
begs the question about whether or not due diligence in fact is 
being provided. So a part of what the physical therapists 
recognize is the importance of having that public representation. 
 
In respect to the mediation process, of course mediation 
processes work well if in fact the person of whom the 
allegations are being brought against and the individual 
themselves agree to that process. If they don’t have a mutual 
consent on that, then of course you need another process in 
order to deal with it. And accordingly, the legislation then has 
two aspects to it today where in fact they can go to the council 
and try to get it resolved at that level, or in fact they would use 
then the Court of Queen’s Bench . . . or the . . . yes, the Court of 
Queen’s Bench. 
 
The piece that we’re taking out of course, is the one that we 
talked about, where the council could make the request of the 
minister to become involved, that the minister’s office could 
become involved as a mediatory process. To date, there hasn’t 
been a request from the physical therapists to deal with it in that 
aspect. 
 
And accordingly, it becomes redundant I think, if you have the 
process there and nobody uses it when in fact it could be better 
served in the way in which you defined earlier, by having 
public participation there to ensure that if there are any 
discrepancies of which the public should have a voice in, it 
could be handled at that level. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well certainly, Mr. Minister, I think if the public 
feels . . . and certainly if the mediation process is working — 
and you’re correct, the mediation process can only work if the 
participants agree to it. 
 
On the other hand if someone doesn’t really want to, or 
disagrees to the mediation process and determines that they 
want to go further and actually end up in the courts, it would 
seem to me that going before the courts or pushing an issue to 
the courts certainly is going to become much more expensive. 
It’s going to add costs to the participants; probably even to the 
association, as you’re forced to defend yourself or certainly 
stand up and represent a member of the association. It adds 
costs that the public in general may feel is a burden to them. 
 
But I guess one would have to say we do have a process that 
offers a mediation process to take place. And if I understand 
you correctly, we’re going to have members on that mediation 
. . . or appeal process that are somewhat removed from the 
association; so that it’s not totally governed by the association; 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

so the public can feel comfortable with it in that regard. I think 
that’s important. I think the public needs to know that when 
they raise a concern that they’re dealing with individuals who 
are going to look at a case objectively versus just the profession 
itself. Because there’s that feeling . . . and then if you don’t 
accept the mediation process and want to go further and accept 
to bear the costs of going further on it, then that’s a 
responsibility that you’re going to have to accept. 
 
And I think you and I, Mr. Minister, as representatives of the 
public in our capacity as MLAs, it certainly makes, will make, 
and I hope will make our role a lot easier as well. Because I 
think we sometimes get pushed into areas where the public may 
not accept a verdict that is brought forward or decision that’s 
brought forward, and then of course they come to you and I 
asking for some assistance. 
 
And I think it’s appropriate that we have a mediation 
mechanism in place that totally addresses this and certainly 
removes the pressure that you or I as elected representatives 
may face when individuals come seeking our assistance. 
 
Now I understand that there are three people appointed. When 
we’re talking about — and I’m not sure if this is the appeal 
process or the mediation process — there’s appointments by 
cabinet to be part of council, and I’m wondering specifically 
what that process is, what the needs are, and would the specific 
background of these appointees be . . . would they need to have 
a knowledge of the profession? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — On these professional pieces of legislation, 
usually the largest representation of people whose names come 
forward usually come from the association. So they would be 
people that they would have some familiarity with, that would 
be serving across the province in various different capacities 
that would have some appreciation and understanding I think, 
of the delivery of health care services and the quality of health 
care services that need to be delivered. 
 
I think you would be looking for people who would have a 
sense of fairness and responsibility and would take a strong 
interest in serving on the council, because there would be then 
committees that they would be serving on, which would be the 
one that we talked about earlier, which would be the discipline 
one. 
 
They would then make those recommendations to cabinet by 
and large. And cabinet would likely, in all likelihood, follow 
those recommendations based on the referrals that are being 
provided from the association, is the normal practice that we’ve 
adopted. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So, Mr. Minister, when we talk about 
appointments by cabinet to different areas on the council, when 
it comes to the mediation group or panel, is the government 
involved under the Act to make the final appointments? And 
would you indeed want to make sure that there is a 
representative outside of the profession on this mediation panel 
to indeed determine that there is an area of fairness in dealing 
with matters of appeal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the member’s 
correct in stating that on the mediation process, the selection of 

those individuals to provide the mediation would likely be 
selected either through the profession themselves, or through 
the registrar of the college. And it would not be done through 
the cabinet process, where you would be selecting people as 
you would on appointing people to the council. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Toth: — So then on that basis then, if a member is to be 
removed from any one of those positions it would be the college 
or the profession itself that removed them, that would call, if for 
some reason they didn’t believe an individual was serving in 
their capacity as to an appointed position on council, the 
profession would have . . . I guess what I’m asking, are there 
provisions in the legislation that allow for removal of a member 
from a specific position on the council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Are you asking about the members on 
council, the public members on council, or are you asking about 
someone who in fact might be, might have, might be in question 
here both in professional conduct, and if it was then determined 
through say a mediation process, that in fact, or through the 
council, that an individual needs to be removed? How would 
that occur? Because in the legislation there’s provision there for 
the council to act to remove an individual from their duties or to 
discipline an individual if it is in relationship to their practice. 
The council has that kind of authority within the legislation — 
both to discipline and/or remove — and then I think that’s the 
question that you’re asking. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well there’s certainly that question, plus there’s 
also the question of individuals on council serving a period or a 
term. And I’m not sure what all the criteria are regarding your 
responsibilities on council. Are there provisions, if council feels 
that members who have been elected to serve on council are not 
serving or not fulfilling the purpose of their appointment to 
council . . . Does the council under the Act then have the ability 
to terminate a council member’s time of service on council 
prior to the expiration of their term? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — In the bylaws, I note within the legislation, 
it talks under 14(g) where the: 
 

prescribing the officers of the college and governing the 
procedure(s) for the appointment, election or removal of 
these officers; 

 
So there is provision within the bylaws for the removal of those 
individuals if it was noted that within the bylaw they weren’t 
meeting the obligations of what the bylaws would be 
determined for them to serve under. 
 
I expect that — and I don’t have the answer to this in front of 
me — but I expect that if there was an action here . . . and 
sometimes members who serve on these kinds of committees, 
there’s a level of need to attend, for attendance, for example. 
And if you miss three meetings or four meetings, that the 
provisions are then within the bylaws to remove people from 
there. And the establishing — and I note here that under (p) of 
that section it says that: 
 

(p) establishing any committees that the council consider 
necessary and prescribing the manner of election, 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

appointment or removal of committee members; (is within 
the purview of the council). 

 
So it provides a broad range of powers to the council to make 
changes to their membership if in fact there is . . . for some 
reason there’s a practice that the member has been negligent to 
or hasn’t been fulfilling fully, the council can remove them. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I understand that the Act gives council the right 
to license people, and as well if they chose they may license 
someone who’s not completed the necessary education or has 
passed their exams. And I’m wondering what would be the 
reasons for this provision, if I understand it correctly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — In the practice of physical therapy, I think 
there are only a couple of occasions through the course of a year 
where in fact the exams are written and then licensure follows 
that. And on occasion what might happen of course, is that 
while they’re waiting for their marks to return they might in fact 
be practising, but they would be practising under the 
supervision of somebody who is already licensed to practice 
physical therapy. So it would be under a . . . they would be 
almost under an apprenticeship, I guess is how I might best put 
it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what that’s doing is basically recognizing the 
fact that an individual has actually taken a lot of his education 
but is still waiting for final marks and approval, but already are 
in a position where they have the abilities. But may, as a result 
of time for marks to come back, find themselves either waiting 
or going to the council and asking for the opportunity to begin 
to practice, and in this case I think you mentioned under 
supervision until final marks are all in and they’ve received all 
the necessary certificates, if I understand you correctly. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe other professions . . . We’ve seen in 
other professional self-regulatory Bills, that this one gives as 
well, the Minister the right to pass certain bylaws, whether the 
council agrees with them or not. Can you give us a reason why 
this is done in the case of a supposedly self-regulating body? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Under professional legislation, there are, 
there are several options of which professions have. Whether 
they . . . and they, they can choose to do two of three, two or 
three things. They can actually pass the bylaws themselves and 
. . . or they can get them ratified by the membership. And in this 
case, because of the public representation that they have on the 
board, their interest was to ensure that what they would have is 
the bylaws approved through, through the ministry. 
 
And so in, under this particular piece of legislation, this is 
direction on which the profession wanted its bylaws approved 
and passed, and so they, they’ve included in the legislation . . . 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, would you be able to give us an 
example of what type of a bylaw the minister would simply 
impose on the council without its consent if, if there is an area 
that this might fall into? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think that we’ve not, not had an 
opportunity to exercise that piece. But one that comes to, sort of 
comes to mind to us, might be one where you needed a 
labour-mobility provision. For example, if in fact you had the 

. . . in question the credentials of someone who might be 
practising outside the, let’s say the Saskatchewan jurisdiction, 
might be, might be practising in another province. We had a 
shortage, for example, of individuals that we felt we wanted to 
attract into the province and practise in, in the province, we 
could in fact then suggest here that we would, we would 
exercise the right to ensure that that individual then might be 
able to come into a community or come into a district and 
provide the professional expertise that we would be looking for. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I believe as well, Mr. Minister, the original 
legislation gave physical therapists the right to charge a fee for 
service. And is this right still in existence or has this been 
removed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think the right still exists. For that 
to occur, just . . . We don’t believe it needs to be part of the 
legislation only because they can do that anyway. So it becomes 
redundant I think, to include it in the legislation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you’re basically saying, the right is still 
there. If a physical therapist feels or the profession feels that 
there are certain services that they’re providing that medicare is 
not, in their opinion, covering enough or an adequate amount, 
that they could charge a patient an additional fee if they feel that 
they haven’t received enough by the Department of Health. Is 
that the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s correct. It’s the same as what a 
private nurse might charge as well. It’s the same, it’s the same 
process. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, currently how many physical 
therapists do we have practising in the province? And how does 
this compare to other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We have in Saskatchewan today practising 
about 400 physical therapists around the province. You question 
about how we compare. We’re about, about the middle of the 
pack if we were to take sort of the Canadian average of the 
number of physiotherapists . . . or physical therapists. 
 
Do we need more physical therapists in Saskatchewan today? 
The answer is that we do need more. In some districts around 
the province today, they’re operating without a physical 
therapist. In some districts, depending on where they’re located, 
they might have as many as two in a rural area. And it tends to 
be the rural areas that we have shortages of physical therapists. 
But currently we have 400 that are practising and are working 
to attract more. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, when it comes to physical 
therapists and where they’re practising, I guess a question that 
just comes to mind, just chatting with one of my local media 
this morning . . . In fact it just so happened some discussion 
came up about physical therapists, and it all related to the need 
for the service in one of the communities. 
 
And the discussion about . . . and a discrepancy between the 
board and indeed the therapist involved and the family whose 
young son had unfortunately had the unfortunate mishap of 
falling off a bicycle and maybe sustaining a fairly major head 
injury and want . . . desiring to go back to their community and 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

receive some care. And a physical therapist had offered the 
care, but certainly found themselves with a lack of equipment 
and had gone to the board. 
 
And basically I guess the board had indicated they really didn’t 
have funds, but there were funds made available for some 
equipment and the board used the funds to buy equipment to 
actually enhance the lives of employees in the office. But it 
seemed like they forgot about the young . . . in this case a young 
child and a physical therapist needing equipment to help 
provide the physio for this young child versus just employees, 
making sure they stayed in shape. 
 
And I guess when it comes right down to it, does the profession 
itself attempt to, and do they work or attempt to work, I guess 
together with district boards, to determine the types of facilities 
and equipment that is needed in the area to meet the needs and 
the demand for the service in the area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think that when you look at what’s 
happening in terms of physiotherapy across the country, what 
you see is you see an expanding of their role in a significant 
fashion, moving from institution, which has been the case by 
and large of where they practice, now to community. 
 
And I think you make a good point that there is work that’s 
being done today by the Canadian physical therapists 
associations and each of the provincial physical therapist 
associations that are looking at how you might start to improve 
and enrich and enhance the level of equipment that you have, so 
that you can provide a broader range of services to people who 
live in the community today. 
 
I know that probably the best example of a really well-working 
physical therapy/occupational therapy department is located in 
the little community of Shellbrook. And you would think that 
services of that nature and the quality of services that you 
would find would be in the larger centres — and they are, 
they’re very good — but if you could replicate what you have 
in terms of the physical therapy program across the province 
that exists today in Shellbrook, both with an occupational 
therapist and physical therapist, our communities would be well 
enriched. 
 
And here’s an example of a district health board whose taken 
the opposite view about how important it is to have those kinds 
of people within their communities and providing those broad 
range of services. So you’re right in saying that those services 
need to be extended, expanded, increased, and work is going on 
as we speak today between district health boards and the 
profession to see that you can grow that, enrich that in the 
future. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I think certainly 
when we look at health care it certainly involves many, many 
different professions and groups of individuals. And I guess 
communities and individuals as well taking some ownership 
and certainly endeavouring to provide the services even locally. 
 
And I guess it’s . . . well you talk about Shellbrook. I’d 
certainly like to think that even in some of the communities I 

represent . . . and I think we recognize it won’t be in every 
community, it’s probably physically impossible to have that 
service in every community. But certainly we can look at the 
fact that it’s available in rural areas and you can provide an 
adequate, and more than adequate, but a very good service to 
meet the needs of rural residents as well, rather than forcing 
them into additional costs in having to drive to larger centres to 
receive the service. 
 
So I would like to commend the therapists for the efforts they 
are making to let the public know exactly the services they 
provide, working with district boards in trying to meet the needs 
of the local communities. And in general I think their 
recommendations and the changes to the Act that we have in 
front of us, I think at the end of the day will be positive and 
should be positive in providing . . . and helping this profession 
really to enhance its image before the public as well as 
providing good service. 
 
So I thank you for your comments, your responses, and I thank 
your official as well for the time spent in addressing the 
questions that we brought forward this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I too want, Mr. Chair, to thank the member 
opposite for his questions and certainly his commentary as it 
relates to the importance of physiotherapy across the province. 
And I know that we have a common view and a common role in 
how we might enrich that. 
 
I say to the member opposite that I’ve met your physical 
therapist in Moosomin. Does a wonderful job there. I think 
came initially to stay for a short period of time, married a 
farmer, and has been there nine and a half to ten years. 
 
So I appreciate your comments and your questions, and to thank 
Mr. Johnston for his assistance this afternoon. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Committee members, this Bill has 53 
clauses but it has a total of 9 subject titles. We’ve just voted off 
the first subject title, which contained two clauses. I’m going to 
ask for leave to call the Bill by subject titles right up until 
clause 49. The final five clauses I’ll call individually. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clauses 3 to 53 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Public Utilities Easements 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: —I now move, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

Bill No. 23 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 19  The Physical Therapists Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to reintroduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. This 
afternoon I have with me from the Department of Health, seated 
next to me is the deputy minister, Mr. Con Hnatiuk, and seated 
next to him in the front row is Mr. Wiley, who is Rod Wiley, 
the executive director of finance and management services. 
Behind Mr. Hnatiuk is Mr. Neil Yeates. Mr. Yeates is the 
associate deputy minister. And seated directly behind me is Mr. 
Lawrence Krahn, who is the associate deputy . . . or assistant 
deputy minister. Seated over to my far left behind Mr. Wiley is 
Dale Bloom who is the assistant to the deputy minister. 
 
I have other officials here with me today, Mr. Chair. Miss Lois 
Borden, who is the executive director of the district support; 
Jim Simmons, who is executive director of community care 
branch; Carol Klassen, who is executive director of acute and 
emergency services; and Mr. George Peters, who is executive 
director of capital and operating planning. 
 
And I don’t have, Mr. Chair, anyone left in the department. If 
there’s another question that needs to get asked they’re all here 
to help us through this process. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair and certainly 
welcome to the minister and his officials. And I look forward to 
discussing health issues with the minister’s officials. I have a 
hard time believing that they’re all here with him, but maybe 
he’s right, we’ll find out. 
 
In regards to that, Mr. Minister, there was a time when I used to 
think it was just as nice to sit on that side of the House as this 
side of the House, especially when you’ve had headlines in the 
paper. And I remember opposition members — they didn’t 
actually have a headline like I was reading such as, health mess 
rival to Channel Lake, but certainly bed shortage delays health 
surgery, communities facing hospital closures, city could lose 

only diabetes specialist, or doctor workload ridiculous, or the 
waiting-lists. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m sure you’ve heard and you’ve noted a lot of 
the headlines. You’ve heard from people across this province a 
number of the concerns they have regarding health care. In fact 
there was a time I think when people believed that if we defeat 
the government of the ’80s and re-elect the NDP, health care is 
going to be a non-issue. And I think that’s an area that the 
Premier was certainly hoping it would be. 
 
It would become irrelevant, but I think, Mr. Minister, we have 
to acknowledge that there are a number of concerns, a number 
of issues that continue to be a part of the process in this 
province and certainly health care, the concerns regarding 
health care or health care delivery, how it’s handled, how it’s 
maintained. Issues such as the Plains, issues such as hepatitis C, 
and the fact that as one individual indicated the other day the 
waiting-lists for elective surgery, the fact that you may not 
receive your surgery immediately. 
 
Well the person that had called me the other day said they were 
told that it would be within a year they should receive this 
procedure. That was last June, June 1997, and just the other day 
they are now informed that it could be September, October 
1998 rather than by June 1998. So, Mr. Minister, we do have a 
number of concerns in the area of health care. 
 
I know, Mr. Minister, as well, you have talked about the fact 
that the government has put more or added more money to the 
pot and to hopefully address a number of the concerns. 
Especially in view of the fact that I believe back in 1992 when 
the former minister, Ms. Simard, had announced that there 
would be a major shake-up in health care. They were going to 
adopt what they called the wellness model. That wellness model 
included closing 51 rural hospitals plus the Plains health care 
centre which resulted in numerous jobs being removed from the 
system. And it was all done at the time, the minister suggested 
it needed to be done to address deficit finances. 
 
(1600) 
 
Then the ministers changed positions, and the member from 
Saskatoon became Minister of Health. And when asked about 
and looking over the documents and the blues and recognizing 
that there really hadn’t been any reductions in spending, the 
minister’s comment at that time regarding the changes in health 
care were the fact that changes needed to come about and it 
didn’t necessarily mean that there was a reduction in health care 
spending, but it meant a change in the fact that we’re spending 
money differently. And as the public looked at it and as you 
talked to people, they didn’t feel that spending money 
differently wasn’t really addressing the areas of concern they 
had. 
 
So as you see, Mr. Minister, I expect and I’m certain your 
officials are quite aware or aware of two of the facts that there 
are a number of concerns regarding health care. And the debate 
we’re into today, well I don’t expect, Mr. Minister that we’ll be 
able to finalize the debate on health care or the health issue 
today. 
 
But I know you’re probably expecting me to go right into 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

questions on hep C or questions in the area of the Plains health 
closure. Fortunately, Mr. Minister, I’ll save that just for a little 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. I don’t wish to be 
overly harsh here. I simply remind the hon. member that rule 28 
of the legislature directs members to address their questions 
through the Chair to the minister. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
as we’re debating this, and I am not exactly sure I’m always 
acknowledging your position, but I would like you to 
acknowledge the fact that my comments are directed through 
the Chair. But at the same time when I’m talking to the 
minister, I think the minister appreciates eye to eye contact as 
well. And so while I may be looking at the minister it doesn’t 
mean that I’ve missed out on the Chair’s role in the committee. 
And I thank you for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, however, as I indicated and through the Chair I 
indicate to you the fact that we certainly want to get into debate 
on hep C, and certainly debate on Plains Health closure. But a 
call has come into our office and in fact the call just came back 
in today regarding a specific issue that a family has in regards 
to autism. And I have to admit, Mr. Minister, that I do not 
understand all the impacts of autistic children or individuals 
who face the problems of autism. 
 
But for the sake of the calls that have come to the office I’d like 
to raise a few questions so that we can certainly respond to the 
calls. And therefore I’m diverting from some of the areas that 
certainly would probably raise a greater number of questions 
which I can assure you we will certainly get into at length even 
momentarily. 
 
But I would like to raise a couple questions that have been 
raised with us in regards to the area of autism and support for 
families who are dealing with autistic children or autistic 
individuals in the family. And the level of support that they can 
or have received from the department in the past and what 
they’re receiving today. 
 
And what I was . . . I have four or five specific questions in that 
area that I’d like to bring up and make sure that we’ve 
addressed questions based on the issue that has been raised with 
our caucus in this regard. 
 
And first of all I would like to ask, Mr. Minister, what is the 
current level of services provided in Saskatchewan for 
individuals suffering from autism? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well first of all, I want to just make a 
couple of comments that relate to what the member has 
indicated in his prelude to the questions that he had put to me, 
Mr. Chair. I want to assure the member opposite, there’s an old 
saying that if you’re not all here, then we’re all here. 
 
So I say to the member opposite that I want him to rest assured 
that we have a number of . . . all of our officials who are here 
today are well versed in all of the subject areas that we want to 
deal with today; and say to the member opposite that I really do 
have the appreciation of rather sitting on this side of the House 
than on that side of the House. I have that preference. And I’m 

sure that you have that preference that you work hard to try to 
achieve as well. 
 
And as much as through the course of the ’80s, you talk a lot 
about the difficult time that Saskatchewan people had, and it’s 
true that they did, but we have in this province as you know, 
because of the administration of the past, which you were a part 
of, we have a huge, huge deficit in Saskatchewan. 
 
And today when you talk about some of the issues that 
Saskatchewan people are facing in health care, of which $1.72 
billion is the largest expenditure that we’ve ever provided to 
health care in this province, and there can be the debate as to 
whether or not it is spent in the appropriate fashion or way, and 
we can do that better, district health boards can do that better, 
we can clearly have that debate. 
 
But let’s not forget that we in this province, where $750 million 
worth of interest payments could do a lot, not only for health 
care but for roads and economic development and jobs, and you 
name it or pick it. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that from time to time 
freely in this Legislative Assembly and through our debate, I 
know that we’ll talk about the closure of 52 hospital beds . . . or 
52 hospitals I mean — not hospital beds, but 52 hospitals — 
across the province. And from time to time I want to say to you 
that the 52 hospitals in many of those instances have been 
converted. They have not been closed. They’re being used for 
other purposes today. 
 
And I mean I have language that I can refer you to that your 
previous leader and members of your party, as well as members 
of the Liberal Party, have from time to time addressed the 
importance and the value of those decisions having been made. 
So you’re on record in many of your local papers and across the 
province suggesting that decisions were made in health reform 
through the period of 1991 to 1997 where you’ve had 
reductions in services. You’ve had facilities that have been 
changed and are providing different roles today. And in many 
of those instances you support that process as well because 
you’re on record for that happening. 
 
I say to the member opposite that when we talk specifically 
about the issue of autism, I want to say to him, and I have some 
notes that I might address to you, dedicated mental health 
services to children with autism are provided primarily in 
Saskatoon and Regina, as you know, through the health districts 
and their affiliated community-based organizations, the 
Saskatoon Society for Autism and the autism resource centre. 
 
I think secondly, these CBOs (community-based organizations) 
provide a functional assessment in terms of what they do in the 
centre or the home-based intervention, support recreational and 
consultation services to children with autism. And on average 
the most intensive intervention services provided are three 
hours per week for three months to a year. 
 
The Saskatoon Society for Autism also manages, for your 
information, two residential facilities for individuals with 
autism: one for adolescents and one for adults in Saskatoon. 
And in Regina there are three residential group homes for 
individuals with autism ranging in age from the late teens to 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

their adult years, and one residential facility for respite only, for 
adolescents and adults. These facilities are funded primarily by 
Saskatchewan Social Services. 
 
And I think finally, in response to your question, diagnostic 
services and treatment planning for individuals with autism are 
provided primarily through the Kinsmen children’s centre and 
the child and youth mental health services in Saskatoon, and the 
Wascana Rehabilitation Centre and children and youth mental 
health services in Regina. 
 
Those would be I think sort of the five areas that you might 
have some interest. And I can provide some additional 
background for you, if you like, in greater detail. And I can 
provide that. For the record I can simply get it to you as it 
relates to the age groups, three- to five-year-olds with their 
specialized educational needs, including autism which is under 
legislation. 
 
And maybe as a point here, in 1998-99 Saskatchewan Health 
provided in the Saskatoon Health District with $88,830 to 
contribute to the operational cost of the Saskatoon Society for 
Autism and $193,440 to the Regina Health District Board to 
support those services here in this part of the province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think from your 
comments it sounds like there’s a number of avenues but a 
question that has specifically been raised — and I’m not exactly 
sure if it’s been dealt with in your comments — and if you have 
information that can be passed over as well that we can follow 
up with, we’d sure appreciate it. 
 
But a further question: what access do families with a child 
suffering from autism or an adult suffering from autism have to 
specialize treatments? I think the number of agencies you talked 
are fairly general. When it comes to specialized treatments, 
what access would individuals have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — If the member is asking, Mr. Chair, 
specifically what types of interventions are involved, I can 
provide those interventions and say to him that they’re provided 
this way. There’s intensive home-based communication, 
interaction, and behaviour therapy as one model; 
comprehensive parent training and family support services; a 
centre-based therapeutic preschool program; and a transitional 
programming into community-based programs and other 
community-based preschool, day care recreational programs. 
 
Those are the four areas in which intervention is provided to 
and for individuals who in fact have . . . or who suffer from 
autism, and to their families. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
certainly I would appreciate any additional information 
regarding autism and some of the programs that may be 
provided, even if you would like to send some of that 
information over. It would certainly be helpful when we . . . in 
talking with individuals regarding problems of living with an 
autistic child. 
 
Are children with autism permitted ongoing access to pediatric 
occupational therapists in Regina? 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — My thought would be that they would be. 
They would be provided the opportunity for that kind of access, 
for that type of therapy. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I’ll have to do some follow-up to 
and just, as I say, get more of the details if there are some 
questions to be raised in response to that. 
 
Another question that was raised as well is children with autism 
have severe . . . and it deals with the fact that children with 
autism have severe sensory dysfunction that permeates 
everything in their lives which can be improved with the 
assistance of an occupational therapist trained in sensory 
integration. 
 
According to the people we’ve talked to, this service is not 
provided in Saskatchewan and they must travel to Winnipeg. Is 
that true, Mr. Minister? Or are any attempts being made to 
make sure the service is provided or is there a service that is 
provided here that they may not be aware of, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What I would suggest to the member if 
you have a specific case that you’re alluding to of which they 
require some specialized services that may or may not, in your 
opinion, be accessible in the province I’d be very happy to 
receive that and collectively we could try to sort out, through 
the department, what additional services we might have in 
Saskatchewan that we could ensure that these people had 
accessibility to. 
 
Or if there are other areas of need that they might have, either 
they or their family, we would be able to assist you in getting 
through that process. Because I can’t answer the specific 
question in terms of whether or not the particular needs that 
you’re asking about can in fact be met today in the programs 
that we have available to us. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I understand that back in 1996 there 
was some questions raised regarding autism, and at the time the 
government provided auditory integration training funding and 
we’ve now been informed that this funding has now been 
removed. Can you confirm this information? And if so, explain 
to the Assembly why it was removed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Just to the member opposite I’m told that 
this specific type of programming is currently under review and 
that we will be able to provide the member with broader and 
more detailed information into the future on this particular 
program. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So, Mr. Minister, when you say the program is 
under review, does that mean that the program has been 
discontinued for the time being while it’s under review, or is 
funding still available while they review the current program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — To the member, and through the Chair, 
just to say that what we have done is we have referred some of 
these clients to Manitoba, but the program is under review from 
the point of view of assessing the level of service that we 
receive from those people who in fact have gone. And into the 
future we’ll be making some decisions here within 
Saskatchewan’s purview of health delivery as to how we might 
offer those services in the province here and asses the value of 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

the service that we've received from Manitoba. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll certainly look 
forward to following up too. And I’m not exactly sure if the one 
call we received would be one of those that have been referred 
to Manitoba, but certainly the question arises about the 
availability out of province. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us if people suffering from autism are 
eligible to receive any assistance from SAIL (Saskatchewan 
Aids to Independent Living), for incontinence supplies. For 
example people suffering from cerebral palsy may be eligible to 
receive assistance for adult diapers or other supplies. And many 
people suffering from autism need the same type of supplies. 
 
Mr. Minister, we were told that they are not covered, and that 
this causes great financial hardship for families. And can you 
explain what coverage is available and why these individuals 
would not be covered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Just to the member opposite. The services 
that are covered by and large by SAIL are primarily for adults, 
as the member likely has some sense of. And what we’re doing 
today is we’re undergoing a very, very detailed and extensive 
review of the entire program that SAIL offers, and expect that 
within a short time we’re going to have a better appreciation of 
how we’re going to be able to deliver the programs through 
SAIL and what the catchment area will be of individuals and 
families that will be served through that program. So to date 
that program is under review, and specifically I can’t provide 
any additional information to you until we’ve completed that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I raise those 
questions because they’re raised by an individual who . . . one 
of the calls that has raised the problems that have arisen in their 
case where as a result of an autistic child, certainly marital 
problems and the break-up of the home, and that has resulted in 
financial hardship. So I think you can appreciate, Mr. Minister, 
when we’re dealing with situations such as this, while it may 
not affect a lot of people, when it does for families that it does 
affect, it certainly creates a hardship. 
 
I know a family in our area that have faced some very difficult 
circumstances as a result of having an autistic child. The 
fortunate part, Mr. Minister, is that there are . . . communities 
themselves have taken upon themselves. And in one situation 
that I’m aware of just to allow the family a break and even give 
the child an opportunity to attend a camp, have put on a 
fund-raiser and were quite surprised when at the end of the day 
the total cost of the camp, that camp program was covered. So it 
just shows that people in this province are aware of different 
circumstances and are willing to reach out and help meet those 
needs. 
 
And I think sometimes it’s unfortunate that we have to call on 
the voluntary help and the care of individuals, when I think 
most people feel that these are areas where government, 
especially through our health program, would be reaching out to 
meet those needs. But I think it’s certainly important to 
recognize that people in this province are willing to reach out 
and to help meet some of the financial needs that are created. 

Now, Mr. Minister, a couple questions here. How many people 
in the province of Saskatchewan are diagnosed with autism? 
And also, you had indicated a number of different programs, 
intervention programs. How are the different programs paid 
for? Are they paid for by government or are, in many cases, 
individuals left to cover the costs of those programs 
themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — To the member. Just to indicate that I 
support his comments that he made earlier as they relate to the 
various different situations that individuals might find 
themselves and the hardship of course that’s related to, in 
particular, raising a child that’s autistic. Recognize that and 
appreciate the effort that that requires on the part of families 
and the willingness in many cases of communities to come 
together and assist individuals and families in meeting some of 
those needs. 
 
And the member is correct that in Saskatchewan we’re noted, 
irrespective of where you come from, whether it’s Moosomin or 
Shaunavon or Yorkton or wherever it is that you are, 
communities pull together, and in the very fine, excellent 
tradition that we’re known for in this province in many aspects. 
 
And I want to say that we have of course, as you know, the 
Kinsmen Foundation, which is probably a leader in terms of 
raising funds in this province, to assist families and young 
children in enriching their lives to ensure that they have a 
higher quality and a better standard. 
 
To your question specifically about the number of children, 
there are approximately 500 children today, and adults, in 
Saskatchewan that suffer from autism. And the largest portion 
of that funding of course is covered off through grants through 
to the community-based organizations. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, I thank you, Mr. Minister, for 
those comments. And certainly we’ll take some of the 
information that you provided us this afternoon in the area of 
autism and discuss some of the responses, the responses with 
some of the callers we’ve had in regards to this too. 
 
And if there are further questions that they feel that they need 
some more answers on, we’ll look forward to bringing forward 
at another date so we can indeed address all the concerns that 
individual family members may have. 
 
Mr. Minister, before I move on into another area of discussion, 
my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena has a few questions that 
they would like to get into in a specific case that has been raised 
with them as well. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and 
staff, we have a few questions as well dealing with, not on that 
topic but on another, that perhaps you could provide some 
information to us today that we can look at and raise at a further 
meeting in estimates. 
 
And some of the things that we would like to know are the 
deficits in the districts out there. Do you have a total of where 
these district deficits are to date? Do you have that with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — To the member, through the Chair, from 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

Wood River. I have the annual report here for ’96-97. And the 
annual report of ’96-97 lists the districts and the financial status 
of each of those districts. 
 
Now if the member is asking for a 1997-98 annual report, that 
annual report is yet not tabled. It will be tabled likely the end of 
June or early in July. So I don’t have those numbers available 
with me today because I don’t have them yet. But they’ll be in 
the annual report at the time that I’ve indicated that they’ll be 
available. 
 
But I do have the 1996-97 report which we could make 
available to the member if he doesn’t have a copy of it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, what deficits are 
you aware of at present without waiting for the annual report? 
Other years we’ve been able to get I believe an update at this 
time of the year. And could you provide even an incomplete list 
of what districts are reporting to you their deficits will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member. As you 
know, the districts close off their operating years at the end of 
April, and we’re now only into the first week in May. So for us 
to have that kind of detail today, we don’t have that at our 
disposal yet. 
 
So I say to the member, we’ll have a better appreciation of what 
those numbers will be, likely within four or five weeks from 
now and then can provide that in broader detail for you. But 
today, because of the closing date for the district health boards, 
as I say to you it’s just completed. So for us to have that 
information in detail today, we just don’t have it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, lately you’ve been making 
some comments about the hospital situation, the bed situation, 
the lack of here in the cities, but your response has been that in 
fact you would like to see rural hospitals play a lot larger role in 
taking care of people. And I commend you for that but would 
you be able to provide me the dollar amounts that you’re going 
to support that statement with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think one of the things that I’ve said 
publicly in some of the meetings that the member and I have 
been fairly close at, you being the Chair and you inviting me up 
to share the podium from about six or seven inches away from 
you and I appreciate the fact that we’ve been able to do that. 
But say to you that as we’ve been around the province together, 
we’ve been talking a great deal about how health reform has in 
fact in some instances enriched the value of health delivery 
around the province. And in some instances it has been difficult 
for districts and communities to fully realize the impacts of 
what we can achieve through health reform in the province. 
 
And I know that we’ve talked at length about the importance of 
hospital beds, and the value of hospital beds, and particularly 
the Plains Health Centre here. And I’ve said on a regular basis 
that it isn’t the level of beds around the province that really 
signal or direct or provide the quality and the level of health 
care services that are provided in the province. Although they 
are important and are a significant piece in the overall delivery 
of health in the province, there have been a whole host of other 
initiatives that are going on today that have enriched the value 
of health services. 

Like when we look at the number of day surgeries that we 
provide in the province today, they’re significantly higher. 
When you look at the number of cataract surgeries that we 
provide in the province today than what we did say four or five 
years ago, or for that matter three years ago, they’re 
significantly higher. When we look at the number of hips and 
knees and orthopedic surgeries that we provide in the province 
today, they’re significantly higher. And the processes and the 
techniques and the technology today that we use to perform 
some of these procedures are further advanced and they’ll 
continue to grow. 
 
And so we need to be careful around the debate. You and I need 
to be careful around the debate about suggesting for a moment 
that if we enrich or grow the number of beds in the province 
that we’re going to have a better health care system, because 
that isn’t reflective in the literature anywhere across North 
America. 
 
When you look at what’s happened in provinces in Canada, and 
on a regular basis I get an opportunity to sit around the table 
with Health ministers from across the country. And it doesn’t 
matter which province you look at, what you see is you see 
reductions in the number of beds and institutional services that 
are provided in acute care. 
 
That’s where everybody’s going with a greater emphasis on 
community-based services, on home care, and that’s where 
we’re going. So you try to grow those services more in your 
communities and you try to enrich those services so that you 
can keep people closer to home. And that’s part of the message 
that I’ve been giving as I’ve been travelling around the 
province. 
 
I think we’ve done an excellent job of ensuring that we have 
some of the finest tertiary centres in western Canada in 
Saskatoon and Regina. And our Saskatchewan rural people 
have a huge dependency on ensuring that those services 
continue to be at the level that they’re at today. And it’s correct 
in what you say, is that as I’ve been around the province I have 
a strong interest in ensuring that we increase or try to enrich the 
level of services that we have in rural communities. 
 
Just recently, as you know, we were in your community and 
talked about the new health care facility in Ponteix, which was 
a difficult situation as you know. But today I think provides a 
broad range of services, some that weren’t there before. 
 
We recently made the announcement of the new health care 
facility in Shaunavon that will soon be on its way to 
development. I talked a little bit about the importance of a new 
health care centre in Balcarres. Just made that announcement 
not more than a week ago for a new integrated health facility in 
Balcarres. 
 
We have a new hospital that’s going to be built in Athabasca, in 
the northern part of the province, which your good friend and 
mine from Athabasca will be a benefactor of, as well as the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. We’ve talked about and 
recently approved the new hospital for Meadow Lake. 
 
So when you look around the province and see the kinds of 
initiatives that are going on in rural Saskatchewan, I guess it’s 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

our signal to say to you and to people who live in those 
communities, that we want to build a complete health delivery 
system, and an important piece of that would be ensure that we 
have good quality health care facilities which are appropriately 
staffed and equipped, so that you have that level of service for 
Saskatchewan people in all parts of the province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, then following up on 
your comments, let’s take a look at some places such as Swift 
Current. I believe they have already put forward a proposal to 
your department. Now I’m not sure if this is a thrust really of 
their own or at the request of the department, and you could 
perhaps clear this up. 
 
But I know it’s a proposal that was put forward that they could 
cut that regional hospital back some 54 beds. And the doctors 
down there, Mr. Minister, we both know are saying the same 
things that each and every health care professional in this 
province is saying, in that there is burn-out, there is stress, they 
are overworked. 
 
And so when you say that we can do a lot more out in the rural 
areas but we’re doing it at a lot higher level of acuity and we’re 
doing it with staff that are on, you know, near burn-out 
conditions, and yet we are still looking at proposals coming in 
from places like Swift Current, how then can you stand up and 
say that there’s going to be more health care delivered in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
(1630) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Before the minister responds I just wish 
to bring the hon. member’s attention to rule no. 28 of the 
Legislative Assembly rules that requests or requires all 
members to address their comments through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what’s important to recognize here 
is that the article that I read and certainly the newspaper . . . or 
the radio clip that I heard the CEO (chief executive officer) 
from Swift Current speak about was that they were looking at a 
variety of different options in terms of what they might do for 
their district. 
 
We have not received a definitive plan from the Swift Current 
District Health Board that suggests that they’re going to be 
reducing a whole host of beds today. But our role will be to 
continue to work with district health boards, not only Swift 
Current’s, but those across the province. 
 
And as the member has an appreciation, there are clearly needs 
for us to look at how districts might work closely with each 
other. And the example in my visit to that part of the province, 
for example, the Rolling Hills Health District that surrounds the 
Swift Current Health District, have talked a lot about how 
important it would be for them to look at how they might 
partner up in a variety of different ways, and if they were to do 
that, the valuable and the enriched services that they might . . . 
you might see on the western side of the province. 
 
And that’s part of what my objective is, is to see if we could 
have a broader range of discussion between district health 
boards so that you might be able to further enrich, pool some of 
those resources that are in those areas. Because when you ask 

the question about what happens in this province with the 
allocation of funding that we have today, I don’t hear anywhere 
that $1.72 billion isn’t enough today to deliver health care 
services in the province. I don’t hear anybody say to us that 
that’s not enough money. 
 
What I often hear and what you hear and from some of the 
public meetings that we’ve recently had, it’s the way in which 
those funds are being used, who’s administrating them, are we 
getting the best value for the money that’s being invested. 
 
And I guess part of the discussion that I’d like to see take place, 
when we’re looking at enriching the level of services in rural 
Saskatchewan, is that you have a broader discussion with the 
district health boards of where you have major centres that are 
providing some of those specialized services that I think you 
and I believe need to be enriched. 
 
So that will be my focus and my goal over the next few weeks 
and months to come, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess we’re going to 
sort of have a free-ranging conversation here to the end. 
Because when you say the $1.72 billion is enough, probably it 
is, perhaps it is. I don’t know — you’re the minister and you’re 
the one that should have those figures at hand and know better. 
 
However when you take a look at the Leader-Post on Saturday, 
May 2, it has the “Saskatoon health ‘crisis’” — I imagine 
you’re aware of this paper, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister — and here 
it is making the statement that officials from that health district 
are saying that they would need an immediate budget increase 
of 3 to $4 million to bring the overall waiting-list for surgery 
down to six months from, I guess it’s a little over a year. 
 
So given that, where we’re looking at bringing it down by 50 
per cent for 3 or 4 million, I have to assume that if you’re 
saying there’s enough money there, then the people, the boards 
that you and your government initially put in place and 
basically are still running health care today, and especially 
under the tight guidelines that you’ve put forward, for a few 
million dollars here or there we could bring these horrendous 
waiting-lists of 6,600 people down to an acceptable level. 
 
So could you then provide me, as this Saskatoon District Health 
official has made the statement of 3 to 4 million — he knows 
what that waiting-list is to be brought down — so could you 
provide that for each health district in the province, what the 
dollar amount would be to bring the waiting-list down to those 
levels. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to . . . I don’t want to get into a 
debate about the literature that’s printed in the newspapers on a 
regular basis from both Saskatoon and Regina. But in the very 
same article that the member alludes from — and I don’t have it 
quite handy — but I want to say to the member opposite that 
when in fact the Saskatoon Health District reviewed in more 
detail the issue of waiting-lists, what they said, I believe, is that 
when you compare Saskatchewan’s waiting-lists to waiting-lists 
across the country, that Saskatchewan’s waiting-lists are not 
any, are not any greater than what they are in other parts of 
Canada today. 
 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

And I’m not saying that we don’t have a challenge or we don’t 
have a goal here to reduce those waiting-lists, as the official 
from the Saskatoon Health District said. And I think he used his 
mother as the example, where he said that his mother, who was 
in Great Britain, was on a waiting-list that was far longer than 
what it is here today in Canada or in Saskatchewan, is I think 
his direct quote. 
 
So if you make the case about whether or not we have an 
objective to reduce the number of, the number of days in which 
somebody waits for a surgery or procedure today, of course that 
is our goal and we’ll continue to work hard in trying to achieve 
that. 
 
And our role with district health boards, as you know, right or 
wrong, we have a process and a system that’s in Saskatchewan 
today. That decision was made in 1991. We have district health 
boards that actually provide the direct services to individuals 
across the, across the province. 
 
And the government, through its efforts, tries to provide the 
largest package of funding that it can to each of those health 
districts and then the allocations are made on, on needs-based 
funding. And on an ongoing basis, what you see is you see 
adjustments to that allocation the districts receive based on 
migration. 
 
So, I mean today, as much as we might not appreciate the fact 
that our budget is $1.72 million . . . billion in health care, it’s 40 
per cent almost of our total expenditure that we, that we, that 
we invest in health care — a number one priority in terms of 
investment. And we’re of the opinion the district health boards 
across the province are in fact making their allocations in the 
best fashion that they believe meets the needs of each of their 
districts. And I have no reason to believe that that’s not the 
case. 
 
Can we get a broader utilization of those funds that go out to 
some of those smaller districts in particular? I think the answer 
to that is that we can. And that’s why I talk about the 
importance of having a partnership between some of the 
districts, because I think it would get maximized in a greater 
way, in a greater fashion, the resources that they have allocated 
to them and will be able to provide enriched services at a 
home-based level to many of those people in rural 
Saskatchewan in particular. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Before I recognize the 
hon. member, I just wish to remind the minister of rule 28 in the 
Legislative Assembly handbook that directs that comments to 
members be directed through the Chair. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, do yourself, do you feel that 370 days is an acceptable 
period of time to be on a waiting-list? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I think what’s important here is 
that we have a full appreciation of how the waiting-list process 
works. And the member opposite, Mr. Chair, has some 
appreciation as well that waiting-lists are not new to 
Saskatchewan; they’re not new to Canada. Waiting-lists are . . . 
have always been in place. 
 

And today the decision about how people move up and down 
the waiting-lists are not made by me and they’re not made by 
my department staff. They’re made by the physicians in terms 
of their priority in which people require a particular procedure. 
And as you know, we have electives and we have urgent and we 
have emergency need. And people are categorized based on 
what their requirements are and their immediate need that they 
have for medical health services or treatment. 
 
Now if my treatment or an individual’s treatment changes in the 
process . . . And they might be categorized as an elective today. 
Based on the best medical evidence and wisdom and best 
practice that they would access and evaluate somebody on, they 
would make a determination of where they’d go on those three 
categories. 
 
Now if that changes along the way, if someone’s elective today 
and they go in to see their physician because they believe that 
their situation changes, they of course would move up the list if 
they become more critical to the piece. And always in this 
province that we’ve been able to address, always we’ve been 
able to address the emergency needs of people. 
 
So if somebody is an emergency case in this province, you’re 
stuck with where they are, the system accommodates them in a 
variety of different ways. And every day we hear about 
somebody who’s involved in a car accident or we hear about 
somebody who’s involved in an unfortunate family feud where 
there is damage done to them, or if somebody’s been shot in a 
hunting accident or there has been a crisis like a train crash, and 
all of those occasions, all of those occasions — barring none — 
when there’s an emergency situation, people get dealt with 
within our system. 
 
And you and I both know, as we’ve been around the province, 
Mr. Chair, and again last night, people stand up and tell their 
story about how it is that in an emergency situation they’re able 
to get to the centre of excellence in this province, or the centres 
of excellence in this province, at the tertiary centres, and on 
every, every occasion — every occasion — they get treated. 
 
I have yet, I have yet to hear from somebody who’s gone 
through the public meetings that I’ve been at with you where 
they haven’t been served by the tertiary centre. Every 
testimonial says — every testimonial says — that people have 
been well served. The professional community has served them 
very well, be it the physician or the doctor. The ambulatory 
service has ensured that they’ve gotten them there. And I’ve yet 
to hear from somebody where they’ve to say that the emergency 
services haven’t been well provided. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, do you see what the problem 
is here — you’re playing a game of semantics — Mr. Chair, 
Mr. Minister, I think that’s what he’s doing. Now we know full 
well you’re not going to leave somebody in an emergency 
situation for 370 days; but those electives, they’re on these 
waiting-lists for so long. And we’ve raised cases in here where 
it was two and a half years to get some surgeries for hip 
replacement and such. Now when you leave them that long . . . 
you, Mr. Minister, are the one who made the comment before 
one other day about the costs of doing surgery once they’re left 
for far too long. 
 



May 6, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

Now you can perhaps provide us with those figures for all those 
people that you have let — I guess it’s some 6,600 people — 
that you have let sit on waiting-lists for a year, a year and a half, 
up to two years. Now there’s a tremendous cost to the system. 
 
In getting back to the question that I had asked before, Mr. 
Chair, does he agree that 370 days is a fair period of time to 
wait for elective surgery list? I didn’t say anything about 
emergency. Surely no one would accept or believe that you’d be 
that cruel, to leave people go in an emergency situation. But 
you can’t tell me there isn’t something cruel and unusual about 
leaving people for a year on elective-surgery lists — answer 
that one, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say to the member opposite 
that first of all you need to understand . . . and maybe you do, 
Mr. Chair. Maybe you do understand the three levels that I tried 
to tell you about, which are the — and I’ll go through them 
again just so that we both understand them fully — which are 
the emergency one and the urgent one and the elective one. 
 
And as I say to you and have said on many occasions, that the 
decision about how people move up and down those lists are 
really made by the practitioners, by the physicians. Not by 
politicians, and not by district health staff, and not by boards in 
this province, but they’re made by professionals, who are well 
trained and highly skilled and are physicians across this 
province. And they decide what level of service someone needs. 
 
So when the member opposite asks whether or not a period of 
370 days is too long, the decision about how long somebody 
sits on a waiting-list by and large is determined by their family 
physician and their specialist and the system. And so when you 
have that kind of determination made by those specialized 
individuals, then I’m assuming that they’re appropriate, because 
I trust that they’re in the system today providing those kinds of 
services for us because they have that kind of degree of training. 
 
Now the number of procedures — and I want to raise with the 
member again and share with him — the number of procedures 
that we’re doing in Saskatchewan today, cataracts alone, over 
the period 1991-92 to today, ’96-97, cataract surgeries are up by 
81 per cent. So we’re doing more cataract surgeries today then 
we ever have. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hip and knee replacements are up by 30 per cent in this 
province than what they were in 1992-93. And when you take a 
look at what Saskatchewan’s surgeries that we performed from 
1987-88 to 1996-97; in 1997-98 we did a total of 77,237 
surgeries, and today, today we’re doing 87,378 day surgeries. 
Now those surgeries are up by 52 per cent. Those are day 
surgeries. 
 
And so when the member talks about the number of procedures 
that we’re doing in the province today surgically, they’re far 
greater today, as in-patient and out-patients, than there ever 
have been. They’re far greater today. And I’ve highlighted for 
you the two areas that have been probably most notable, and 
those are in the cataract side and those that we do hip and knee 
surgeries. 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, what you’re doing is cherry 
picking a few. When we’re talking about elective surgery I have 
— and this was raised a few days ago in the House here — 
from the Saskatoon Health District, the waiting-lists for the 
different surgeries. For general surgery, elective, 370 days, and 
you can’t dispute this stuff. I would like to know, Mr. Chair, 
Mr. Minister, if in fact you agree with this sort of stuff? 
 
Because don’t talk about the emergencies or the amount you’re 
putting through, the fact of the matter is you’ve got over three 
times more people today on waiting-lists than there was 15 
years ago. And that’s a sign of your government. 
 
Now you’re saying, and your back-benchers who are heckling 
continuously here today, you’re saying, Mr. Minister, that it’s 
acceptable. We have, we have a lady that laid — what? — six 
days, seven days, Hope Sawin in the Assiniboia hospital, with a 
broken leg, broken hip. There were no beds. 
 
So for you now to stand up and say, well it’s the doctors who 
make the decision, it’s the health district here in Regina or 
Saskatoon that’s making the decision? Oh, come on. You know 
what it is? You’re saying it’s not a political decision. It is a 
political decision — it’s one being made by you and your 
government. 
 
Because if the beds are not available, if the staff shortages are 
there and they can’t deal with the people, who’s to blame? You 
can’t blame the doctors and nurses if you don’t give them the 
tools to work with. You don’t provide the beds. You’re putting 
quotas on the amount of surgeries that can happen. How can 
you say it’s not your fault? Of course it is. 
 
And getting back to the . . . You know, it’s terrible the heckling 
that’s coming from the member from Regina South, Andrew 
Thomson . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. There is a growing amount of 
noise in the legislature and as we’re into the last minutes of this 
day, I ask for the cooperation of all members in allowing the 
hon. member for Wood River to put his questions and the Hon. 
Minister of Health to respond. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so when we 
take a look at . . . backing up a few questions ago because you 
didn’t answer that one either and I’ve been trying to be civil 
with you, Mr. Minister, and get these answers from you. 
 
Three to four million dollars, Mr. Chair, would take care of six 
months. It would bring the waiting-lists to six months. Right? 
So that’s taking 50 per cent off the waiting-lists, Mr. Chair, in 
Saskatoon alone — 3 to 4 million. 
 
I have to assume by your comments that either the 
administrative people that you and your government have put in 
place in these districts can’t do the job . . . because you’re 
saying there’s enough money there. So they’re not doing the job 
if they can’t find 3 to 4 million in the Saskatoon Health District 
to bring those waiting-lists down. Somebody should be fired. 
Somebody should be. Wouldn’t you agree with that, Mr. 
Minister? I have to assume it’s roughly the same here in 
Regina. Well why wouldn’t he? 
 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1998 

So what are we talking about? If it’s 3 to 4 million in 
Saskatoon, say the same in Regina, couldn’t we be talking 
about 15 million, 20 million, to bring a waiting-list down from 
one year, two years? Some 6,600, people down to what was I 
guess acceptable level, Mr. Chair. And you’ll remember well 
back in the late ’70s when the Premier Allan Blakeney, publicly 
threatened to fire a Health minister if he couldn’t keep below 
2,000. And now 6,600 is acceptable? And for mere millions, 
half of what you wanted to spend in Guyana, would take care of 
this. 
 
How do you answer people like the lady in Assiniboia who lays 
. . . an elderly lady lays with a broken hip, broken leg for that 
many days? How can you stand up and say that things are under 
control? And you play the games about emergency service. Mr. 
Minister, you’ve got a lot to answer for. 
 
I have seen lists that go well beyond 370 days. This is for 
general elective surgery, and yet I have seen lists where surgery 
couldn’t be done for hip replacements and such on elderly 
people who deserve a lot better than what this government is 
giving them. And it’s gone two and a half years, Mr. Minister. 
And I’ve tabled, and the member who is heckling from Regina 
South has seen these documents, because I’ve tabled them in 
here — two-and-a-half years waiting-list? That’s not acceptable 
by any standard. It’s not. 
 
Do you dispute the 3 to $4 million figure? Is this Saskatoon 
District Health official right or wrong, that he could accomplish 
these 50 per cent reductions in waiting-lists with three to four 
million bucks? It would seem . . . Well that seems inhuman to 
not spend that much money or give that district enough money 
to take care of those lists. 
 
The people who are really suffering here also, let’s not forget, 
by and large are elderly. These are the people that pioneered 
this country. These are the people that went through the world 
wars to make sure that you and I could live in a country like 
this. 
 
Well Andrew Thomson, the member . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. The hon. member for 
Wood River, I believe would recognize the improper use of a 
member’s name. I ask the member to withdraw the name and 
carry on. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Sorry, Mr. Chair. I withdraw using that 
member’s name. I meant to say the member from Regina South, 
who continuously . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. It is . . . Order. I asked the 
member to simply withdraw that name, which you did and I 
appreciate that. It is improper to comment on a ruling of the 
Chair. I ask the member to simply proceed with the Health 
estimates. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right, Mr. Chair, thank you. And I do 
withdraw the comments. But it does come back, Mr. Chair, to 
one thing — it’s about compassion. Now the minister is 
standing up in here and he’s saying $1.72 billion is enough. 
Perhaps it is. 
 

You know I think the problem that this government has had 
from day one, Mr. Chair, is that they have decided how much 
money they’re prepared to spend on people’s health care needs. 
Instead they should have always been coming at it from the 
other end. They should have decided what kind of care, what 
level of care, they are prepared to give to the people. 
 
To the elderly people in this province, and to those who are sick 
and those who need the help, they should have determined what 
level of care they were prepared to provide. What is an 
acceptable period of time for an elderly person to lay in a bed 
waiting for a broken leg or hip to get fixed? What is an 
acceptable period of time for people waiting to find out how 
bad their cancer is? What is an acceptable period of time for 
each and every operation and surgery that should be happening, 
and funded accordingly? 
 
That’s how the health budget should be arrived at. You first 
determine what kind of compassion you’re going to provide to 
society and you fund it accordingly. And if we have to err in 
any of the budgets in this province, you better be prepared to err 
in the health care budget. Or, and I’m sure this will happen, the 
people will deal with you at the polls. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve asked a simple question. Obviously you’re 
not going to give that answer today. Mr. Chair, I don’t believe 
he is. But perhaps he could bring those figures for another day. 
Could I have the breakdown for each health district in this 
province as to what the dollar value would be to bring the 
waiting-lists down by 50 per cent? 
 
Further to that, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, could we get an update 
on the waiting-lists in each and every health district or in the 
province as a whole — or/and the province as a whole — as to 
how many people are on these waiting-lists? 
 
Now we’re hearing from medical professionals . . . And why is 
it, why is it that the people can’t find out from their own 
government exactly what the situation is? Health has become 
the most secretive thing we do in this . . . or that government 
does in this province. That’s not what it should be all about. 
Our health care, our care for our sick and our elderly, should be 
everyone’s business and we should all know about it. 
 
So let’s find out exactly what those waiting-lists are. Why have 
you allowed them, Mr. Minister, to get to 6,600? You can’t, you 
can’t accept that that is acceptable. Surely you can’t. And you 
must know there’s a serious problem for you to stand up, for 
you to stand up and say that you yourself, Mr. Chair — he said 
this, that he was on three waiting-lists himself. When 
questioned by the doctor . . . 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Nutana on her 
feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, I move that we rise and 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................978 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................978 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................978 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................978 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................978 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................978 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................979 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................979 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................979 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................979 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................979 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Beauval Comes to the Aid of Bereaved Families 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................979 
 Saskatchewan Sends Fire-fighters to Alberta 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................979 
 Liberal Party Policy on Medicare 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................980 
 Swift Current Boom 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................980 
 Beechy School Wins Drama Festival Awards 
  Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................980 
 Kinistino Dealership Wins Excellence Award 
  Langford ....................................................................................................................................................................................981 
 SGI-CAA Child Safety Program 
  Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................981 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskPower’s Proposed Investment in Guyana 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................981 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................981 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................982 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................982 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................982 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................983 
 Northern Highways 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................983 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................983 
 Health Care Concerns 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................984 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................984 
 Drought Contingency Plans 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................985 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................985 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 



 

 Bill No. 48  The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1998 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................985 
 Bill No. 49 — The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................985 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on Bill No. 744 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................986 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 36  The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur les services de l’état civil 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................986 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................987 
 Bill No. 40 — The SaskTel Pension Implementation Act 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................987 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................988 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 27 — The Public Service Act, 1998 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................989 
 Bill No. 33 — The Provincial Court Act, 1998 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................990 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 3  The Public Utilities Easements Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................991 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................991 
 Bill No. 23 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 1998 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................992 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................992 
 Bill No. 19 — The Physical Therapists Act, 1998 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................992 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................992 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 3 — The Public Utilities Easements Amendment Act, 1998 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................997 
 Bill No. 23 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................998 
 Bill No. 19  The Physical Therapists Act, 1998 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................998 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Health — Vote 32 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................998 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................998 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1001 
 
 
 


