





























































Hansard: April 08, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 521 
 April 8, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of the communities 
of Estevan and Benson. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. I also have petitions to 
present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from my constituency, Mr. Speaker, the 
towns of Redvers, Maryfield, and Bellegarde. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With petitions as well to 
present to this Assembly. And reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions are signed by individuals from the 
Redvers and Wauchope areas of the province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Coleville, 
Kindersley, and Flaxcombe. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition. The petition deals with concern over the severance 
payment to Jack Messer and requests an independent public 
inquiry into the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. And 
these are signed by the good people of Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present. The concerns in the petition are related to 
the severance payments to Mr. Jack Messer, and calling for an 
immediate, independent public inquiry. Signatures on this 
petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily from the area around St. 
Brieux. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today from Prince Albert and Shellbrook. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the people in 
Assiniboia, and of course that’s the home of those people that 
were in last night. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the hon. member 
will recognize of course that he won’t want to engage in debate 
in the presentation of petitions. Next petition. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present the petition on behalf of the people begging for relief. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
These folks all come from the community of Piapot, 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 
behalf of people from Pilot Butte and east side of Regina. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present 
petitions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent its closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, your petitioners come from Pilot Butte and 
Balgonie. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in presenting petitions regarding the closure of 
the Plains hospital. The prayer is: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petitions are all 
from the Assiniboia area of the province. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that presented the petitions are 
primarily from Regina here, and I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: funding the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; saving the Plains Health Centre; 
and cancelling severance payments to Jack Messer and 
calling for an independent public inquiry. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, it is my duty at this point to present 
the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. 
 
Your committee, in examining the matters of the acquisition, 
management, and sale of Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd. by 
SaskPower and the payments to Mr. John R. Messer when he 
ceased to serve as president of SaskPower, has concluded that 
certain documents in the possession of the government are 
required in order for this committee to fully carry out its terms 
of reference. 
 
Your committee recommends therefore, that the Assembly do 
order the Speaker to issue a subpoena to summon the 
attendance of Mr. Don McKillop of the Department of Justice 
of the Government of Saskatchewan before the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations at its meeting on 
Wednesday, April 15, 1998, at 9 a.m. And that he do produce 
the following documents at that time: (1) all written legal 
opinions in the possession of Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 
the Crown Investments Corporation, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan, touching upon the terms of reference of the 
Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd. investigation in the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations; and (2) the long-term gas 
supply agreement between Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
and Direct Energy Marketing Ltd. and its three ancillary 
documents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded from the member from Regina 
Coronation Park, that the fourth report of the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations be now concurred in. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 28 ask the government the following question: 
 

(l) how many cases of HIV (human immunodeficiency 
virus) were reported in Saskatchewan in 1990; (2) how 
many people died from HIV that year; (3) how many of the 
reported cases were children and youth under the age of 
21; and (4) how many of those children and youth died 
from HIV that year? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions regarding the years 
1991 through 1997. 

 
I so present. 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 28 ask the government the following question: 
 

Of the Minister of Justice: what plans do you have to 
relieve volunteers of liability in the performance of their 
roles as volunteers; in view of repeated calls for help, what 
help can you give other than that expressed by the 
volunteer liability workshops conducted throughout the 
south-west, which has only served to make everyone more 
fearful; have you any plans for no-fault volunteer 
legislation to address this ever-increasing problem? 

 
I have another, separate question. I give notice, Mr. Speaker, 
that I shall on day 28 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

Minister in charge of multi-national agreement on 
investment: what position will your government be taking 
with regards to offering an alternative to the proposed 
agreement, and what efforts will be made at the 
forthcoming OECD (Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development) meeting in late April to 
contribute to a new framework of principles? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
should like to direct your attention and that of the other 
members to your gallery, and you will see — if you’ve been 
counting — a group of 36 students. They’re here from St. 
Andrew’s School in the constituency of Regina-Victoria. 
They’re accompanied here today by their teacher, Perry Fafard. 
They’re going to have a tour of the Legislative Building after 
question period and I look forward to meeting with them after 
that to see what questions I might be able to answer for them. 
 
At this time I’d like to ask all members to extend a very warm 
welcome to these students and their teacher. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the members of the Assembly, Mayor 
Doug Still of Humboldt, who is seated in your gallery. Mayor 
Still is highly regarded in Humboldt for his hard work and the 
advancement of economic growth in the Humboldt area. And 
Mayor Still came to Regina today to present the invocation at 
this morning’s annual prayer breakfast. 
 
I ask the members of the Assembly to join with me in extending 
a warm welcome to Mayor Still. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I would also like to welcome Mayor Doug Still to the Chamber. 
Mayor Still chairs one of the most successful REDAs (regional 
economic development authority) in the province, and I’m also 
very pleased that he accepted our invitation to sit on the 
Provincial Action Committee on the Economy. So another 
welcome to Mayor Still. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in 
welcoming Mr. Still to the Assembly today on behalf of the 
Liberal caucus and just to say that it’s nice to see an old friend. 
We served on the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) board together and I’m very pleased to say that 
today his work and hard effort is an example to all of us. It’s 
nice to know that he’s still the mayor. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you, a delegation in your gallery 
from the Beijing Education Examinations Bureau headed by 
Mr. Wang, vice-president of the bureau, and hosted by the 
University of Regina. I’ll ask you to stand, yes. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The University of Regina has a 
cooperative agreement with the Beijing Educational 
Examinations Bureau to promote academic exchanges and 
cooperation. The purpose of the delegation is to learn about 
post-secondary education standards, examinations, evaluation, 
and policies governing admission, and we’ll be meeting later 
today. 
 
So thank you for helping me to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Mr. Speaker, my colleagues may know that 
the 1998 Canadian Fire-Fighters’ Curling Championships are 
taking place in Regina from April 4 to 11 at the Caledonian 
Curling Club. And seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, are 
five partners of those curlers. I’m pleased to introduce them to 
you and to my colleagues. I hope that you’re enjoying your stay 
in Regina and I hope that you will find the proceedings here this 
afternoon interesting. 
 
Please join me in extending a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last night 
in Assiniboia over 200 concerned citizens gathered to express 
their grave concerns about the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre. My colleague from Souris Cannington and I attended 
the meeting and were both thoroughly disgusted with the 
Minister of Health’s refusal to listen to some arguments put 
forward by those in attendance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of southern Saskatchewan are more 
convinced than ever that government members are not prepared 
to listen to them. They are not committed to providing quality 
services to rural residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night the minister simply provided his pat 
answer that the number of beds would not be decreasing with 
the closure of the Plains and that the level of services would 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

remain the same. Mr. Speaker, the people at the meeting did not 
believe the minister, nor do they believe his government is 
currently providing the right level of services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the message was loud and clear. This government 
is running a health system on the edge and something must be 
done. 
 
First, the minister must place a moratorium on the closure of the 
Plains until an independent review of the entire system is 
conducted. 
 
Second, the minister must ask himself why the people of 
Saskatchewan are so upset about the closure of the Plains. The 
answer to this question was put by the mayor of Wood 
Mountain at last night’s meeting. People are upset because for 
many the Plains is all they have left. 
 
Since this NDP (New Democratic Party) government came to 
power, the people of rural Saskatchewan have lost 53 hospitals 
and witnessed the deterioration of services in the rural and 
small urban centres such as Swift Current, Yorkton, and North 
Battleford. If this government is bent on closing the Plains, they 
must improve the level of services being provided in these 
communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure what 
meeting he was at. I was at the same meeting in Assiniboia. 
This meeting was planned . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now hon. 
members will be aware that members’ statements are not to be 
debated. Members are entitled to make their own statements but 
not to engage in debate on other members’ statements. And I 
know that the member from Swift Current will want to guide 
his statement accordingly. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. This meeting was planned and 
orchestrated by the Liberal Party, who have never believed in 
medicare and who have used every conceivable way — 
remember the Keep Our Doctors campaign? — to oppose it. 
 
Approximately 237 people attended the meeting to voice their 
concerns about the closure of the Plains. Five members of the 
government caucus attended this meeting, including the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Some of their concerns, which have been greatly exaggerated 
by the Liberals, were allayed by the minister in his talk. Here 
are some of the facts. 
 
When the services are consolidated in the Pasqua and the 
General hospitals on October 31, 1998, not a single bed will be 
closed. There will be improved and additional services with the 
addition of an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) and a CAT 
(computerized axial tomography scan) scan. And more 
specialists will be attracted to this modern, state-of-the-art 
health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only disturbing aspect of last night was the 
distortion of facts by the Liberal members and their blatant use 

of innuendo to prey on the minds of the good folks of 
Assiniboia and area. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Bed Shortage 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Day in and day out 
in this session . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order! All hon. members 
will recognize that the hon. member for Arm River is not seated 
all that far away from the Chair here, and has been difficult to 
be heard, and I ask for the House to provide cooperation so that 
he may be heard. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Day in and day out 
during this session, the Liberal opposition is raising concerns 
about the hospital bed crisis in the city of Regina. The Minister 
of Health responds daily, on a daily basis, that we’re 
fearmongering. Perhaps the Minister of Health should read 
today’s Leader-Post on the front page, which says “Surgery 
delayed; Critical care beds filled.” The headline refers to the 
fact that another open heart surgery case was cancelled 
yesterday because of a lack of critical care beds in this city. 
 
What is it going to take for this NDP government to understand 
that our health care system is seriously overburdened? What 
will it take for the NDP to acknowledge the Plains hospital is 
being used to a full capacity and then some. And why does this 
government not realize that if they close the Plains this crisis is 
going to get worse. If this government wants to throw dice, they 
should go down to Casino Regina, Mr. Speaker. Don’t gamble 
with our health care system. Don’t gamble with our lives. 
 

Babcock and Wilcox Expanding in Melville 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, in the great state of Texas you 
can carry a concealed weapon as long as you check it at the 
door before private hospitals that you enter in that state, but 
you’re not guaranteed the right of free collective bargaining on 
your job site. You can pack heat under your coat, Mr. Speaker, 
but you don’t have the right of free association. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, Texas is a right-to-work state, which 
makes it a model for members of the Tory Party, as we have 
found. The members of Cannington, Moosomin, and 
Kindersley, have often in this Assembly spoken honourably of 
the states of Texas and Alabama, where workers have no rights, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They want Saskatchewan to become, as our Premier has said so 
often, an Alabama North. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have bad news 
for them and good news for Saskatchewan. The Babcock and 
Wilcox company, based in Barberton, Ohio will be closing its 
Paris, Texas plant, which manufactures boilers for the power 
generation industry. It is expanding its plants in Ontario and, 
Mr. Speaker, in Melville, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Because of, Mr. Speaker, as pointed out by 
the company, because of the relationship Babcock and Wilcox 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

has with Canada, with its employees, the provincial and federal 
governments, and their agencies. The Melville plant currently 
has 46 employees and plans are to double that number. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is great news from deep in the heart of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Perogy Police Squad 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently an 
article in the Ag World newspaper called “Perogy police can 
ruin a good party” caught my eye. The article stated that an 
official from Sask Health meandered into the curling rink at 
Choiceland announcing that the locals were no longer permitted 
to serve home-prepared food. This means no more home-made 
soups, pies, or perogies. The food served must come from an 
approved facility such as a restaurant or a bake shop. 
 
Is there no end to the overkill of this administration through 
regulatory burden? Are we now to have perogy police and 
cabbage cops patrolling rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Since the birth of this province, Mr. Speaker, and the serving of 
millions of meals at curling rinks . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I hesitate to 
interrupt the hon. member for Humboldt . . . Order! Order. 
Order. I’ll ask for the cooperation of the hon. members on both 
sides of the House to provide for the hon. member for 
Humboldt the opportunity to conclude her members’ statement 
in an uninterrupted manner. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, are we now 
to have perogy police and cabbage cops patrolling rural 
Saskatchewan? Since the birth of this province and the serving 
of millions of meals at curling rinks and pot luck suppers, I am 
not aware of a single fatality as a result of home-prepared foods. 
 
I say to the Minister of Health, lighten up and call off your 
perogy police and cabbage cops. Allow rural Saskatchewan a 
little breathing space. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Citizenship Ceremony at Radisson School 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday afternoon at 
Radisson School in my constituency, a significant citizenship 
ceremony took place; so unique I might add, that it was 
televised last night on the local news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thirty-nine students from grade 5 to 8 reaffirmed 
their Canadian citizenship at that ceremony. Students from 
other grades participated by singing in the choir. Citizenship 
Supervisor Garnet Quigley, representatives from the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police), and the Saskatoon West 
School Division, Mayor Art Meister, and Principal Bill Thon 
also took part. 
 

I was represented by Irene Arrtux, my constituency assistant, at 
the function. The highlight of this ceremony, Mr. Speaker, came 
when one student, Tania Hamp, originally from St. Petersburg, 
Russia, was given her citizenship. Tania was adopted by George 
and Irene Hamp of Radisson and she has been in Canada for 
about a year. 
 
Most of us, I suspect, take our Canadian citizenship and our 
country for granted. It’s pretty easy to become a citizen when 
all you have to do is be born here. 
 
These students, by publicly reaffirming their citizenship, remind 
us that ours is a nation to be proud of, and that citizenship 
within it is both a privilege and a responsibility. 
 
On behalf of Canadians everywhere, I congratulate and 
welcome Tania and I offer my appreciation to Principal Thon 
and teacher, Loretta Harpham for organizing the significant 
event at Radisson School. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
afternoon are for the Premier. The Premier keeps telling us he 
didn’t know anything about Channel Lake or Jack Messer's 
severance. Mr. Premier, on March 4, 1998, the day before he 
was fired, Jack Messer wrote you a memo. The first line of that 
memo reads, “You are no doubt aware of the recent activities 
with respect to Channel Lake as it relates to my future at 
SaskPower.” You are no doubt aware, Jack says. Jack seems to 
think you knew a lot about what was going on. 
 
It’s funny how you keep having these kind of memory lapses, 
Mr. Premier. Since there is no record of your written response, 
you obviously spoke to Jack Messer about this memo. What did 
you say to him? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, obviously we have dealt very succinctly and clearly 
with the issue of severance and Jack Messer. If the member 
opposite would care to listen and pay attention rather than just 
reading from his notes, he would know very clearly that the 
issue of severance was dealt with over a period of time by the 
board of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), coming to the conclusion that the best way to 
deal with the issue of whether or not to pay severance after the 
issue of departure of Mr. Messer was dealt with . . . we came to 
the conclusion that it would be best dealt with by the 
Vice-Chair of SaskPower, in consultation with legal advice. 
And that is the process that was followed. 
 
Now I’m not quite sure which part of that the member from 
Kindersley doesn’t understand, but it was a process set in place 
by the board of CIC, and whatever reaction Mr. Messer had to 
that, he had. The fact of the matter is there was a process. 
We’ve explained it to you. If you’re unwilling to believe it, that 
is a difficult spot for you to be in. But that’s the process that 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

was followed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The part that no one seems to understand is, is 
when the Premier of this province says that he doesn’t know 
anything about this Channel Lake affair, and yet his old buddy, 
his campaign manager, writes to him, pleads for his job. It’s 
pretty hard to believe that the Premier didn’t talk to him about it 
at least. 
 
Since you aren’t going to come to the Crown Corporations 
Committee and to the Channel Lake hearings and testify under 
oath, I guess we’ll just have to ask the questions here. 
 
Mr. Premier, did you speak to Jack Messer about Channel Lake 
prior to the March 4 memo? Did you speak to Jack Messer 
between March 4 and the announcement of his $300,000 
severance package on March 10? What did Jack Messer ask you 
to do and how did you respond? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the member opposite that the issue of severance — I say 
again and I can’t be more emphatic about it — was dealt with 
by the board of CIC. And the way we dealt with it was to give 
the file, give the file to Milt Fair, who in conjunction with legal 
advice came to the conclusion that severance should be paid. 
 
It’s my understanding that there was no consultation or 
discussion with anyone outside of the board of CIC before the 
time that you mention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, I think I know how 
the conversation went. It went something like this. Mr. Premier 
saying Jack, I don’t think I can save you this time but I’ll make 
sure you get a big fat severance package; maybe after the smoke 
clears I’ll find you another job somewhere else. I think maybe 
that’s what happened, Mr. Premier. And I think you should 
come and testify about it under oath. 
 
If that isn’t the way it happened, you should have no problem in 
coming to the committee and testifying. The only reason you 
wouldn’t want to testify is because you have something that you 
don’t want to tell the people of Saskatchewan about with 
respect to this. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you hiding about on this issue? Why 
won’t you stand in your place and respond to the questions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, let me just review the 
file with the member who says that we’re hiding everything 
about the file. On the second day of this session, we brought to 
the House the Deloitte Touche report, which was a lengthy 
document. We also brought a document from CIC outlining the 
parameters of the Channel Lake issue. There have been 
hundreds of questions asked about it. 
 

Today we delivered to the committee a thousand documents, to 
which one of the members in opposition said: “I think it is 
important for the record to show that every single document 
requested by the opposition has now been produced.” 
 
Now look, when your government was in power, Mr. Devine — 
and I remember Mr. Berntson — standing at this desk when we 
asked about various issues and asked for documents. We got not 
one shred of information. Not one item. We delivered to you a 
thousand documents today and you say we’re hiding the facts. 
 
What could be more ridiculous; and why don’t you try reading 
the documents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In fact I think the 
Premier’s had another conversation lately. He has ordered his 
NDP committee members to keep him off the witness stand no 
matter what it takes. But their excuses are getting weaker and 
weaker. The NDP members have said that you will be called 
there if there is evidence that you have something to add. 
 
The committee’s mandate deals with Jack Messer’s termination 
and severance. You’ve already admitted saving Jack Messer’s 
job at least once in the past. This memo shows that Jack Messer 
asked you to save his job one more time around. This memo 
shows that indeed you do have something to add. 
 
Mr. Premier, all of Saskatchewan wants to know: will you 
testify under oath to the committee as requested? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have given this answer 
many, many times before — I’ll give the answer again. Let’s 
get on with the work of the Crown Corporations Committee. A 
report of 150 pages was tabled by us. One thousand documents 
were produced today by us. 
 
There is a work schedule of approximately 20 witnesses who 
are the main players and the main people involved with respect 
to this whole matter, which are going to be coming forward and 
giving evidence. 
 
I have said that if there is something that I can say, of use, to be 
helpful to the investigation or to provide information, the 
committee will make that decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Bed Shortages 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are for the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, you keep telling us that 
hospital bed shortages are just isolated incidents. Another one 
of these isolated incidents appeared on the front page of today’s 
paper. An open-heart surgery patient at the Plains had his 
surgery cancelled due to lack of critical care beds. 
 
Mr. Minister, these isolated incidents are turning into a crisis. 
And all your figures about open beds don’t help, because empty 
beds in the maternity or pediatric ward don’t help if there are no 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

beds available for heart patients. 
 
Mr. Minister, Fred Bordas of SUN (Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses) says it’s a pressure cooker — something is going to 
give and we’re going to have a disaster. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you doing to address this crisis, and 
what sense does it make to close the Plains hospital when there 
is already a critical lack of beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all make 
note to the comment that was made yesterday by the member 
from Moose Mountain in his speech where he said, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when we look at and when we discuss the issue of 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan, it’s not just the 
bricks and mortar and the beds, is what he talks about. 
 
And then the member shows up at a pubic meeting last night on 
the coat-tails of the Liberal meeting — which now I think 
maybe he’s deciding to move across, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 
what he’s doing — and what he then says is that what we need 
to do in this province, Mr. Speaker, is what we need to do in 
this province is that we need to introduce health care premiums, 
is what he says. 
 
And the member opposite today stands up in the House and 
says that we don’t have enough beds. This is the individual who 
believes that we need to protect health care in this province. 
This is the individual and the party, Mr. Speaker, based on the 
information that comes out of the leadership race, where, if they 
ever had an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, we would see health care 
premiums, we’d see the privatization of health services in this 
province. It would be the tearing-down of medicare in this 
province. That’s what this member talks about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it isn’t 
just the opposition who’s concerned about health care. Your 
own polling says that Saskatchewan people see health care as 
the most important issue facing the province today. About 73 
per cent of the people think you’re doing a poor job of 
managing the health care system, Mr. Minister — 73 per cent. 
That’s an overwhelming number that say that you are failing. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you going to do to address the crisis? If 
things are going as well as you say, why do Saskatchewan 
people feel that your government is failing in its management of 
the health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the 
member opposite, first that last weekend, on Friday, Saturday, 
and Sunday at the Plains Health Centre in this province, what 
we did is we did six emergency heart surgeries. And we did six 
emergency heart surgeries, which is over and above the average 
nine that we do on a weekly basis, to deal with the emergency 
situation that we had of people who need heart surgeries in this 
province. 
 

Which says to the people of Saskatchewan that we’re always 
available to provide emergency services whenever they’re 
needed. Whenever they’re needed, we’re always available to 
provide that. Eighty-six per cent of the people who use the 
health care system today say that it is good and excellent — 86 
per cent of the people who use it. 
 
At no time, Mr. Speaker, in this province have we turned away 
anyone who required emergency services. That has always been 
the case, that will continue to be the case, and we will ensure 
that we will provide emergency services to people when they 
need it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, your own polling shows that people 
are fearful of the health care system under your control. Even 
last night, Mr. Minister, you heard people telling you that you 
weren’t listening; while you were speaking, you were not 
listening to what people were trying to say. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you and your government . . . Or Mr. 
Premier, maybe I should be addressing you this question too. 
When are you going to start listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan and addressing the concerns they have in regards 
to health care in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 
allocated in this budget which is currently before the House 
under debate, the largest expenditure to Health in the history of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we’re doing it in the face of cut-backs by the federal 
Liberal government; cut-backs which are destroying or 
threatening — I’ll put that word more correctly — threatening 
the very fabric of medicare in not only Canada but other regions 
of this country, including parts of Saskatchewan; although we 
backfilled every penny and every dollar of the way back. And 
on top of that have added $88 million. That’s what we’ve done 
for health care. And we’ve reformed. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that when we finish with respect 
to the renovations to the General and Pasqua Hospital, we are 
going to have the best quality of health care for southern 
Saskatchewan ever in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Ambulance Service 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 12, 1996, 
I lost a dear friend in Jake Alcrow. Mr. Alcrow is dearly missed 
by his friends, his family, and the entire community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to relate the incidents leading to his death. 
Jake was visiting friends in Buffalo Narrows when he was 
rushed into the health clinic there with chest pains. On 
examination the doctor felt he needed further examination and 
was unable to do so without an ECG (electrocardiogram) 
machine. Jake was then to be sent to the hospital in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, Jake was not sent to the neighbouring hospital 45 
minutes away by an emergency transportation vehicle. He was 
not sent by an ambulance or by air ambulance. Mr. Speaker, he 
was sent by a taxi. Another example of northern Saskatchewan 
people being treated as second-class citizens. Jake Alcrow was 
placed in that taxi with an intravenous infusion line in 
operation, but without the escort of a nurse or any qualified 
medical person. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you again, is a taxi cab with no medical 
personnel or medical equipment an appropriate emergency care 
transportation method that should be used to transport critically 
injured or critically ill patients, as in Mr. Alcrow’s case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend 
my best regards to the member opposite on the loss of his dear 
friend. Any time that that happens to any one of us our 
condolences are paid, and I pay tribute to you today for the loss 
of your dear friend. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that today in northern 
Saskatchewan, we have just agreed that we will have two new 
district health boards. These two district health boards are going 
to ensure that into the future — into the future, Mr. Speaker — 
we’re going to have better health care services than we have 
today. 
 
Now there isn’t any question that access to southern 
Saskatchewan facilities is not easy. It’s not any issue of course, 
that we know that sometimes the transportation system that we 
have in the northern part of the province needs additional 
access. No question about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what we’re doing about it is speaking with our federal 
friends, because the air travel out of the North requires that kind 
of participation. We’re continuing to work with the district 
health care services there, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we can 
enrich the quality of services in the North. That’s what we’re 
doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My friend Mr. 
Alcrow died 20 minutes after being loaded into that taxi. He 
died with no one there and no one to immediately administer 
CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation) or to ease his pain as he 
died. In fact he died alone. 
 
Mr. Minister, two weeks ago you said, and I quote: discussions 
are currently under way to enhance services in those areas. We 
want to provide the people who live in the northern part of this 
province . . . 

 
I say to this Assembly, the residents of northern Saskatchewan 
cannot wait for another study. They cannot wait for this 
government to continue finger-pointing at the federal Liberal 
government and we cannot wait any longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do not want another study on health services, 
particularly road ambulance services. We need them. This is 
another, common example of health care service in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 

The level of health care in rural Saskatchewan is embarrassing, 
Mr. Speaker, but in the North it’s truly prehistoric. Will the 
Minister of Health get up in the Assembly today and tell us 
what discussions are taking place and what day and when will 
he make a provincial commitment to the residents of northern 
Saskatchewan to provide them with fair and adequate road 
ambulance services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First I want to 
say to the member opposite that rural services in Saskatchewan 
today, outside of the northern communities, have been enriched 
and enhanced in a significant fashion. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, we have included in our last budget, 
additional funding for rural physicians in the province; 25 
million additional dollars to assist us with physician services in 
the province, of which $5.5 million is going to be used for the 
rural on-call services. That’s going to be in southern part of the 
province. 
 
When I say to the member opposite about northern 
Saskatchewan that we need to do additional work, and it’s not a 
criticism of our partnership with the federal government, which 
he has some anxiety about, but the federal government in 
northern Saskatchewan has responsibilities. And so we sit down 
with the federal government and we say to them that we need to 
enhance this partnership so that we can provide better road 
ambulance services, so that we can put more funding into air 
travel into the northern part of the province. 
 
That kind of work today is undertaken and it includes people 
who are sitting on the northern boards who are of aboriginal 
extraction. Aboriginal people sitting at the table for the first 
time ever, making decisions on the quality and the level of 
health care services that they’re going to get in the future. 
That’s the partnership approach that we’ve used in developing 
those services in the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
This morning the NDP members of the Channel Lake inquiry 
voted against adding your name to the witness list despite your 
stated willingness to come. They said you wouldn’t have 
anything relevant to add. Well, Mr. Premier, you know that’s 
not the case. 
 
The Liberal opposition has learned that in 1996 you intervened 
with Jack Messer to encourage the firing of Lawrence Portigal, 
the same Lawrence Portigal who had earlier been fired by the 
Tories and paid a severance of $327,000. I know you have some 
difficulty remembering intervening in Channel Lake affairs and 
the management of SaskPower and the firing of officials, but do 
you recall being involved in asking Jack Messer to get rid of 
Lawrence Portigal in 1996? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I did not 
speak to Jack Messer to get rid of Lawrence Portigal in 1996, to 
the best of my recollection. 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

Mr. Hillson: — Do you recall, Mr. Premier, being in a room 
full of people, saying, why is Lawrence Portigal still around? 
The clear reference being to get rid of him. Do you recall that it 
was after that that Mr. Messer wrote a letter advising Mr. 
Portigal that his services would be terminated on December 20? 
However they were not terminated and he continued on from 
December 20, 1996, through the events of 1997 which of course 
are now before the inquiry. 
 
Will you admit that there are many questions which can only be 
answered by you, sir, and that therefore you’re attendance is 
required before the committee if the committee is to do its full 
work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the question is I think in 
two parts. I’ve given the answer with respect to Mr. Portigal 
and I take the position, I will tell the member this now, that it is 
the job of the manager, the CEO (chief executive officer) or the 
deputy minister to be responsible for the people who work and 
report to the CEO or to the deputy minister. I don’t 
micro-manage. That is the way the process works and the 
decisions are made by the management and by the board of 
directors. 
 
With respect to attendance at the Crown Corporations, you have 
over a thousand documents plus the 150 tabled, plus 20 
witnesses which are going to be there testifying, and I repeat 
again what I’ve said to the hon. members of the Tory Party over 
there which I say to you: if there is, after the full examination of 
the documentation and the questioning of the witnesses 
involved, any other matters which need clarification or I can 
add some information to, I’d be more than pleased to help. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board Survivor Benefits 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 
Minister of Labour spoke eloquently about the tragedy of 
work-related accidents and the hardship suffered by those who 
have lost their loved one under such circumstances. Many 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan have been denied 
pension benefits and they’re asking this government to amend 
the necessary legislation that would rectify this injustice. 
 
My question to the minister this afternoon is quite simple. Will 
his government be restoring pension benefits to those who have 
been denied monthly payments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member for this important question. The people concerned 
met with the board representatives some few weeks or even 
months ago and put their case to them. I have asked the board 
for a report on the issue, including an estimate of the costs 
involved, and I’m still awaiting that report. When that report is 
in hand, then I will take the matter to cabinet with a 
recommendation, and at this point I’m not able to say what that 
recommendation will be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, widows in British Columbia 
have had all of their benefits restored retroactively with interest; 
in fact they had their court costs paid for. The province of 
Ontario settled in January. 
 
The widows and widowers of Saskatchewan approached the 
Workers’ Compensation Board last October and they agreed at 
that point to a 30-day time frame. They were told in November 
that the details of research into their requests would be 
completed by January. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is now April, and I’m wondering if you’d 
please explain to this House why WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) and your government have been dragging 
their heels on this important matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, the . . . we are aware of 
course of the British Columbia and the Ontario situation. I think 
that the initial estimate of time on behalf of the board was, to 
say the least, optimistic. It has taken them much longer than 
they expected to do a search of the file to see how many of the 
files . . . to see how many such claims there would be, and what 
the total cost would be. 
 
I’m told that the actuarial work on the matter will be completed 
by about the end of this month, but it’s sort of outside my 
control. The board has not been dragging its feet on the matter 
— I think they just didn’t understand the amount of work that 
would be involved in being able to make a complete report to 
the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — The Ontario legislature took from August 
22, 1997 to the beginning of January, 1998 to have cheques in 
hand to Ontario widows. They were dealing with a far greater 
number of people than the numbers we’re dealing with in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It has taken the Saskatchewan 
government absolutely months just to establish the actuary for 
approximately 300 people; and can and will you tell these 
widows why — why is it taking that long? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — If the Ontario board acted that quickly 
— and I accept the member’s statement that they did — then 
they acted with incomplete information, which probably 
explains why that board is so many billions of dollars in deficit. 
We’re not in deficit in Saskatchewan; our board is in a very 
strong financial position, and part of the explanation for that is 
that they don’t go off half cocked, making decisions before the 
necessary research work is done to be sure that the decision is a 
well-founded one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College Gets New Home 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased today to inform all hon. members about an important 
announcement that I participated in yesterday concerning the 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College. 
 
This government is committed to investing in Saskatchewan 
people, and education is the best investment that we can make. 
The Saskatchewan Indian Federated College meets an urgent 
need for the fastest growing segment of Saskatchewan’s 
society, the aboriginal population. This important and unique 
institution is getting a new home, a home befitting its national 
and international stature. 
 
SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) is the only first 
nations-controlled university in North America. All SIFC 
programs are fully accredited through their agreement with the 
University of Regina, and the new facility will be built on the U 
of R (University of Regina) campus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a special relationship of cooperation and 
mutual effort between the University of Regina and the SIFC. 
And certainly one of the things that characterized the whole 
announcement yesterday was the maturity of the relationship 
between all of the partners there. Many students take classes 
from both institutions; 15 per cent of the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College students are non-aboriginal. 
 
In recognition of the Government of Saskatchewan’s 
responsibility, we have increased SIFC’s operating grant to $1.5 
million. This has enabled the SIFC to obtain 5 million in 
financing for the exciting project, which includes a significant 
capital construction from the federal government and 
substantial capital fund-raising by SIFC. 
 
The SIFC students will share a learning environment and 
potential partnerships with the University of Regina’s new, 
high-tech research park and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) Wascana campus. It was very 
touching, Mr. Speaker, to see the students cry in joy over being 
able to have this new facility that either they themselves or their 
children will graduate from. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I predict that this new SIFC building will 
become a powerful symbol of the wisdom and practicality of 
Saskatchewan people. It’ll certainly take us into the 
Saskatchewan of the future. And it’ll be a sign that we are 
willing to learn from our past and build a positive future for 
young people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to indeed begin by congratulating the 
aboriginal community here in Regina and all across 
Saskatchewan for finally being able to formulate a deal that will 
provide, I think a very quality institute to the province of 
Saskatchewan and to the city of Regina. 
 
While we note that the capital construction of this project is in 
excess of $21 million, we still see that there is a need to indeed 
ensure that all monies are to be provided. I understand that a 
potential loan, an additional amount of approximately $8 
million, is still required. 
 
And I would hope that the aboriginal community is successful 
in its efforts to indeed establish a working relationship with new 

partners, because I think that’s what’s going to be needed. I 
think we’re going to have to have businesses, and we’re going 
to have to have other people, join in to ensure that this project is 
successful. 
 
I think what it also does to students . . . I mean education is 
very, very important to everyone in this province. And when we 
see that students will be able to enjoy, I believe a 
state-of-the-art facility, the fact that it will be coordinated into 
one institution to allow greater access — not only for aboriginal 
students, as the minister mentioned . . . There are 
non-aboriginal people who are also taking classes through the 
federated Indian college. 
 
So I think what this says is that we have the opportunity to 
improve — to improve programs, to improve program delivery, 
to ensure that the programs offered through SIFC are 
recognized province-wide and indeed that we establish a greater 
amount of numbers of people that will be educated through this 
new system. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to rise today to respond to the minister’s statement in 
reference to the SIFC accomplishment. 
 
As an aboriginal person, I want to personally commend both the 
federal government and the provincial government on the 
initiative that they participated in, and certainly the support and 
help they offered to the SIFC and the builders of that particular 
dream. 
 
I share with the Assembly that I think it’s very important that 
the people understand in the future, we’re all going to work in a 
cross-cultural environment. The future of the population trends, 
the demographics of Saskatchewan, and the economy itself 
simply dictates that we have to have efforts of this nature under 
way. And certainly the aboriginal community had their hand 
extended over a period of years to try and accomplish that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the aboriginal people look at this as clearly an 
investment. And any government that invests in making the 
aboriginal people become part and parcel of Saskatchewan, of 
the economy, of the social fabric, of the culture, is something 
that we all want to become part of, should be commended. 
 
So on behalf of the aboriginal people and certainly on behalf of 
the constituents of Athabasca, I once again commend both the 
federal and provincial governments on their initiative. 
 
I also want to point out some of the positive spin-offs as a result 
of the SIFC establishment. And that was a point you made quite 
clearly and quite often at the Assembly . . . or at the gathering, 
was that over the next 20 years, some of the spin-offs in terms 
of the economic growth as a result of it, SIFC, could be as high 
as $1.9 billion. So that’s something that we should all be aware 
of and something that we have to recognize and respect. 
 
(1430) 
 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

And the other factor, Madam Minister, is yes, Regina has 
accomplished a great deal. And yes, SIFC has accomplished a 
great deal. And often we speak about the hard work and the 
determination and the coordination of all parties. And I would 
not do justice to begin to name names because we’d be here for 
a number of weeks, if not months. 
 
But the clear thing, Madam Minister, is in the future we must 
look to other regions in the province. For example, Saskatoon. 
For example . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The hon. member has 
been lengthy in his response to a ministerial statement and has 
already taken more time in responding to the statement than the 
original statement itself. I will ask him to very quickly conclude 
his statement. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just can’t say 
enough of this. I’m again very honoured to stand here today and 
say I’m very proud of the work being done by all parties and I 
urge you to continue along that path. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 22  The Electronic Filing of Information Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 22, The 
Electronic Filing of Information Act be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 23  The Statute Law Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 23, The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 1998 be now introduced and read 
for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 24 — The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 24, The 
Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1998 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Pipelines Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 25, 
The Pipelines Act, 1998 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Resignation of Member for Saskatoon Eastview 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day, I 
wish to advise the Assembly of correspondence that I have 
received dated today and addressed to the Speaker, and is 
received from the hon. member for Saskatoon Eastview: 
 

I wish to advise you and the Assembly of my resignation 
as the Member for Saskatoon Eastview, effective today. 
 
As I recently indicated in the House, the past ten years has 
been a wonderful experience for me. All honourable 
members take pride in representing their constituents and 
this privilege has been very rewarding for me. 
 
Thanks to the residents of Saskatoon Eastview, to yourself, 
Mr. Speaker, to all honourable members for their 
friendship and co-operation, to the legislative staff, and to 
my loving family, Gwen, Darren, Dean, and Joanne for 
their love and devotion. 
 
May the spirit of compassion, co-operation and good will 
continue to guide decision making in the Assembly. 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
Bob Pringle, MLA 
Saskatoon Eastview 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, by leave, 
to introduce a motion. Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the 
following motion . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the hon. member 
just to advise the House as to the nature of the motion she 
wishes to introduce by leave. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, is to request the Speaker to issue a 
subpoena as recorded earlier in my Crown Corporations 
Committee report. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Request for Subpoena 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Coronation Park: 
 

That this Assembly requests the Speaker, pursuant to 
section 20(1) of The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act, to issue a subpoena to summon the attendance 
of Mr. Don McKillop of the Department of Justice of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, before the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations at its meeting on 
Wednesday, April 15, 1998 at 9 a.m., and that he do 
produce the following documents at that time: 
 
(1) All written legal opinions in the possession of 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, the Crown Investments 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

Corporation, and the Government of Saskatchewan 
touching upon the terms of reference of the Channel Lake 
Petroleum Ltd. investigation in the Standing Committee on 
Crown Corporations; and 
 
(2) The long-term gas supply agreement between 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation and Direct Energy 
Marketing Limited and its three ancillary documents. 
 

I move that, seconded by the member from Regina Coronation 
Park. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Deputy Whip 
it’s my pleasure to table the response to question no. 23. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I will ask the hon. members . . . 
The Chair was unable to hear the indication of the 
government’s Deputy Whip regarding the status of the response 
to question 23. And I would ask the Deputy Whip to please 
advise the House again. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the spirit of 
goodwill that you read from the letter from a member from 
Eastview, I am tabling the response to question no. 23. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 23 is tabled. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also pleased to 
table the response to question no. 24. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to question 24 is tabled. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now move that 
this motion be converted to a motion for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Return No. 7 is converted to motions for 
returns (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Moosomin: 
 

That notwithstanding Rule 3(4) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
that when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, April 9, 
1998, it do stand adjourned until Wednesday, April 15, at 
1:30 p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Correctional Services 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The Correctional Services Amendment 
Act, 1998. The Correctional Services Amendment Act provides 
authority for the establishment of correctional facilities and 
correctional programs. It sets out the rules respecting 
administration of correctional facilities and services. 
 
Significant changes were made to the legislation in 1993. These 
changes have now been in force for several years. During this 
time we’ve had an opportunity to monitor the effect of the 
changes and determine what gaps needed to be filled and what 
clarifications were required in the existing legislation. The 
proposed amendments address these requirements. 
 
The Correctional Services Act presently permits the transfer of 
inmates between, from, and into correctional facilities, but 
specifies it must be done “with the approval of the executive 
director of corrections.” An amendment will clarify the ability 
of the executive director to delegate this function to directors of 
facilities. Since there are approximately 2,200 transfers 
annually, it is neither practical nor desirable that the executive 
director should personally authorize all inmate movements from 
one facility to another in order to authorize inmates to 
participate in approved programs. 
 
The executive director should be required to make transfer 
decisions only in cases where there are definite issues of public 
safety, cost, or inmate conditions of care. Assessment of inmate 
risk has traditionally been, and should remain, the responsibility 
of the directors of the facilities. 
 
A further amendment will provide that the rules of the receiving 
facility will apply during the transfer. This will ensure 
consistency with recent changes to the federal Prisons and 
Reformatories Act regarding transfer of inmates between 
facilities. Transfers of inmates between federal and provincial 
facilities occur on a regular basis. 
 
Another amendment clarifies that the approved public places 
that an inmate uses while participating in a community training 
program are only considered part of a facility while being used 
by an inmate for the purposes of the program and according to 
the terms of the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments also extend the protection from 
liability provisions to correctional services volunteers. As these 
volunteers are performing important functions on behalf of the 
government, it is appropriate to extend this liability protection 
to volunteers. Community justice committees are specifically 
included in this provision. These committees are comprised of 
volunteers who participate in the delivery of adult diversion 
programing. 
 
A similar provision extending protection from liability to 
community justice committees respecting young offenders was 
added to The Young Offenders’ Services Act in 1997. Without 
this limited exemption from liability, it is difficult to expect 
volunteers to take on these tasks. 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

All of these amendments facilitate ongoing programs. They will 
contribute to the smooth functioning of correctional services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Correctional Services Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
colleagues and I have been taking some time to review the 
legislation that’s before us, the Bill that the minister has just 
been brought . . . bringing forward. However, Mr. Speaker, we 
do feel it’s important to take some time to look a little more 
closely at this piece of legislation. 
 
I certainly commend the minister for looking at the legislation 
and reviewing some of the policies in the past and determining 
where corrections can be made. And I would gather from some 
of the comments made even this afternoon in clarifying the 
reasons for this piece of legislation, that the minister has 
conferred with a number of people and they’ve come to some 
conclusions that I think are certainly appropriate. 
 
(1445) 
 
The fact that to date only the executive director of a correction 
facility is able to delegate authority, when you look at, I believe 
the minister talked about some 2,200 transfers that take place 
annually, it certainly seems appropriate that the executive 
director can give authority to directors of facilities to facilitate 
the transfers of inmates and allow for the process to run 
smoothly rather than having to follow a chain of command. And 
that we all know, Mr. Speaker, does take time and I think that 
certainly will be something positive in regards to how inmates 
are dealt with and certainly how correctional officers are able to 
perform their duties as well. Probably take away some of the 
paperwork that they have to deal with on an ongoing basis. 
 
The area dealing with the transfer of prisoners from facility A to 
facility B and being subject to the rules and regulations of 
facility A, changing that to facility B, following the rules, I’m 
not exactly sure on that process. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s an 
area I think we can certainly — as we debate the legislation 
before us a little further and certainly get into committee — we 
can converse with the minister and get some clarification as to 
how that impacts and how that improves the transfers that do 
take place. And so we look forward to further debate in regards 
to this part of the legislation. 
 
I think it’s also important, Mr. Speaker, and I think for those of 
us who were able to attend the Saskatchewan Prayer Breakfast 
Committee this morning, the speaker at the committee talked 
about Saskatchewan as a place of voluntarism, a place where 
people do volunteer their time and services. And I understand 
even in correctional centres we do have many instances where 
there are volunteers or people giving volunteer time. 
 
And I believe it’s appropriate that the department certainly 
amend the Act to extend protection to correctional services 
volunteers and community justice committees. I think that’s 
important; it’s important if we expect people to continue to 
offer their services and volunteer their time and efforts. Without 
that protection . . . And we know in this day and age how easy it 

is for people to file suits or to make accusations against other 
individuals dealing in circumstances such as people are dealing 
with in regards to providing services to our Justice department 
and to the inmates of this province. It’s important that we treat 
all people equally. 
 
I think what the minister is saying is that we are going to do 
that. We’re recognizing that there was a little glitch here. I don’t 
think there was any intention in the Act originally not to 
recognize this, but I think it just . . . what it does is it just 
confirms what the department has probably viewed all along but 
never was technically before us in legislation. 
 
So it’s something that as opposition members we look at very 
positively. 
 
So with those few comments in mind, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
appropriate for us to take a little more time to review the Bill 
before us. And with that, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Public Utilities Easements 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Public Utilities Easements Amendment Act, 
1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Public Utilities Easements Act provides a 
process that allows a landowner to voluntarily reach an 
agreement with a company in order to grant that company an 
easement to cross or use the landowner’s land. This new interest 
in land, the easement, may then be registered in the Land Titles 
Office. 
 
It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that the Act deals only with 
rights voluntarily granted by the owner of the land and in no 
way provides for access to land by a public utility where the 
landowner does not consent. Without this Act, there would be 
no easily identifiable way for parties to reach an agreement for 
an easement that can be registered in the land titles system. 
 
When this Act first came into force in 1950, it did not foresee 
the new types of interests and the new types of companies that 
would develop in Saskatchewan. For example, CO2 pipelines 
and cable television companies were simply beyond the 
contemplation of this legislation at the time it was introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is intended to introduce the flexibility 
necessary to consider accommodating new technologies and 
new types of companies as they develop. It will permit a 
prescribed company to receive prescribed rights in the form of a 
public utility easement from the landowner. For example, CO2 
pipelines could be expressly included in the regulations as a 
prescribed right for which a public utilities easement could be 
granted by a landowner. By building this flexibility into the 
Act, desirable business and economic developments will not be 
delayed by an inability to properly register and protect those 
interests. By voluntary agreement with the company involved, 
landowners can agree on the terms and conditions they deem fit 
to grant a variety of rights to such a prescribed company. 
 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is committed to 
the concept that the best solution to any problem is an 
agreement between the parties involved. With these 
amendments, new types of companies and new types of 
technologies will gain access to a voluntary process for 
establishing easement rights on real property. 
 
No decisions have yet been made as to the individual rights and 
the individual companies that may be set out in the regulations. 
This will be the subject of further consultations; however, with 
this flexibility incorporated into the Act, these Act’s issues can 
now be considered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Public Utilities Easements Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In regards to The Public 
Utilities Easement Amendment Act, 1998, the minister I believe 
talked about making it easier to reach voluntary easement 
agreements. And I guess one of the issues that I have in regards 
to this — and it really isn’t a big issue — it seems to me on 
many occasions just thinking back to times when, as a 
landowner, a property owner, have been approached by 
companies — whether it’s SaskPower to build a power line, or 
whether it’s natural gas to put through a gas line — we’ve 
always I believe, had the opportunity to sit down, and 
companies have come and certainly sought approval before 
they’ve moved across property and sought the approval of the 
landowner. 
 
And I guess I’ve just taken it for granted that that was 
something that was always there. We’ve always . . . but I 
suppose on many occasions companies may find that there are 
hindrances when they, when they try to come to agreement with 
landowners regarding easements and the ability to move across 
public property in order to provide a service to the community 
or to the public in general. 
 
In my mind, as I look at this piece of legislation, I don’t see it as 
being a major piece of legislation that really has a lot of 
hang-ups or things that would hold up the piece of legislation. 
 
But it seems to me that it certainly would be appropriate for the 
opposition members of the Assembly to take the time to do 
some more consultation and make sure that we do understand 
what the legislation is doing, follow it up a little more clearly. 
And indeed if there are concerns to be addressed in regards to 
the legislation, there are issues or questions that we may have 
missed or that people feel may not be addressed as clearly as 
the legislation may appear to be, that it would be important for 
us to take that time to review those questions. 
 
I believe the minister has talked about the fact that this covers a 
number of companies and it covers a lot of public companies, 
utilities as well. It grants companies the opportunity to carry 
wires or cables or conductors, telephone electrical lines or for 
spur tracks, snow fences, drainage ditches, sewer pipes and 
water pipes across landowners’ property. And I think that’s 
something that most of us in Saskatchewan are most likely 
aware of as the result of a number of the operations that have 
taken place over the past number of years. 
 
And the delivery of services, whether it be natural gas or 

whether it be power lines or whether it be sewer lines or 
whatever we’re dealing with, or even CO2 pipelines as we see 
are now being expanded in the province of Saskatchewan . . . 
And certainly when we talk about CO2, we think about natural 
gas and we think about some of the problems that may result, 
and certainly we’ve seen that just in last fall, a couple of 
explosions on natural gas lines. I think most people would look 
at CO2 lines, they would see them as fairly volatile too, and you 
would want to make sure that they’re carefully laid down. And 
I’m sure that when it comes to a line such as that, a property 
owner may have some questions or concerns in the regards of 
laying such lines. 
 
So it’s a . . . Mr. Speaker, I guess it is . . . we look at any piece 
of legislation. It’s important that we do take the time to address 
concerns, to talk to people who would be directly affected, get 
their opinions; so that we indeed can address any concerns 
directly with the minister as we get into further debate on such a 
piece of legislation. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Saskatchewan Evidence 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to move 
the second reading of The Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment 
Act, 1998. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is concerned about those 
who are most vulnerable in our society. Therefore we are very 
pleased to introduce this Bill that will facilitate the participation 
of vulnerable people in the civil justice system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill implements some of the 
recommendations of the steering committee on the abuse of 
adults in vulnerable circumstances and also provides further 
support for vulnerable adults. 
 
In December of 1997, the steering committee on the abuse of 
adults in vulnerable circumstances presented its report and 
recommendation to the ministers of Justice, Health, Social 
Services, Labour, and Municipal Government. 
 
The steering committee is made up of representatives of 
community agencies and provincial government departments 
concerned about the abuse of vulnerable adults. The steering 
committee’s report and recommendations follow extensive 
community consultations respecting the abuse of adults in 
vulnerable circumstances. 
 
Specifically, the committee focused on older adults and adults 
with disabilities who because of their circumstances, may be 
vulnerable to abuse or neglect. The steering committee’s 
consultations reveal that adults in vulnerable circumstances find 
access to the justice system to be an issue. 
 
As witnesses, their stories may not be believed or their evidence 
may be deemed unacceptable. This is a problem particularly for 
those with intellectual disabilities, mental illnesses, or 
communication problems. 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

 
Mr. Speaker, one of the proposed amendments will allow a 
witness who has difficulty communicating evidence because of 
a mental or physical disability to testify behind a screen or 
outside the courtroom. This process will allow witnesses to feel 
more comfortable while giving their testimony and it will 
facilitate the courts’ receipt of valid evidence. 
 
The Saskatchewan Evidence Act already contains a similar 
provision with respect to children which will be extended to 
include vulnerable adults. The provision is used when it is the 
judge’s opinion that excluding a witness from the courtroom or 
allowing his or her testimony to take place behind a screen 
would assist the court in obtaining full and candid evidence. 
Arrangements are made for other parties and the judge and jury 
to watch the proceedings on closed circuit television. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal Criminal Code contains a similar 
provision that applies to both children and adults who have 
difficulty communicating evidence because of mental or 
physical disabilities. 
 
Another amendment, Mr. Speaker, will authorize the use of 
videotaped evidence by vulnerable adults. Again The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Act already contains a similar 
provision with respect to the evidence of children. 
 
The steering committee recommended extending this provision 
to adults with disabilities affecting memory or ability to recall. 
This would include persons with intellectual disabilities and 
persons with cognitive impairments or psychiatric illnesses that 
affect memory or recall. 
 
The provision will also be extended to adults who may have 
difficulty communicating their evidence because of mental or 
physical disabilities. The federal government is considering 
such an amendment to the Criminal Code, which contains a 
similar provision with respect to children. 
 
This provision states that videotaped statements are admissible 
as evidence if the videotape was made within a reasonable time 
after the events occurred and the vulnerable adult adopts the 
contents of the videotape in his or her testimony. 
 
The third amendment, Mr. Speaker, will allow witnesses under 
14 and witnesses who have difficulty communicating because 
of mental or physical disabilities to have support persons with 
them when they testify, if the court is of the view that the 
proper administration of justice requires this. Again this 
amendment was recommended by the steering committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the Criminal Code a judge may allow a 
witness under the age of 14 to have a support person close to 
him or her while testifying. The support person sits next to the 
witness or in the body of the court; however the judge may 
order that the support person and witness not communicate 
during the testimony of the witness. The support person’s 
function is to provide emotional support to the witness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a further amendment will allow witnesses who 
have difficulty communicating by reason of physical or mental 
disabilities to give evidence by any means that enables the 
evidence to be intelligible. Another amendment will allow 

witnesses to identify accused persons visually or by other 
sensory means. The federal government is considering similar 
amendments to the Canada Evidence Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan government is very concerned 
about the abuse of adults in vulnerable circumstances. The 
proposed amendments to The Saskatchewan Evidence Act 
demonstrate the government’s commitment to responding to the 
recommendations of the steering committee on the abuse of 
adults in vulnerable circumstances and to protecting the 
interests of vulnerable people in our community. 
 
In closing, I would like to thank the steering committee, and all 
those with whom the committee consulted, for their thoughtful 
examination of the difficult issues facing adults in vulnerable 
circumstances in our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I listened 
to the minister present his reasons and arguments for the pieces 
of the legislation, Bill No. 4, The Saskatchewan Evidence 
Amendment Act. 
 
It would certainly appear that there are some very sound ideas 
that have been brought forward — in fact some very sound 
suggestions and reasons for this piece of legislation. And I too 
would commend the steering committee for some of the work, 
just on the surface of what I see in the legislation that’s brought 
before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think even in this Assembly, being here the first 
time, most of us found it just a little intimidating to stand up 
and speak in the Assembly, speaking on behalf of our 
constituents. While we felt we were carrying out our 
responsibility to the people who elected us to stand and speak 
here, when you come into an auditorium such as we have here 
and you’re a new member and there’s a number of members 
that have been around for awhile, it is somewhat intimidating 
and it takes awhile to get used to that. 
 
And certainly, whether or not you have some disabilities, like 
some people in our society, even to be in a courtroom or to be 
called as a witness, I can assure you it can be very intimidating 
as well. And for those who may face or do have the unfortunate 
task of having disabilities, and to face the pressures of trying to 
testify in a court hearing, this piece of legislation . . . And 
certainly, while the minister acknowledged that a judge could 
make a decision on behalf of a witness, I believe this piece of 
legislation goes a little bit further in addressing a number of 
those concerns and in helping individuals feel more comfortable 
and preparing them, which would allow them to basically 
answer and present the truth to the best of their ability in a more 
comfortable way and a less intimidating form. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate that this 
steering committee has certainly followed . . . and the 
Department of Justice has followed the guidelines and the 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

wishes of the steering committee in being a little more 
forthright, rather than always leaving the issue at the discretion 
of a judge. Especially when you already have a trial in progress 
and then you have to go through the debate that may take place 
in determining whether or not a witness is given the opportunity 
to either give testimony outside of the court and use a video 
camera in the court or, as also indicated, by the use of a screen. 
 
And we all know that the process of having a trial proceed takes 
some time. And, Mr. Speaker, to have a debate pursued about 
the fact of whether or not this specific witness should have 
these provisions and have an argument in the court, this I 
believe would certainly allow opportunity for the court to make 
that determination ahead of time. And it would allow, I would 
suggest as well, possibly even a speedier process to a court 
proceeding. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, as I look at the piece of legislation, 
look at the information that’s been brought forward, it certainly 
appears that there are some very good and very positive 
recommendations that are coming forward in this piece of 
legislation and recommendations that this legislation is 
addressing — issues that I believe certainly will, and I hope 
will, enhance the role of the courts and the recognition of the 
rights of individuals. And recognizing the fact that there are 
people in our society that we need to give a little more thought 
and caring consideration to. 
 
And I believe that’s what the minister is talking about in this 
piece of legislation as well, what his department is trying to 
address. The concerns that . . . and even the fact that in our day 
and age we do have, even amongst our population, having some 
very grave concerns about the whole process of justice and how 
it’s conducted. 
 
And this piece of legislation just goes a little further in 
addressing some of the concerns that are out there. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think as I look at this piece of legislation, I believe 
that there are some real positive amendments and suggestions 
that are coming forward with the legislation that we see before 
us. 
 
And while I’m not here saying we’re just ready to move into 
committee today, I believe, Mr. Speaker, there are some very 
positive and sound recommendations that are being brought 
forward in this piece of legislation and we look forward to 
addressing them even further in the future. 
 
However at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The Trustee Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
The Trustee Act governs the appointment and discharge of 
trustees, the investment and administrative powers of trustees, 
and the remuneration of trustees. The proposed amendments 
respond to the need to update the rules respecting trustees’ 
investment powers. 

The changes will replace the restrictive list of authorized trustee 
investments with an investment power comparable in scope to 
that usually conferred by well-drafted trust instruments. 
 
The changes are based upon proposed legislation adopted by the 
Uniform Law Conference of Canada. The Law Reform 
Commissions of Ontario and Manitoba have recommended 
similar changes. The “prudent persons” standard has been 
adopted in other legislation, such as financial institution and 
pension legislation. It is also used in the trustee legislation in 
several provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new provision will allow trustees to invest in 
any form of property in which a reasonable, prudent person 
might invest. This will provide greater flexibility to trustees in 
choosing investments that balance the need for a reasonable rate 
of return on investments, with the need for trustees to invest in 
secure investments. 
 
The “prudent person” standard is in essence a statement of the 
common law duty of care and skill required of trustees in 
discharging their duties on behalf of the trust and its 
beneficiaries. The new provision requires that when trustees are 
investing trust property, they must act with the same degree of 
skill, diligence, and judgement as a prudent investor. 
 
The adoption of this approach to trustee investments permits 
flexibility in choice of investments to meet changing economic 
conditions. It reflects the realization that every investor must 
take account of the economic cycles and market movements and 
be in a position to adjust his or her portfolio to respond to 
changes. 
 
The legal-list approach presently in The Trustee Act is not 
capable of adapting to ever-changing economic and financial 
conditions because it is too restrictive. The flexibility and 
diversification that the “prudent person” concept brings to 
investment choices are characteristics that are vital to the 
well-being of any trust in today’s economy. 
 
The Act will set out criteria a trustee must consider when 
making investments. The criteria directs the trustee’s attention 
to considerations that are relevant to the development of a 
successful investment strategy. The legislation requires the 
trustee to diversify investments to the extent appropriate in the 
circumstances. Diversification is a feature of good investment 
strategy that is important enough to warrant the imposition of 
an express duty to diversify. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, under the new provisions, trustees are 
being given the authority to rely on competent investment 
advice. Trust law assumes that trustees will exercise their own 
judgement and discretion. Their ability to rely on investment 
advice without express power to do so is in some doubt. These 
amendments remove that doubt. Similarly, under general trust 
law, a trustee needs to be wary of delegating authority unless 
the document establishing the trust gives the trustee the express 
power to delegate the function. Delegation of some authority to 
an investment manager will frequently be a normal and prudent 
act on the part of present-day investors. Thus this Act updates a 
trustee’s ability to appoint agents and delegate authority to 
agents. 
 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

Mr. Speaker, the powers given to the trustee by these new 
legislative provisions will continue to be subject to the terms of 
the trust. This Act also limits a trustee’s liability in the event of 
a loss on the value of investments if the trustee has acted 
prudently. It is intended to protect trustees whose overall 
investment activity and strategy are sound. They will not be 
held in breach of trust merely because individual investment 
decisions may appear to have been imprudent when viewed in 
isolation, with the benefit of hindsight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation responds to requests from a 
number of sources to review the current statutory restrictions on 
trustee investments. This is primarily because the restrictive list 
prevents trustees from investing in mutual funds. In today’s 
economy these are among the most popular investment vehicles 
for the non-expert investor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Trustee Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that this particular Bill has been a long time in coming, 
that a number of people that deal with trusts are certainly 
looking forward to having a vehicle that is more appropriate to 
today’s economy rather than what suited the economy of the 
1950s. When you look at the differences in the interest rates 
alone in a savings account today, you may be getting an interest 
rate of 2 to 3 per cent, whereas the trust accounts that could 
invest in mutual funds could be generating 10 to 20 per cent. 
And that includes such things, Mr. Speaker, as people’s 
pensions. 
 
You know our own pension plan within the . . . as MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) is certainly generating 
more than 2 to 3 per cent. If it wasn’t we would be unhappy, as 
would any of the other members of the civil service if their 
pensions were generating those kind of returns that trust 
accounts have been held to. So that’s certainly a good change. 
 
But I have to sometimes wonder, what does it mean when it 
says a reasonably prudent investor? Now somebody who 
invested in Bre-X when it was on the rise could have been 
considered a reasonably prudent investor, but as it was in the 
downturn, questions would arise. So I think we’ll need an 
explanation a little more clearly thought out as to what a 
reasonably prudent investor would be classified as, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1515) 
 
Also when it comes to terms like diversity of your account. 
Now if I want to invest in the grain industry, does that mean 
I’m diversified if I have invested in five different grain 
companies? Does that mean my portfolio is diversified? Or does 
diversified mean I invest in gold, I invest in oil, I invest in land, 
I invest in manufactured types of companies? I think the 
minister needs to explain a little more what he means by 
diversify. 
 
Previously trustees have been limited to such things as 
government bonds, savings accounts. I think it is a good move 
to allow this change that will allow people to invest their trusts 
in a greater number of financial vehicles. 

But the minister also talked about allowing agents to handle 
those trusts. The trustees, up until now, have been responsible 
for making those financial arrangements. They could invest in 
various and sundry financial vehicles but they dealt with them 
themselves, for which they received a remuneration for dealing 
with the trust and the trust accounts. 
 
If they in turn though, under this piece of legislation, turn all of 
that managerial responsibility over to an agent such as a broker, 
why would you carry on paying the trustees their remuneration 
when they are not bearing the responsibilities that had originally 
be assigned to them? So I think there needs to be some 
discussion on that particular point and perhaps some 
clarification from the minister. 
 
When you talk about trustees no longer being liable if they have 
acted as reasonably prudent investors, even though they may 
have invested in what others may have thought was a high-risk 
investment, does it mean that no one is going to be held to 
account? I would hope that this piece of legislation wouldn’t be 
used by the government to turn SaskPower into a trust, and 
therefore be able to exonerate the ministers and the board of 
directors if they weren’t reasonably prudent investors in things 
like Channel Lake, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess one other thing that I should mention, Mr. Speaker, is 
subsections (13) through (17). And we will certainly be asking 
the minister to explain what is the purpose of those particular 
subsections in this clause, because on the surface they don’t 
seem to relate. So I think the minister will need his explanation 
as to why the Wascana Park Act is included in this particular 
piece of legislation, or the Meewasin Valley Authority, and 
those particular pieces. So we’ll be asking the minister to 
explain why he has included references to those Acts in this 
particular Bill. 
 
There are a number of groups, Mr. Speaker, that need to be 
consulted on these particular pieces of legislation. They have 
not yet responded to our queries; so at this particular time, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Animal Products 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
be able to rise and to be doing the following second reading 
speeches on behalf of the Minister of Agriculture. At the end of 
my remarks I’ll be moving the second reading of The Animal 
Products Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Agriculture 2000  A Strategic Direction 
developed a few years ago, directs the provincial government to 
work with the industry to undertake changes which contribute 
to the development of family farms, diversification, and value 
added production. 
 
We are working closely with our food production and 
processing sectors to establish quality assurance programs. The 
goal of both federal and provincial governments is to harmonize 
food inspection regulations. This will facilitate the 
interprovincial and international trade of Canadian food 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

products. 
 
Saskatchewan is working with other provinces and the federal 
government to develop a common legislative and regulatory 
base for a harmonized Canadian food inspection system. That 
working group is working toward the development of national 
codes for dairy, for meat and poultry, and for the retail sector. 
This will result in a cost-effective and safer food inspection 
system for the consumers of Canadian food products. 
 
This will ensure our quality products have continued access to 
the markets. It will address a number of concerns that 
consumers have and the demand for quality, safe food products. 
 
The proposed amendments will provide Saskatchewan with the 
ability to develop modern, cost-effective, and efficient 
inspection systems. They will address hazards associated with 
food production and processing of animal products, and they 
will help create effective partnerships with industry for their 
delivery. Lastly, they will enable Saskatchewan Agriculture and 
Food to eventually consolidate all meat inspection regulations 
under one Act. 
 
The amendments will also provide the opportunity to clarify 
and modernize language. In some sections they will update 
offensive and . . . offence and penalty clauses. They will renew 
the constitutionality of inspection powers. And the legislation is 
consistent with the desires of the Saskatchewan Meat 
Processors Association, who are interested in developing a 
hazard analysis, critical control, point-based quality assurance 
program for small meat processors, and who did not want a 
more expensive, traditional, government-delivered inspection 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of the Assembly to support this 
Act, and I therefore move second reading of Bill No. 5, The 
Animal Products Amendment Act, 1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, on the surface this particular Act seems like a fairly 
innocuous, small piece of legislation, but it does raise a few 
questions and a few concerns, Mr. Speaker, when it talks about 
records which would now include electronic records. 
 
Does this mean that if the government for some reason wanted 
to review those records, that they could now walk off with the 
processor’s computers, or does it simply mean they would 
extract a record from that computer and allow the owner or the 
processor to maintain his records in his computer. Some of 
those things are the types of questions that need to be answered, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also goes on to talk about the amendment suspension and 
revocation of a licence of any person issued under the Act. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it says that there can be a hearing but it 
doesn’t say who will actually be doing the hearing — who will 
be responsible to hold this hearing and who will be the advocate 
or the judge at that kind of the particular hearing. It needs to 
clarify that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also goes on though later in the Bill to say that the minister 

has the power to change, suspend, or revoke such a licence 
without a hearing if he feels it’s in the public interest, although 
a hearing would then have to be held within 15 days. Perhaps 
we need to find out from the minister just what kind of issues he 
would see arising that would necessitate the suspension of a 
licence for public interest, and again who would be holding the 
hearings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Does this particular Act, Mr. Speaker, have any impact on 
hunting and trapping? Because we hear a great deal of 
contention from some corners about hunting and trapping. So 
would this, any changes to this Act, have an impact in that 
particular area? 
 
Also fines, Mr. Speaker, are changing for penalties under this 
Act — I shouldn’t say penalties perhaps, fines under this Act — 
to raise them from $1,000 to $20,000 for offences but it doesn’t 
impose a penalty. Well if somebody gave me a fine for $20,000 
that would sure sound like a penalty to me. You know so I think 
we need to again clarify some of the terminology, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also under this Act the government is taking the power onto 
itself to state exactly how animals will be killed or slaughtered, 
and how they’ll be processed. I know that is of concern to some 
processors, Mr. Speaker. I talked to a processor about a year 
ago that deals with some of the animals that would be dealt with 
under this Act, some of the exotic animals. The problems he 
was facing, which were not so much provincial regulation but 
federal regulation . . . and hopefully this particular Act will not 
be adding a further burden to him, because he was trying to 
process animals like emus and ostriches, to do it in a kosher 
manner. 
 
So some of these things were causing severe problems for his 
business because he had to do so many things to meet 
regulations that it was making his business unprofitable. He was 
operating in a proper manner for his customers, to provide the 
services they need in a safe and healthy manner, but 
nevertheless regulations were virtually driving him out of 
business. And hopefully this particular piece of legislation will 
not add regulations that will further increase his costs and 
diminish his time to carry out his duties. 
 
One final thing in this particular Act, Mr. Speaker, that seems to 
be perhaps a take-off of the federal Liberals’ Bill C-68, is that it 
absolves representatives of the Crowns, ministers, inspectors, or 
any employee of the Saskatchewan government of any threat of 
lawsuit for exercising their authority under the Act or the 
regulations. If they’re exercising their authority in a proper 
manner, Mr. Speaker, indeed they should be protected. 
 
But if for some reasons they have abrogated somebody’s rights 
or acted in an unlawful manner, they should not be protected 
under this particular piece of legislation — indeed under any 
particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. If they have acted 
beyond their authority, they should be subject to the penalties of 
the law, the same as any other citizen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because we have some questions, because we need to talk to 
the people who will be affected by this, the processors, I would 
move at this time that this Bill be adjourned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

Bill No. 6 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. At the 
end of my remarks I will move second reading of The Cattle 
Marketing Deductions Act, 1998. 
 
Saskatchewan has a strong cattle industry which contributes 
significantly to the provincial economy. In order for the 
industry to expand its opportunities, continued investment in 
research, development, and promotion is required. The 
livestock industry recognizes this need. They supports the 
current cattle check-offs for use on research, development, and 
promotional activities. 
 
The industry has approached the government and has asked for 
some changes to the existing legislation. To accommodate this 
request, rather than amend the existing Act, it was decided to 
develop a new Act. The new legislation does not change the 
intent of the Act. It modernizes the language and powers in the 
current Act. It clarifies the intent of the Act to meet the needs of 
the livestock industry. 
 
The new Act better describes the mechanics of collection for the 
current cattle industry check-off. The new legislation provides 
for the collection of a proposed national check-off. 
 
Once again I point out to the members this was a request of the 
provincial cattle industry. This legislation has been developed 
in consultation with the industry and is consistent with the 
desires of Saskatchewan’s livestock producers for this type of 
legislation. The cattle check-off established in this legislation 
will be directed toward research, development, and promotional 
activities. 
 
I ask the members of the Assembly to support this Act, and I 
therefore move second reading of Bill No. 6, The Cattle 
Marketing Deductions Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes indeed, 
the stock growers of this province have been looking for some 
changes in this particular Act, but I’m not sure if they were 
looking for changes that increased the cost of the deductions 
that were set out under the previous Act at $1. Now, under this 
Act, it would allow the government to set whatever fees it 
deemed to be appropriate. 
 
It also allows it, Mr. Speaker, to direct how those funds are 
going to be allocated. Under the previous regulations, there was 
a committee in place made up of stock growers that directed 
how those funds would be used, what projects they would 
invest those funds in. And they directed those in a manner that 
best suited the cattle industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is what needs to continue. Those funds need 
to be directed to serve the best purposes of the cattle industry. 
And a lot of those purposes are such things as showing how 
good beef is, the value of it, the protein and fat level, and 
showing that indeed, Mr. Speaker, the fat content in beef has 
decreased over the years. 
 
Those are some of the things that this type of deduction has 
been used for and should continue to be used for. It shouldn’t 
simply be left into the hands of the minister to make those 

determinations. It needs to be carried on by a board of stock 
growers. 
 
Now I note that there has been a list of people drawn up for one 
of these Acts as to who would be on a board. And it’s perhaps 
one of the other ones here. It’s perhaps The Stray Animals Act 
I’m thinking of, because we’ve got a lot of agricultural Acts 
coming up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there was a group of people that had been designated on 
there previously and those need to continue, Mr. Speaker. I note 
that the Canadian Wheat Board replaces a representative of the 
Western Cow-Calf Producers Association. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, why would the Canadian Wheat 
Board have a representative on a cattle check-off board in 
Saskatchewan. Doesn’t make a lot of sense. Unless perhaps this 
government, with the encouragement of Mr. Goodale, because 
he did say in the changes in C-4 for the agricultural Act, the 
Canadian Wheat Board Act that’s been presented to the 
Canadian House of Commons, that they could expand what the 
Canadian Wheat Board could deal in. 
 
(1530) 
 
Maybe they want to get into cows now. I certainly hope not, 
because Canadian Wheat Board certainly has no place, Mr. 
Speaker, in dealing with cattle. I hope this is perhaps an error, a 
typo some place on this particular thing and we can clarify that. 
Because I certainly would not be in favour of allowing the 
Canadian Wheat Board to sit on a cattle check-off board, Mr. 
Speaker, in Saskatchewan. The people who raise the cattle, the 
people who sell the cattle, those are the people who need to be 
involved in this particular kind of a fund. 
 
We have to be careful, Mr. Speaker, that the monies that are 
raised on this simply don’t disappear into that black hole known 
as the Consolidated Fund. That they do indeed serve the best 
interests of the stock growers. 
 
The one other area that we need to be careful of, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the use of the term administration or administrating the Act, 
that costs associated with that do not eat up the entire amount of 
the fund. And that will be up to hopefully the committee to keep 
a control on that. 
 
But the money is being paid to the Department of Agriculture 
for those costs of administration and hopefully they won’t be 
too high. And that needs to be tracked to make sure that it 
doesn’t happen. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, once we have had the opportunity to discuss 
this with the stock growers associations, with the cattle 
producers of this province, we will be prepared to proceed with 
this particular action. At the present time, I would move that the 
debate be now adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Pastures Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — At the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, 
I will move second reading of The Pastures Act, 1998. 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

The Government of Saskatchewan continues to identify and 
pursue all opportunities to diversify the agricultural economy so 
as to ensure a sustainable agricultural economy in the 21st 
century. The Government of Saskatchewan supports and 
encourages the livestock industry in Saskatchewan. Fifty-six 
pastures in the Saskatchewan pastures program are a service to 
the Saskatchewan livestock producers. 
 
Saskatchewan introduced the unique concept of the community 
pasture to the world. The program was introduced in 1922 with 
the acquisition of Crown land previously leased to the Matador 
Land and Cattle Company. 
 
The program has enjoyed continuous and successful 
development. The livestock herd size in Saskatchewan has 
increased and the quality of animals has improved. The various 
livestock management services and programs introduced within 
the pastures have contributed to this improvement. 
 
The services and programs have provided supplemental grazing 
to 2,500 patrons. The appeal for producers was such that the 
program now has 56 pastures throughout the province. 
 
The program provides an improvement service for producers 
who wish to maintain cattle and sheep but do not have the land, 
feed, or time to pursue livestock management. For a fee, Mr. 
Speaker, producers can place their animals in a Saskatchewan 
Crown land pasture. The fee covers professional livestock 
management services provided by Saskatchewan Agriculture 
and Food. 
 
For many years the Saskatchewan pastures program was 
operated as a program within various branches of Saskatchewan 
Agriculture and Food and the former Department of Rural 
Development. In June 1996, the pastures program was housed 
within the newly created pastures branch of Saskatchewan 
Agriculture and Food. This branch is dedicated solely to the 
potential contribution of Saskatchewan pastures to 
Saskatchewan’s agricultural diversification and economic 
development through the production of livestock. 
 
The proposed legislation entitled The Pastures Act will allow 
for the consolidation of legislation and regulations that govern 
the Saskatchewan pastures program. The program is currently 
administered under the auspices of two Acts and one set of 
regulations. The Acts are The Agricultural Development and 
Adjustment Act and The Department of Agriculture Act. The 
regulations are the provincial community pastures regulations. 
 
The program’s finances are handled through the conservation 
and development revolving fund which is contained within The 
Department of Agriculture Act. 
 
Existing authority for the pastures program is located in various 
Acts and regulations. Efficiencies would be achieved and the 
public and the government would be served by the 
consolidation of legislation and regulations pertaining to the 
Saskatchewan pastures program within one Act. 
 
The proposed legislation would also ensure that all operating 
details of the pastures program have clear legal authority and 
are under one statute. The new pastures branch would like to 
implement programs that would enhance the existing grazing 

programs. 
 
By consolidating the legislation under one title we can ensure 
that proposed activities and program enhancements will 
continue to assist agricultural diversification. It is imperative to 
ensure that all activities are adequately defined by legislation. 
The pastures program is changing but not as a result of this new 
legislation. 
 
I encourage you to adopt The Pastures Act, and I move that The 
Pastures Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think some 
of the members opposite want to put me out to pasture already. 
I think there’s a good number of them, Mr. Speaker, who will 
be out to pasture after the next election. 
 
Because of that, Mr. Speaker, we have some concerns when 
part of this Act deals with purchasing of more land. I think we 
need to give some very serious consideration to the amount of 
land that Saskatchewan Agriculture already holds before we go 
around purchasing any more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think overall we’re in favour of this particular 
Bill. We’re always in favour of simplifying things, cutting out 
the red tape and the regulations, and this Act does go a long 
ways towards doing that. 
 
But again, we need to discuss the situation with the people who 
are most affected — the clients of the community pastures — to 
determine whether or not this suits their particular needs. 
Because I know that over the last few years I’ve had a number 
of people complaining to me about the operation of the 
community pastures, how the costs have increased over the last 
couple of years, particularly in areas dealing with the 
elimination of the bull program on a number of the community 
pastures. That had been a long-time service. It provided what 
the minister was talking about, the increase in the quality of 
cattle in this province because a number of people, when it was 
initiated, could not afford to buy purebred animals for their own 
herds. This gave them access to those kinds of animals. 
 
Now the government has eliminated that particular service from 
a number of the pastures. I think we need to talk to the clients of 
the pasture to determine whether or not these pastures are 
actually serving them in the manner that they need. 
 
Also another concern that has been raised, Mr. Speaker, has 
been access to the pastures. Some pastures seem to have a 
policy of allowing people, ranchers, into those pastures with a 
small number of units, let’s say five to ten animals, and then 
growing it over a period of time. 
 
Other pastures simply say that if you’re all ready in there and 
there’s some increased opportunities there, the people who are 
already utilizing the pastures get to increase their herd size and 
no one new seems to be able get access. 
 
That’s a problem, Mr. Speaker, as we have a change in the 
intergenerational transfers of agriculture in this province. 
Young people need to be able to gain access to these pastures, 
Mr. Speaker. And at times that seems to be difficult for them to 
do so. 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

So perhaps when we do get this particular Bill into committee, 
the minister will be able to respond to some of those kinds of 
questions or any other questions that we may hear back from 
the clients of the community pastures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at this time I would move that we adjourn debate on this 
Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 8  The Stray Animals Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the good 
member opposite thought the last one applied, maybe this will 
have more application. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of my brief remarks, I’ll move second 
reading of the amendments to The Stray Animals Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s strategic direction in agriculture 
is founded on diversification. Saskatchewan producers are 
diversifying into specialized livestock. We’re seeing growing 
numbers of bison, wild boar, and elk, and other specialized 
livestock on Saskatchewan farms. The economics and markets 
are there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a need for government to amend The Stray 
Animals Act to reflect the new realities of a diversified 
livestock on Saskatchewan farms. It is the government’s 
responsibility to create a legislative regulatory framework for 
sustainable growth. The specialized livestock industry and rural 
municipalities are asking the government for changes in 
legislation to meet these new emerging realities. 
 
The current Stray Animals Act does not provide adequate 
provisions to deal with non-traditional or specialized livestock, 
which include the production and marketing of bison, wild boar, 
and elk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment contains provisions for dealing 
with dangerous stray animals, compensation for damage, and 
cost recovery to the municipality of impounding and caring for 
strays. 
 
Amendment of the Act is aimed at including provisions such as 
specifically naming new species to be covered under the Act; 
giving municipalities the right to transport strays to pounds 
outside of their RM (rural municipality); to protect proprietors 
from liability if a stray is accidentally injured on their property; 
and allows destruction of dangerous strays by any person if the 
situation is immediately threatening; to update fees by RMs to 
reflect current costs of capturing, impounding, selling, or 
destroying a stray animal; and provides for an increase in fines 
that more closely reflect the value of crops, livestock, and 
property destroyed by strays. The Act provides the opportunity 
for mediation. 
 
Two amendments I want to emphasize are, the municipality 
waits seven days before an animal of unknown ownership is 
sold. This allows for time to locate the owner and addresses 
concerns regarding premature action by the RM. The second 
amendment I want to emphasize is that a dangerous stray can 
only be destroyed if the stray is in the act of harming, 

endangering, or pursuing any person or livestock. There is a 
need to deal with stray animals, compensation for damage, and 
the cost recovery of impounding and caring for strays by RMs. 
 
The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and the 
livestock industry, such as the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 
Association, have requested a legislative review of The Stray 
Animals Act. The amendments we are making provide the 
provisions to meet the changing realities in diversified 
livestock production in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I ask 
the members of the Assembly to support these amendments to 
The Stray Animals Act. 
 
I move second reading of Bill No. 8. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s quite 
a number of these Bills so it’s like being in the pasture, Mr. 
Speaker, you have to watch where you’re stepping. Mr. 
Speaker, this particular Act has been brought to my attention by 
some of the RMs in my area because they did have a great deal 
of concern about stray animals that were at large in their 
particular areas. 
 
And I can understand how some of the members opposite have 
some concerns about this particular Act also because when 
they’re put out to pasture it would be a shame if they were to 
stray. They would no longer be under control of the party 
whips and need an administrator to fulfil that function for them. 
 
One of the things this Act does is the appointment of an 
administrator in the RMs to deal with the stray animals. The 
concern expressed to me by a couple of the RMs was that they 
did not want the responsibility of putting their neighbour’s 
cows into a pound and disposing of them in some manner. It 
was their hope that some other agency would carry out that role 
for them so that they could maintain harmonious relationships 
with their neighbour. 
 
(1545) 
 
It would seem that under this Act that does not happen, Mr. 
Speaker. That the administrator would be someone, in all 
likelihood, either the administrator of the RM or on the RM 
council, or perhaps the pest control officer for the RM, or 
someone of that nature. 
 
Hopefully though, some other arrangements for those RMs that 
would like to make them could be made so that somebody else 
could be designated as the administrator and therefore would 
bear the responsibilities of making the decision of whose animal 
should be impounded. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, any animals at large do indeed cause a 
hazard. If animals are at large at night and you’re driving down 
the road, you may very well strike them and cause yourself and 
your property considerable damage. 
 
And that’s certainly not unheard of, Mr. Speaker. In fact, just 
four miles south of my place here about a month and a half ago, 
a driver at night struck approximately ten to a dozen horses, 
killing five or six of them and injuring a large number of others 
that necessitated their destruction. Thankfully, no persons were 
injured in the accident but the vehicle that was involved, I 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

believe, will be a write-off. So this is certainly a danger in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the items in this particular Act states how a pound is to 
be constructed. And I think it would be important to review that 
particular piece, Mr. Speaker, to find out exactly what the 
government is talking about in that particular area. I note that 
they’ve increased fines in this area to $5,000 from $500 for the 
unlawful restraint of an animal or for removing an animal from 
a pound. 
 
The minister was talking about things like wild boar and elk. 
Many of the elk animals today, Mr. Speaker, particularly the 
females, are valued upwards to $25,000. So for removing an 
animal from a pound with a fine of $5,000 does not yet seem to 
be appropriate in that area. 
 
Bison, Mr. Speaker, are again a very lucrative animal if you 
happen to acquire one through removing it from a pound, and 
the $5,000 fee, while in that area it may indeed cover the cost, it 
would be very close. 
 
So we need to talk, Mr. Speaker, to those people that would be 
affected, to the RMs, to the producers of animals in this 
province, including elk and bison and ostriches and emus and 
horses and cows and sheep, to determine what they believe is 
the most appropriate, if this Bill represents their need or if some 
changes need to be made to it. 
 
So at this particular point in time, Mr. Speaker, I would move 
that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
introduce Brent Cotter, my deputy minister of 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs; Melinda Gorrill, the 
director of administration on his right; Ernie Lawton directly 
behind me, the assistant deputy minister in charge of Aboriginal 
Affairs; and, Paul Osborne, directly behind the deputy, the 
assistant deputy minister in charge of Intergovernmental 
Affairs. I welcome them here today. 
 
Subvote (IA01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Welcome to the minister and to the 
officials. It’s great to see you here. And when we first . . . 
before we really get into questions, I would ask the minister to 
give me an overview of what’s going on in his department this 
year . . . in the last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to begin by 
just indicating what the mandate of the department is. The 
mandate is to promote Saskatchewan’s interests through the 
management of the province’s relations with other governments 
in Canada and abroad, and to work with aboriginal peoples in 
the province and their organizations to develop and implement 

policies and programs which advance our common interests. 
 
And as the member may know, within the last year the 
Department of Intergovernmental Affairs has taken on a new 
face and been integrated with the Indian and Metis Affairs 
Secretariat, which was previously a separate secretariat. So we 
have brought together those two elements of government into a 
new department carrying out the mandate as described here. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe you could 
explain how, in the government’s eyes, seeing the . . . joining 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Aboriginal Affairs was 
something that would make sense. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The position of governing the peoples of 
our country and creating relationships between them is a unique 
fact in this federal state of Canada. We have obviously one of 
the better governing systems in the world; has developed one of 
the best countries in the world. In fact a country that’s been 
named to be the best country in the world. And it has been so 
done by creating a relationship of respect and mutual interest 
between all bodies . . . all governing bodies in Canada. 
 
We have provincial governments, we have federal governments, 
and we have aboriginal governments. And so there is a common 
notion to the idea of the new department where these all come 
together in one place. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I read an article a 
week or so ago that was . . . talked about Canada being the best 
place in the world to live in, Saskatchewan of course being part 
of that. And though I agree, I thought it was an interesting 
perspective that the writer brought forward saying they 
wondered what would happen if the United States had paid their 
UN (United Nations) fees, would we still be considered the best 
place in the world to live. So it’s just an interesting side note. 
 
Mr. Minister, I noticed that in the next year you’re expecting to 
spend an additional $9 million. And we’re talking about . . . the 
number of employees are going up — pardon me, it’s nine more 
staff you’ll have — the number of employees have gone up by 
nine and yet it looks like we’re spending exactly the same 
amount of money. Can you tell me how we can have . . . how 
that can happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I want to begin by responding to the 
concluding comment of the member opposite with respect to the 
best country in the world in which to live. I think there is 
nothing the United States of America could do to compete with 
Canada in that sense. They’re not even paying their United 
Nations dues because Canada is a country of a unique spirit of 
cooperation and mutual interest that is unparalleled anywhere in 
the world. 
 
And I think the reason that Saskatchewan is named to be the 
best province within this best country is because that spirit of 
cooperation is really rooted most solidly here, and many of the 
elements of the nature of Canada which makes it such a 
wonderful place have been gifts that have . . . gifts to the 
country which have been begun here. 
 
With respect to the department staff and programing, there are 
some increased staff in the area of preparing for celebrations of 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

the millennium and government information services through 
the web site. 
 
There are other areas where resources have been shifted. As the 
member knows, last year we spent a lot of energy on the 
national unity consultations and related exercises, so there has 
been money shifted from areas which are at the moment not 
costing as much in the upcoming year and some of that is being 
shifted into new planning exercises. 
 
One of the excitement . . . exciting elements of this department 
is that it is, as a central agency of government, in tune with the 
changing needs of the province of Saskatchewan in its 
relationship with other Canadians and people of the world. And 
so sometimes there are changes in emphasis that happen even 
within the year and sometimes adjustments will have to made 
for that. 
 
But in so far as what’s here, there is a shift from resources that 
were spent on other elements last year into new elements for 
next year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Are there any of the people that are in your 
department paid under contract, or is everyone paid just by 
salary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — There are four personal services contracts 
within the department of the total departmental functions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And, Mr. Minister, can we get a copy or can 
we get those documents please, and the information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, we’ll forward them to you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, last year I . . . the government, 
the Premier, and a number of ministers made trips out of the 
province — Team Canada and some of the other expeditions 
outside of our country, and even within the country but to 
different provinces. Can you tell me how many different trips 
were made by department staff, or by the Premier and the 
ministers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the numbers are being 
compiled and they are not at the present complete for the year. 
But when they are we will make them available to you. 
 
(1600) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Last year I was delighted to attend a supper, a 
meeting with a delegation from the Ukraine. I’m wondering if 
each delegation, each time we have visitors in from outside of 
our province and to Saskatchewan, if its kept track of separately 
and if you can give me an idea of what the cost of that was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The element of information the member is 
asking for is under the protocol office, which is headed up by 
the Provincial Secretary. So maybe when the Provincial 
Secretary is here for his estimates — it operates under the same 
authority as we do — maybe you could ask Mr. Shillington at 
that time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Okay. 
 

Mr. Minister, I noticed that — and I’m not sure where it was 
now — there was quite an increase in the French language 
coordination. Can you give me an idea of what’s happening in 
that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — That is also under the guidance of the 
Provincial Secretary and I’m sure he will make that information 
available to you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So any of the questions that I’m going to ask 
you under that, you’re not going to give me an answer to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I’d be delighted, but I would be stepping 
on my colleague’s toes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So will you answer any questions under 
accommodation and central service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Okay, can you give us, or can you supply us 
with, a list of the properties that are owned by SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) as opposed 
to rented by SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I may have answered the 
previous question too quickly or not clearly understood the 
intent of the question. The central services property 
management is the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, which is under the minister in charge of 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
The facilities which we use, which are SPMC properties, are 
three. One is the Government House, and then the two facilities 
that presently house what was the Indian and Metis Affairs 
Secretariat and what was Intergovernmental Affairs, which is 
going to be brought in together. You may notice a budgetary 
change with respect to facilities. They’re going to be brought 
together in the facility downtown that was once vacant space in 
the, I guess it’s still the Ramada, I guess. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The Delta. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Oh, it’s now the Delta. Sorry. So there 
will be the amalgamation of our department into one facility. 
And to that extent we have the information specific to our 
department. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe I’ll go on to 
an issue that is something that I know that you have a lot of 
information on because we just finished dealing with it in 
December of this year, and that was our unity debate. 
 
We had asked for some information on the exact cost that was 
paid out for the unity debate and I’m wondering if you can give 
me that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The total cost was $584,978. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the paper that you have in front 
of you probably breaks down specific costs. And I was 
interested in the costs of the bussing all this information out to 
the MLAs every day. It was more propaganda than information 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

that was great for our talks with the people in our 
constituencies. Can you tell me what the cost was for all those 
bussings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, if officials have the 
detailed cost sheets here of couriering information, I will relay 
it. If not, we can take note and send you the detail on that. 
 
I would like to respectfully disagree with the characterization of 
the information that went to MLAs as propaganda. We planned 
and were pleased to have a very collaborative, all-party 
approach to this discussion. We met weekly when we could, 
and sometimes not every week but as often as we could, to 
jointly plan everything that was done to keep MLAs informed 
with information that would support their discussion in their 
community. 
 
I think the result was probably one of the best processes in 
Canada with a very, very positive response from the people of 
Canada, and certainly the most involved process from any 
province in Canada, where we had, I think, 150, 160 meetings. 
All MLAs need to take credit for the energy they put into this, 
and they were supplied with information as the process went on, 
to inform them about issues and meeting places and resources 
for their meetings. 
 
I think it was a necessary part of the exercise. In fact it would 
have been irresponsible to have engaged in that discussion 
without giving proper support to MLAs and their citizen 
Co-Chairs. So I would say whatever the cost was — and I’m 
sure the cost of mailing would have been modest in the grand 
scheme of things — it is a central element of providing 
adequate information for a public discussion. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, it was interesting that when we 
began the original discussions about the unity debate and we 
talked about costs, the MLAs were told that all costs were going 
to be covered — which of course they were — but they were 
covered out of our own expenses, the MLA expenses 
themselves. 
 
And if those of us that spent a lot of time travelling around the 
province meeting with constituents or meeting with interest 
groups around the province had spent most of their money 
already, but we found ourselves out of money at the end of the 
year. And although the unity was a very important issue, a lot of 
us were forced to cut back on the number of meetings that we 
could hold and the discussions that we could hold because of 
this kind of costing. 
 
Now I’m wondering why the decision was made that all of 
these costs weren’t involved . . . weren’t paid for out of this 
department. And if you . . . the five hundred and some thousand 
— can’t remember now, you’ll have repeat it for me — that it 
was actually spent on unity, it did not include any of the costs 
for the MLAs for the meetings they held, for the travel they 
had, and that type of thing. 
 
Can you tell me why it was decided to be spent out of our own 
expenses? And can you tell us how much . . . have you figured 
out what it would cost if you actually add all the cost to the 
unity discussion? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes. The costs of meetings were covered. 
The costs of MLA participation was not, in that part of our duty 
and part of the all-party agreement with respect to carrying out 
this marvellous consultation was it was to be an extension of the 
people’s democratic structure, in coordination with local citizen 
Co-Chairs, who could bring a non-political, non-legislative 
element to that discussion and to those meetings. 
 
And I think, without remembering the details of the discussion 
between the representatives of the parties when these 
agreements were made, I think it would have been seen that as 
MLAs, one of our first duties, and I think our most important 
duty, is the representation of our constituents. And the 
allowances which we are given really are given for that 
purpose. 
 
And so that it would have been a natural element, that when 
we’re engaged in consultation with our constituents, whether 
it’s on a theme of a community’s request or in this case a theme 
of broad, provincial coordinated action by all parties in the 
House, that it is reasonable that those should be paid for from 
the funds that we are given to consult with our constituents. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, as official opposition we do not 
only represent our constituents but people across the province 
who have issues that they want to be brought forward to this 
government. And because there are of course not as many of us 
here as there are sitting across the floor, we have obligations to 
be travelling right across the whole province. So if we were 
talking about spending our money wisely, we do it every time 
we get in our vehicle, every time we answer the phone and we 
want to talk to people of the province. 
 
I think it was a disservice to the people in our constituency, 
because if we didn’t have the monies available to have as many 
meetings as many of the members on the other side did have, 
because they weren’t constricted by the amount of money they 
had left when it came to actually representing the people in this 
province . . . So I was very disappointed in that and I can assure 
you that when we went into these negotiations we weren’t 
aware that this was the way it was going to be. 
 
Can you give me an idea of what other provinces spent? I 
imagine because you have been talking to counterparts across 
Canada and deciding on how these issues should be brought 
forward to the people of Canada . . . what kind of numbers were 
spent in other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I suspect the range of costs would be 
substantial, because provinces use very different procedures, 
but I do not have the direct costs of any of the other provinces. 
The members may be able to get that information. If it 
happened to be compiled by someone and made available to me 
by those provinces, I would put it forward but it is not presently 
being compiled. 
 
But I do want to reiterate on the question of representation, that 
the cost for the constituency meetings was covered. So the cost 
that you would have borne would be driving from your home 
and the meals you would consume on the day or the days or the 
evening of the evenings that you had travelled to those 
meetings. And I think, for me at least, the participation with a 
group of my constituents is valuable and productive, and I think 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

there could not be any greater purpose for which we would 
spend that time with our constituents than for the purpose of 
preserving the greatest country on the face of the earth and 
building it to a stronger nation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I’m sure you haven’t heard us disagree with 
the fact that it was a very important issue. What I’m disagreeing 
with is the fact that we didn’t have the same resources and the 
same time obviously to do what you have done; so I think it was 
a disservice to our constituents is what I am telling you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I wonder if you can tell me what the response has been from the 
Premier of Quebec about Saskatchewan’s participation in the 
unity debate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Again I don’t want to return too often to 
the question of the issue of participation by constituents. There 
are 58 MLAs in Saskatchewan. Each of those MLAs have 
agreed to allowances for their expenditures to consult with their 
constituents. The structure that was in place for this was that 
each of the MLAs would participate in their constituency and 
not beyond, in their constituencies with Co-Chairs consult . . . 
to engage in this consultation. So the number of people in a 
caucus does not change the proportionate amount of money 
available to any MLA with respect to these consultations, and 
every MLA of whatever party or independent members had the 
same resources and I think that was fair and I think the result 
was good. 
 
And I want to thank you and the members from all 
constituencies in this province for the very good work they did 
with that, and I think the decision of the joint party committee 
that met to discuss this was fair, and I think the results have 
been good and notable. 
 
With respect to the Premier of Quebec, I have not had a direct 
response from the Premier of Quebec with respect to this 
initiative. But as you know, Quebec has not engaged in it. 
 
You are aware that the Bloc has visited Saskatchewan and we 
have . . . one of the opportunities I had when they were here 
was to demonstrate to them Saskatchewan’s commitment to 
unity from the many, many responses we had here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact I showed them the collection of responses that we had 
had and pointed out to them that Saskatchewanians were very 
proud of our country and were committed to continuing to build 
it and that we had a fundamental disagreement with the Bloc 
and others who would rather fracture the country. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, you haven’t had an opportunity 
to speak to the Premier but I would imagine then you were just 
. . . were on the phone the next day after Mr. Charest was now 
going to be involved in Quebec politics and to indicate your 
support again. So I’d be interested to hear what he had to say to 
you. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I have actually not had the privilege of 
speaking to Mr. Charest recently. I can say that the Premier has. 

But I can say that I have had past relationships with Mr. 
Charest. He was the federal Environment minister when I was 
the provincial Environment minister. 
 
And I respect him highly and I think he has taken on a duty and 
a responsibility on behalf of Quebec people and on behalf of 
Canadians to work to build this country and I wish him all the 
best in his exercise. 
 
Ms. Draude: — No doubt this trend with joining of the 
Conservatives and the Liberals will probably be something 
you’re looking at and you’re thinking is a great thing as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, when the delegation came from the Bloc 
Québécois to discuss their agenda, was there any provincial 
costs involved? Was there anything paid for meals, 
accommodations, for that delegation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I hosted no events on their behalf. I’m not 
aware that there would have been any. I think there would not. I 
had a meeting with them in my office and that was the extent of 
our engagement. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The Aboriginal 
Affairs department is probably I believe one of the most 
important departments we have in Saskatchewan, because they 
are facing an issue that’s going to be important to everybody in 
this province, especially important to the aboriginal people, the 
dealings that the province has with them right now. 
 
And we all feel strongly that in order for everyone to go into the 
next millennium with the very best opportunities, it’s going to 
take cooperation not only with aboriginal and non-aboriginal, 
but it’s going to take cooperation between the federal 
government, the provincial government, and aboriginal 
governments. 
 
I was upset to see that although the aboriginal people represent 
14 per cent of the population in Saskatchewan that there was 
only an increase of $650,000 in their budget this year but about 
eight and a half million . . . or I guess you could probably tell 
me better how much . . . there was more money given to 
Intergovernmental Affairs, is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, the increase in expenditures on the 
Intergovernmental Affairs side is mostly on the . . . or on the 
non-aboriginal side is mostly the taking on of duties that were 
previously done somewhere else — the web site and 
Government House, they were budgeted elsewhere before. So I 
think Intergovernmental . . . or the non-aboriginal portion of the 
budget is relatively constant. 
 
The major part of the Aboriginal Affairs budget is the annual 
allocation for the settlement of treaty land entitlements. So by 
far the greatest portion of that budget is that the portion that is 
not treaty land entitlement is about $3 million, and there was an 
increase of about 5 or $600,000 to that, to achieve that 
expenditure this year. So the increase actually has been quite 
significant. 
 
We are focusing in areas of facilitation . . . facilitating joint 
exercises to improve employment, to improve economic 
development, and to achieve, as I am pleased to hear you say, 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

growth for aboriginal people in this province because this is an 
initiative that’s important to us all. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I realize that just about 23 
million out of the $26 million is for treaty land entitlement. And 
I would like to know what do you really do with the other $3 
million? We have Northern Affairs dealt with under Economic 
Development. We have Social Services dealt with under the 
other departments. What do you actually do with this $3 
million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The expenditures on the Aboriginal 
Affairs side of this department are in policy and coordination. 
They are in support for aboriginal organizations and the 
initiatives that support them, and they are to plan jointly with 
other elements of governments things like the northern strategy, 
economic development initiatives and the like. 
 
One of the areas that is significant in the Aboriginal Affairs side 
of the department is the aboriginal employment development 
program. This is a program that is leading in opening the doors 
between aboriginal people who are looking for employment and 
employers who are trying to create a workplace that is 
welcoming. And of the many initiatives of the government this 
is one of the very most successful, and we’ve increased their 
budget a lot this year to help them grow more. 
 
But I want to say that central to success in this area is the 
recognition and the leadership by the private sector in 
Saskatchewan who have come to invite a partnership between 
aboriginal leaders, between the province, between the federal 
government, and between themselves in readying their 
workplaces so they are welcoming workplaces, and 
participating in training and provision of job placements that are 
productive for the private sector employers and for the 
aboriginal people who very ably meet the needs of these job 
placements, and as a result, help build our economy. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, there is considerably more 
money spent in northern Saskatchewan through the northern 
development fund that’s sponsored or through SaskPower than 
is done through the Aboriginal Affairs. And it would appear to 
me that there’s got to be an overlap in work that’s done through 
Economic Development, through the Department of Northern 
Affairs, through the northern development fund, through your 
Aboriginal Affairs. We must have more people trying to figure 
out who’s working for who than we do actually helping the 
people out there. 
 
This northern development fund, do you deal with it at all or is 
that specifically dealt with through SaskPower? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The Department of Intergovernmental and 
Aboriginal Affairs is responsible for facilitation program 
development but many programs, as you indicate, are housed 
elsewhere. But additionally, as the private sector employers are 
seeking help to work together with us and with the aboriginal 
people of Saskatchewan to build the economy, so are other 
institutions. 
 
One of the good examples of the improvement in aboriginal 
employment is with the Saskatoon Health District Board where, 
after they had participated in that program, the employment 

rose to multiples of what they had previously employed. 
 
When we did the Crown review, one of the suggestions of the 
Crown review was that there should be an aboriginal strategy 
within the Crown sector because this is a very important part of 
the business of Saskatchewan. It’s 17 per cent of the gross 
domestic product of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we have seen within the Crown corporations, a commitment 
to build job and business opportunities with aboriginal 
organizations and with the aboriginal community. 
 
So while our department has the privilege of being a facilitator, 
the leadership in the growth of the aboriginal participation in 
both business and employment is often happening within the 
private sector, within the Crowns, within the health districts, 
and within the departments of government. 
 
You may be coming to this question but may I answer it in 
advance. We have a great distance yet to go with respect to 
achieving equity in government employment for aboriginal 
people. But we can say proudly that we have moved from 3 per 
cent of the government employees being of aboriginal origin to 
about 6 per cent in the time since we’ve taken government. We 
acknowledge that the target is in the 10 per cent range and we 
have some miles left to go. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, does your department take 
any responsibility for coordinating the efforts between the 
different Crown corporations and different entities that are 
actually trying to work with aboriginal people and northern 
people to ensure that monies are not being wasted through 
administration and bureaucracy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes it is one of the roles of our 
department to both facilitate policy development that is 
coordinated and seeing to it that the administration of those 
policies is coordinated. And if there are instances where that’s 
not so, we obviously would like to be advised of it because it’s 
one of our duties. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So do you do it? I mean, do you have specific 
examples of cases where you have . . . people are saying, where 
am I supposed go to here? There’s seven different programs and 
opportunities here. I know I have calls in my office from people 
who are saying — from aboriginal people who say there is 
opportunities here but everybody is telling me to go phone this 
number, phone that number, and it gets to be a lot of red tape 
and regulations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Well I would, I would say that, that if 
there is doubt in anyone’s mind about who to call, my office 
would be pleased to act as a, as a call, as a call centre for 
distributing that information. There are, there are . . . This issue 
is well coordinated in Saskatchewan but it is, it is made more 
complex by the fact that the primary responsibility for 
aboriginal people in Canada is with the federal government, and 
the federal government has a number of agencies. 
 
The truth is that they are . . . that it is Saskatchewan residents 
that we are talking about often who have, who are . . . for which 
the federal government has responsibility. So we feel we have a 
duty and an opportunity to work with all Saskatchewan 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

residents to build the economy. The federal government has the 
primary responsibility and, I can say, have been doing some 
progressive things in recent months. 
 
I would like to pay public tribute to the federal Minister of 
Indian Affairs, the Hon. Jane Stewart, because they are 
recognizing some of the needs of the aboriginal community and 
are working in partnership with Saskatchewan and with first 
nations people in Saskatchewan to build that future for all 
people in our province and within our country. 
 
So there are those complications of multiple levels of 
responsibility, including band level responsibility to provincial 
initiatives, because we want to build the economy and areas of 
federal responsibility. All of us who work in this area are most 
pleased to help make other people aware of where programs 
exist. But there’s a fairly clear designation of what’s there for 
everyone. 
 
(1630) 
 
The issue of services for my constituency are not much less 
complex for my neighbour who’s not aboriginal. If they want to 
do economic development, they have a number of areas of the 
government in which to go, and I consider it a privilege in my 
job as an MLA to help guide those requests for information. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I don’t think this issue is all that 
complicated. The people that are living in Saskatchewan are 
Saskatchewan residents and they come to you for help, and 
when you shut the door on them they’re not getting the help 
they need. Over half the aboriginal people of this province do 
not live on reserves. They are directly your responsibility and 
they are hurting badly. And I think that there is a lot of work 
that has to be done, not hiding behind what the federal 
government does or doesn’t do. 
 
Can you tell me, the treaty land entitlement money, is that given 
directly to bands, the provincial share, or is it given to the 
federal government and then back to the bands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Our money is paid twice annually to the 
federal government who then place it in a trust fund together 
with their funds, and then it is dispersed when the appropriate 
designations of treaty land purchases are complete. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I notice that in an order in council during the 
winter sometime, there was an additional $895,000 given to 
fulfil provincial obligations under the Treaty Land Entitlement 
Agreement to support federal-provincial unity and social policy 
reform initiatives. What portion of that was for the Treaty Land 
Entitlement Agreement and why wouldn’t it be just a specific 
. . . there’s a set amount each year that is owed to bands for 
entitlement and so why would there have to be an additional 
amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — There were three areas in the special 
warrant to which the member refers, Mr. Chairman. There was 
treaty land entitlement tax loss compensation, and the initiatives 
with respect to the costs of operating the National Council on 
social policy, and the costs with respect to the consultations that 
went on in national unity. 
 

With respect to the element of this that was tax loss 
compensation, the amount paid for treaty land entitlement 
resolution is fixed and that is paid twice annually. So that 
amount does not change. 
 
But the amount that’s required to be paid into the tax loss 
compensation fund is dependent on the amount of land actually 
purchased and put into reserve status on an annual basis. So that 
amount we create an estimate of the budget, but if there is more 
that is transferred than was estimated then the additional funds 
need to be placed into the tax loss compensation fund so the 
RMs can then benefit from them. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I understand in partnership to the federal 
government, there is a committee that deals with specific 
claims. Can you tell me if the provincial government . . . do you 
have . . . tell me about the meetings that you have, the number 
of people that are on the committee, and if there is any 
provincial money given to this committee for specific claims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The issue of specific claims, Mr. 
Chairman, is an issue that relates to losses of land unfairly. And 
so those issues are issues where the federal government acted in 
a way — when they are true — that was inappropriate relative 
to the lands of first nations people. That issue is there for an 
issue between the federal government and the first nation and 
we, other than encouraging the relationship and the discussion 
between them and the discussion with the RMs with respect to 
tax loss compensation for it, it does not fall within our 
jurisdiction at all but we do play a facilitating role in hoping to 
bring these people together. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I guess I understand it that there 
is no funding available — at least I didn’t think there was any 
funding given provincially. But in some documentation that I 
received from the federal government, they talked about 
partnerships and one of the federal provincial partnerships was 
this specific claim steering committee. And I’m wondering if 
this is something that you have been dealing with or if this is 
information I have received that isn’t appropriate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I may be able to get more information 
from the member, Mr. Chairman, but the . . . we have provided 
some money to the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities to help them work with the federal government 
on this issue. And so there may have been a steering committee 
set up between the municipalities and the federal government 
but we haven’t taken any direct involvement in any of that. So 
if that possibility fits with the information you have, that’s 
probably what has happened. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I’m just going to ask one more question before 
my colleague from Athabasca asks some questions regarding 
the residential schools and the pay-outs that were given. Was 
there any provincial money in those claims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — No. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just a 
couple of questions, Mr. Minister. Could you give us a very 
brief overview of the agreement, as you understand it, in 1998 
in reference to the Primrose Lake Air Weapons Range 
agreement with the federal government? 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I welcome the 
questions of the member from Athabasca. The 1998 
negotiations on the agreement have not yet been completed so 
there is no information publicly available on that negotiation. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Just for the sake of following through with 
some thought and consultation to the people that may be 
watching this particular segment of the Assembly, could you 
give us a brief historical overview of how the Primrose Air 
Weapons Range was established and the negotiations that took 
place and the fees that your government currently receives at 
this point in time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I’m trying to be judicious in the amount of 
time I take in entering information on the record here by 
reading it. I will read in some very generic background 
information to say that in 1953 Canada and Saskatchewan 
signed an agreement granting Canada exclusive use of almost 
1.6 million acres north of Meadow Lake Provincial Park for 
military purposes. The agreement is a lease in perpetuity. It can 
be amended through negotiation, but can only be ended at the 
federal government’s initiative. Alberta has a similar agreement 
for an equivalent area just across the border. Saskatchewan still 
owns the land. 
 
Under the agreement, Saskatchewan retains the right to the 
resources on the range and has a responsibility for forest fire 
protection. The agreement requires that Canada pay 
compensation annually for lost revenue resulting from limited 
resources accessed. And then it goes from there to the 
from-time-to-time amendment of the agreement and the 
negotiations and the one to which you refer that is presently 
under renegotiation. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — As a result of this particular agreement, 
arrangement, then the provincial government does arrive at an 
annual lease fee. Is that correct, and if it is, what is the amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Saskatchewan presently receives 
$243,670 annually for the renewable . . . from limiting access to 
the renewable resources. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — And since 1953 that’s the same amount that 
you have gotten, in terms of the provincial — sorry — the 
federal lease fee to this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I think I won’t be able to answer that 
question with absolute certainty, but I will get you the 
information. I suspect that the rates have been changed since the 
original negotiation. But I can’t answer that with certainty and 
with detail. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Would it be safe to assume, Mr. Minister, 
that over the 46 years that this has been happening, that we 
could assume that at the very least we may look at 6 or 8 or $10 
million that the province has received from the Primrose Air 
Weapons Range. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I can’t affirm a number because I don’t 
know what the early lease fees were, but suffice it to say that an 
annual amount has been paid that would, over time, amount to a 
significant amount of money. 
 

And I think it is appropriate. I think one of the elements of the 
renegotiations that we think the compensation is inadequate for 
Saskatchewan lands. That these Saskatchewan lands are really 
provincial lands belonging to the people of Saskatchewan and 
the compensation ought to be appropriate for that as if it were 
any other land — agricultural land, land for oil and gas drilling, 
whatever it is. 
 
So one of the issues that actually are at stake in the 1998 
negotiations are the fair compensation to the province for the 
federal use of this land. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — I just wish to offer a different perspective on 
terms of who owns the land and who had access to the land. 
And quite clearly, the 1.6 million acres that was taken away 
from northern Saskatchewan people had most certainly a drastic 
impact and effect on the economies of their communities. 
 
In the early ’50s, the Primrose Air Weapons Range area offered 
significant financial benefits to many, many families. And any 
time you take 1.6 million acres of land away from a people, a 
certain area, it’s going to have a drastic effect on not only the 
current economies of the 1953, Mr. Minister, but you look at 
the perspective of the 1998 dollars and you can see that the 
impact and the fact, as a result of the loss of land to the people 
of that area, would have significant — significant — economic 
impact. 
 
So the question I have is in terms of the annual lease fee that the 
province gets from the federal government in terms of leasing 
that particular section of land: where is the money allocated, or 
where is the money put? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Well if I caught the specific question 
correctly, the question is what does the province do with its 
revenue? The province does with its revenues that which it does 
with all its revenues — it puts it into the General Revenue Fund 
and then allocates, according to the needs of the province, 
expenditures appropriate to the people of the province. 
 
But I want to say with respect to the matters raised by the 
member from Athabasca, that he is pointing to a very 
significant fact that when the federal government made this 
agreement with Saskatchewan they agreed to compensation, 
and in fact did provide some compensation for both Indian and 
Metis people at the time. There is a very strong feeling amongst 
Metis people and amongst the first nations people in the area 
that that compensation was inadequate, and the federal 
government has recently agreed to pay additional compensation 
to the first nations in the area. 
 
Unfortunately the federal government has not paid the same 
respect to the Metis people in the area, and I met recently with 
the Primrose Lake Air Weapons Range negotiating committee 
on behalf of the Metis, to hear their position on this, to receive 
their concerns about it, at which point I conveyed their concerns 
to the federal minister, Minister Ralph Goodale, the federal 
interlocutor on Metis affairs, and encouraged personally the 
Hon. Ralph Goodale to meet with the Primrose Lake Air 
Weapons Range negotiating committee in order to address these 
issues around which they feel they have not been dealt with 



April 8, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

fairly. 
 
And so I say again that I thank the members of the community. 
I’ve heard their concerns. They are real, and I would encourage 
the federal government to take this matter seriously in the 
discussions with the Metis. And I suspect what I hear the 
member from Athabasca saying, that he would support the 
province in their support of the Metis to achieve a reasonable 
resolution of this issue of compensation for lost benefits as a 
result of inadequate federal compensation. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess most 
certainly we can talk about our commitment, your commitment, 
and my commitment to work towards a common resolution to 
the problem, and as I’ve indicated on many occasions to you — 
on a few occasions — that certainly that you can count on my 
support and count on my office’s efforts to try and accomplish 
that very objective. 
 
I just want to make sure that, based on your information as of 
today, and if we assume — and I stress that, we assume — that 
the $243,670 you get each year — again we’re assuming that 
you got that each and every year — is it fair in a yes or a no 
statement to stand today and say that yes, for the past four to six 
years we have been getting $243,670 from the federal 
government on the lease of the Primrose Lake Air Weapons 
Range? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — As I said earlier, I can’t confirm that 
number because I don’t know what the . . . how many times the 
number was changed in renegotiations since the original 
agreement. 
 
But I would again state for the benefit of the member opposite 
that this land is no different than any other provincial lands. 
And whether the federal government leases it or whether my 
neighbour leases it to graze his cattle or whether an oil or gas 
company leases it for purposes of oil development or mineral 
. . . for mineral development or forestry companies for forestry 
development, it is a provincial asset for which the province, the 
people of Saskatchewan, should be compensated regardless of 
who leases it. 
 
And so I would again hope that that would be a common 
interpretation by the member of Athabasca. These are 
Saskatchewan resources that, to whomever they are leased, 
there ought to be appropriate lease fees paid. 
 
If the member opposite is trying to make a link, which he has 
not yet done, but if he’s trying to make a link between 
compensation and reasonable rental of land, there is no link to 
be made. Because the agreement that was struck provided a 
lease payment to the province of Saskatchewan which has been 
renegotiated from time to time and provided that the federal 
government would provide compensation to those displaced. 
 
And again I appreciate the member opposite’s commitment to 
work together with us to encourage the federal government to 
meet their obligations with respect to these Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — No, Mr. Minister, I was not trying to make a 
link. 

I think the key thing here, Mr. Minister, is we go along another 
path here if I may, a couple more questions before we’ll 
certainly have other opportunities to talk about this matter at 
greater length. 
 
In reference to northern Saskatchewan, when you do have the 
treaty land entitlement process in place, in southern 
Saskatchewan you do deal with third interests or third-party 
interests such as the farming community, perhaps municipal 
governments, perhaps RMs. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan a huge chunk of the lands that you 
are selling in the North is Crown land. It’s government-owned 
land. And I understand from the negotiations that you have on 
the treaty land entitlement that any sale of any lands, 70 per 
cent is paid for by the federal government and 30 per cent is 
paid for by the provincial government. So if I were to buy a 
hundred acres off the member from Kindersley, which I know is 
going to be an inflated price, and for example if it’s a $100, I 
would have to . . . the federal government would have to pay 70 
per cent of that cost to the seller. And the province had to sell 
. . . would have to cover 30 per cent of that. 
 
Now what happens in northern Saskatchewan when the owner 
of the land, which is the provincial government, when they own 
the land, do they in essence receive the profits of all those sales 
of Crown lands in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — With respect to the question of what 
happens in the northern areas, the . . . first of all, the amount of 
land that has been sold out of provincial land, provincial land 
base in the North, is very, very small. The successful 
negotiations have often been greater in private land sales. 
 
But in the North, when there is an agreement achieved, the 
province sells the land at an appraised value for the purpose of 
transferring it. But in those instances, the province puts up 30 
per cent, plus another 19 per cent to compensate the federal 
government for the fact that they are, in a number of cases, then 
taking on northern resource, northern communities, northern 
infrastructures, that have previously been a provincial 
responsibility. 
 
So if a community is taken into reserve status that was 
previously funded by Municipal Government in the province, 
this becomes a savings to the province. So the formula is 
constructed in such a way that an additional 19 per cent is paid 
by the province towards the total compensation, but we have 
already sold it for an appraised value, that which is, hopefully, 
fair. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have to admit to you 
I’m, at this point in time, very confused about the answer. Am I 
to understand that in the event that you’re selling some northern 
land, instead of paying 30 per cent of that northern land, what in 
essence you’re doing is you’re, you’re achieving a 70 per cent 
profit rate as a result of this land going into treaty land 
entitlement? So in essence instead of costing you 30 per cent, 
you’re gaining 70 per cent. So you’re saying now today that 
you also assess the property and you pay an extra 19 per cent to 
sell it to yourself? 
 
So I’m just trying to get a better bearing, Mr. Minister, in the 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1998 

event that you are able to explain clearly what the process is, 
where does the purchase of northern Crown lands dollars under 
the treaty land entitlement process — where does that money 
go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Well that’s a very simple question to 
answer, and if you had ever joined with me in my profession 
you would understand that when somebody who owns land — 
like a farmer sells land — the farmer who owned the land gets 
the money for the land. It is also true if the province happens to 
be the owner of the land. If the province owns land and it’s sold 
to anybody — including a first nation — the province gets the 
money for the sale. The province then makes its contribution, 
except it’s a larger contribution, to the purchase of those funds. 
 
So if the province sells a parcel of land for a hundred thousand 
dollars, then it makes its contribution of $30,000 for the regular 
contribution to treaty land entitlement settlement, plus it makes 
an additional contribution of another $19,000 to compensate the 
federal government for, on average, their acquisition of assets 
that used to be assets that were a provincial expense, like 
community infrastructure. So if the province sold a hundred 
thousand dollar parcel of land, they would pay 49,000 towards 
the treaty land entitlement cost structure, and the province 
would then have $51,000 left from a hundred thousand dollars 
value of land. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — So on a hundred thousand dollar price tag 
you’d pay 49 per cent, or 49,000. Nineteen of that thousand . . . 
19 of the 49,000 would go to the federal government as the 
Indian band is assuming the responsibilities of a small 
municipal government that’d be maybe at the borderline or 
within the borders of the Indian band. The other 30 per cent — 
who do you pay that to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — All of the money goes to exactly the same 
place. The provincial contribution to the sale of that treaty land 
entitlement arrangement is 49 per cent and the federal 
contribution is 51 per cent as opposed to 30/70 for lands in the 
South. 
 
So it is just part of the annual contribution we make, and it is 
allocated in such a way that the provincial government pays an 
additional portion and the federal government pays a lesser 
portion because they will eventually assume costs in the cost of 
operation. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Would you . . . is it safe to say that the 30 per 
cent that you’re supposed to pay, do you pay it to the federal 
government, do you pay it to the northern revenue-sharing trust 
account, or do you pay it to yourself? Do you pay it to yourself? 
Your 30 per cent, where does your 30 per cent go on the cost of 
the $100,000 piece of land? It’s paid to yourself. 
 
So the fact of the matter is, and you look at the other 19 per 
cent, Mr. Minister, that you say that you pay in addition to 
assuming some of the municipalities within the treaty land 
entitlement process, that 19 per cent will add substantial savings 
to the operation of municipal governments across the North. 
Now where are those savings going to? 
 
So what I’m trying to get at here is that in northern 
Saskatchewan once again the sale of Crown lands to the treaty 

land entitlement process is of significant — significant — 
financial gain to you in the immediate future and in the 
long-term future as well. 
 
And I end my question with that, and of course we’ll have other 
opportunities to go along this path. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Again, if you had joined me in my noble 
profession of farming, you would understand that whether one 
owns the land or whether one sells the land, in one case you 
have the opportunity to make your life from the land and the 
other case you lose the opportunity to make your life from the 
land; and the payment somebody gives you or the compensation 
for the fact that you no longer have the land from which you 
can make a livelihood. 
 
So how one would describe this as somehow a gain for the 
province, it is an arrangement the province has agreed to as a 
dutiful participant in the treaty land entitlement negotiations — 
to contribute its portion to the resolution of this issue of 
outstanding treaty claims that have never been resolved. The 
money that the province pays, whether it’s 30 per cent or 
whether it’s 49 per cent, depending on where the settlement is, 
goes into the federal trust fund. 
 
And the federal trust fund simply provided a little less money 
for those northern lands from the federal government because 
the province pays more. That’s the simple explanation. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................521 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................521 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................521 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................521 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................521 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................521 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................521 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................521 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................521 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................522 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................522 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................522 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................522 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................522 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................522 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................522 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................523 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................523 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................523 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................523 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................523 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................523 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................523 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................523 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................524 
 Hospital Bed Shortage 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................524 
 Babcock and Wilcox Expanding in Melville 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................524 
 Perogy Police Squad 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................525 
 Citizenship Ceremony at Radisson School 
  Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................525 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................526 
 Hospital Bed Shortages 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................526 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................527 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................527 
 Northern Ambulance Service 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................527 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................528 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................528 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................528 
 Workers’ Compensation Board Survivor Benefits 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................529 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................529 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan Indian Federated College Gets New Home 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................529 



 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................530 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................530 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 22  The Electronic Filing of Information Act 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................531 
 Bill No. 23  The Statute Law Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................531 
 Bill No. 24 — The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1998 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................531 
 Bill No. 25 — The Pipelines Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................531 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Resignation of Member for Saskatoon Eastview 
  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................531 
MOTIONS 
 Request for Subpoena 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................531 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................532 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................532 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................532 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 2 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................532 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................533 
 Bill No. 3 — The Public Utilities Easements Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................533 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................534 
 Bill No. 4 — The Saskatchewan Evidence Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................534 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................535 
 Bill No. 11 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................536 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................537 
 Bill No. 5 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 1998 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................537 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................538 
 Bill No. 6 — The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................539 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................539 
 Bill No. 7 — The Pastures Act 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................539 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................540 
 Bill No. 8  The Stray Animals Amendment Act, 1998 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................541 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................541 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs — Vote 30 
  Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................542 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................542 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................547 
 
 
 
 
 


