





























































Hansard: April 28, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 817 
 April 28, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of the community of 
Lampman. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

These petitions come from the Windthorst, Arcola, Carlyle, 
Lampman, and Kisbey areas of the province. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, as well to present 
petitions. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the Kisbey, Arcola, 
Lampman, and Kipling areas of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Weyburn, Kisbey, 
and Arcola. I so present. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition. This is signed by people from Carnduff, North Portal, 
and Oxbow area. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
as well. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, 
Arcola, Lampman, Norquay, and Kisbey, Mr. Speaker. I so 
present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Everyone that’s signed this petition is from Spalding. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 
behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan relative to the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the Plains Health 
Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1998 

by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Citizens who have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Aneroid, Ponteix, Pambrun, and the 
community of Redvers. I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are all from the 
community of Indian Head. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
more significant than ever for me to be presenting petitions on 
this Day of Mourning for workers killed on the job on behalf of 
citizens of our province concerned about justice for 
disenfranchised widows and widowers: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed this today are all from the Regina 
district, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to save the Plains Health Centre; to put 
a moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health Centre; 
and to reinstate pensions for disenfranchised widows and 
widowers of Saskatchewan. 

 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 
Day of Mourning for Killed and Injured Workers 

 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, April 28 is the day set aside as a 
Day of Mourning for workers killed or injured on the job during 

the previous year. This day of remembrance was initiated in 
Saskatchewan 10 years ago by you, Mr. Speaker, and it is now 
observed right across Canada. 
 
Preventing workplace incidents is first the duty of individuals. 
Sadly, the victims of the incidents are individuals. 
 
This is a day to remember one terrible number. That number 
this year is 34. That is the number of individuals killed on the 
job in Saskatchewan last year — 34 individuals to mourn, 34 
parents or children or siblings whose place in the family is 
empty, whose voice in society is silenced. 
 
Thirty-four is a particularly terrible number because it’s five 
more than last year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the minister in a few minutes reads the 
names of those killed and asks for a moment of silence, I 
suggest that we as legislators consider our duty as individuals 
and as this collective Assembly to do what we can to stop these 
senseless tragedies. Our duty is to defend workers’ rights and 
safety through all the legislative tools at our command. 
 
Let us today renew our determination to stop on-the-job 
carnage. We owe it to the thousands of injured workers and to 
the memory of the 34 individuals who lost their lives at work in 
Saskatchewan last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I rise to recognize all Saskatchewan workers killed on the job 
last year and in years past. This past year we have seen at least 
two very tragic and fatal falls right here in our capital city. 
 
Under any circumstance, death is difficult to deal with. But if 
we lose an elderly loved one or an individual who has suffered 
for long periods of time, their length of life or removal from 
pain may provide solace to their loved ones. But one can only 
imagine how horrifying it would be to lose a loved one in a 
sudden, work-related accident. On average 30 people are killed 
at work each year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this Day of Mourning we should all remind 
ourselves that it is everybody’s responsibility to make sure the 
workplace is as safe as it can possibly be. As legislators we 
must be vigilant of occupational health and safety regulations, 
employers must maintain a safe work environment, and 
employees must take that extra, life-saving minute to protect 
themselves. 
 
I would like to take a moment to remind all workers who have 
been fortunate enough to avoid a work-related tragedy, whether 
they are working in Canada or overseas, to exercise caution. 
Take care and come home safely to your children or loved ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an important day and I would ask all the 
members in the Assembly to join with me in remembering all 
workers killed on the job in Saskatchewan and around the 
world. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

Grant to Big Sisters Association of Saskatoon 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Friday before 
last the Minister of Education announced on behalf of the 
Minister of Municipal Government that the Big Sisters 
Association of Saskatoon has received $10,000 of casino profits 
through the associated entities fund. The Big Sisters will use the 
grant to address the needs of at-risk female children and youth 
related to family violence. 
 
The violence prevention program will work to decrease or 
eliminate risk factors for children and youth through support, 
education, and alternative choices. A portion of the activities 
will be scheduled based on a family support centre services and 
programs. Independent components of the program will be 
scheduled through the Big Sisters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government established the associated entities 
fund to distribute a portion of casino profits for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people. To date over $1 million has been 
distributed throughout Saskatchewan for programs that support 
children, youth, and families. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Free Vote on Hepatitis C Victims Compensation Package 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I 
questioned why the Premier would deny a free vote on the issue 
of compensating all victims of hepatitis C. After all, members 
unanimously passed a motion with the same intent on 
December 15. Following question period today a motion will be 
put to this Assembly to compensate all victims. The NDP has 
expressed some concern about a free vote on this issue because 
it could result in a vote of non-confidence for this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, providing House leaders can agree, a free vote can 
take place without this government risking a vote of 
non-confidence. All this requires is an agreement by the House 
leaders of each of the respective parties in this Assembly. Mr. 
Speaker, I put a challenge to the other parties in this House to 
work together and reach a consensus before this motion is 
presented in this House. 
 
Yesterday the Minister of Health told all members of the 
Assembly to park politics at the door regarding this issue. If he 
truly meant this, now is the perfect time for all members to do 
so and vote according to their conscience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Modern-day Good Samaritan 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, this is a story in which the moral is 
apparent — the kind of story Saskatchewan people pass over as 
commonplace but which is anything but normal in the world 
outside our borders. 
 
Yesterday, while driving to Regina, I stopped in Chamberlain 
for gas. I stopped at Bennett’s service station. MLAs (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly) may be aware that this station has 
willingly complied with all environmental regulations and has 
installed above-ground tanks. 

Lyle filled my car with gas and, when it was time to pay, I 
discovered that I had left my credit card at home. Being a poor 
MLA, I had no cash with me. My dog, who usually travels with 
me, has no resale value. This situation was not quite the same as 
being beaten and left in the ditch like in the parable of the good 
Samaritan, but it was close enough. 
 
Lyle calmly wrote my name and the amount I owed for the gas 
on a piece of paper and said I could pay on my return trip. He 
then asked me if I needed any extra cash for my journey. This 
too would have been given on trust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was a small act of kindness to a stranger by a 
small-business person who could have been very suspicious of 
travelling politicians, but his fundamental Saskatchewan 
goodness overrode any lack of trust. I’m not surprised but I am 
grateful. This is truly the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Political Program on Yorkton Radio 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night I listened to a political program on CJGX radio in 
Yorkton. Now CJGX usually provides high quality programing, 
but I have to say that was actually pretty boring last night. 
 
The Liberals bought an hour of air time so Mr. Melenchuk and 
several of his MLAs could have a phone-in program. It was a 
good example of how much interest there is in Liberals these 
days because the first half an hour nobody called. Not one call, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It got so bad that in order to generate some interest, CJGX 
decided to play a lengthy interview with me. That got some 
calls going, Mr. Speaker. Four of the six callers, four of the six 
callers told the Liberals they should have joined the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
One caller noted that Mr. Melenchuk would have joined the 
Saskatchewan Party, only he wanted to be leader and we 
weren’t foolish enough to let that happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel somewhat guilty about not sharing in the 
cost of the radio program because most of it was about the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And the final caller suggested they should all just join the NDP 
(New Democratic Party). He said the Premier’s quitting pretty 
soon anyway, and maybe Mr. Melenchuk could run for the 
NDP Party. That seems to be the best suggestion I heard all 
night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to tell the Liberals I was glad to help 
out and I’m glad my comments generated some interest and 
some calls in an otherwise boring program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Nursing Home for Shaunavon 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I attended a 
sod-turning ceremony at the Shaunavon hospital to 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1998 

commemorate the commencement of construction of a new 
nursing home attached to the existing hospital. 
 
The project involves construction of a 44-bed nursing home 
attached to the hospital as well as renovations to the hospital 
itself. 
 
The new addition will replace two existing but outdated homes. 
The new nursing home facility will be capable of providing 
level 3 and level 4 care. These levels of care were simply not 
sustainable in the old homes, but perhaps the opposition would 
like to save those buildings as well. 
 
Of the 44 long-term beds in the new addition, 12 are designated 
specifically for respite and care of people with dementia. There 
will be an adult day program; dining and activity areas for 
long-term patients. Renovations on the hospital itself will focus 
on emergency out-patient service areas, and the kitchen. 
 
This is a $5 million project which will greatly enhance the 
health needs of the people in the Shaunavon district. I was 
happy to accept my invitation to the sod-turning ceremony; 
however I am a little perplexed that the member from Wood 
River did not accept his. Perhaps he was too busy spreading 
misinformation about Saskatchewan health care to attend what 
was a magnificent ceremony, celebrating excellent 
improvements to health care in his own constituency. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party and Day of Mourning 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
this official Day of Mourning for workers killed on the job in 
Saskatchewan, I find it interesting that there’s just one political 
party who has chosen not to wear a sticker recognizing this 
important day. 
 
While they mouth their empty platitudes about being concerned, 
Mr. Speaker, it is the very policies that they believe in which 
contribute to the concerns of Saskatchewan people. They are 
against the trade unions and their ability to represent workers; 
they are against toughening up The Occupational Health and 
Safety Act; and they are against a strong Workers’ 
Compensation Board, and they are against a strong Labour 
Standards Act. 
 
All of these Acts, Mr. Speaker, serve to protect working people 
in this province and to ensure safe working conditions as they 
perform their jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s no surprise to me that we hear no sincerity from the 
Saskatchewan Party on this solemn occasion. In their hearts 
they simply do not believe what they are saying because they 
are on public record with their statements and policies which 
would weaken, not strengthen, safety provisions for the workers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskPower. Mr. 
Minister, it is now clear that the decision to pay off Jack Messer 
was made by you — not Rob Garden, not Milt Fair, you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Jack Messer testified under oath that in return for his 
resignation you promised him a lucrative severance package. 
John Wright communicated that message to Jack Messer, 
clearly acting on your direction. Mr. Minister, that is 
completely different from the story you’ve been telling this 
House for the past two months. 
 
Mr. Minister, Jack Messer says you promised him a lucrative 
severance in return for his resignation or he would have been 
terminated with cause. What happened? Did you promise Jack 
Messer this severance package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if I could respond to 
the member, because he has a very selective memory as to what 
is accurate. In fact even in the committee the words he uses 
about the individual testifying aren’t accurate. But let me tell 
you that the circumstances were this, and I repeat them for the 
member. 
 
The board of directors of Crown Investments Corporation and 
Mr. Messer decided to part company, and the issue of severance 
was handed over to one Milt Fair to decide severance, if any — 
if any — would be paid. 
 
I want to quote as well what Mr. Messer said . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the Chair is having 
already difficulty being able to hear the answer being provided 
and I do ask for the cooperation of the members of the House to 
enable the minister to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Messer said outside of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: “I believe that Mr. Wright 
indicated that the Acting Chair will have all the latitude that he 
felt it required in order to make and have a fair settlement.” 
That’s what he said outside of the House . . . outside of the 
committee. 
 
So when you say that he said I was doing the severance, that’s 
not accurate. And you’re misleading and you’re saying 
something that isn’t honest. And I can understand now why you 
weren’t chosen as leader of even that rump of a party known as 
the Conservative Party in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, Jack Messer 
testified before the committee under oath that you directed John 
Wright to pay him a lucrative severance package and he quoted 
an example of the most lucrative severance package that it was 
going to be compared to. And he was told, through Mr. Wright 



April 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

by you, that if he didn’t accept that severance package you 
would have him terminated with cause. 
 
He testified before the committee under oath, Mr. Minister. 
When are you going to take responsibility for your actions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that I checked with Mr. Wright only minutes 
before coming in the House. And he indicated clearly, he 
offered no severance to Mr. Messer. 
 
Now look, in your scrum — I say to the member from Melfort 
— you said we have to be careful in the committee not to jump 
to conclusions, but that there is a clear difference between what 
Mr. Messer says in other accounts. Now I would urge you to 
wait until John Wright, the CEO (chief executive officer) of 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation), comes before the 
committee, other ministers who will come. Take your own 
advice. Take your own advice and not jump to conclusions. 
Otherwise the committee can’t function and can’t work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Jack 
Messer was testifying under oath before the committee and if 
you’re saying that he is not saying the truth, Mr. Minister, that 
is most unfortunate. Mr. Messer also told us that there is more 
information about the Guyana deal that hasn’t been disclosed. 
Mr. Messer said that clearly there are legal repercussions 
potentially against SaskPower and SaskPower Commercial. Mr. 
Messer said that under oath, Mr. Minister, and it was confirmed 
by Mr. Christensen. 
 
Will you admit to this House that SaskPower or SaskPower 
Commercial or the government are at potential legal risk 
because of your pulling out of the Guyana deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 
two questions that were asked. First of all, Mr. Wright will 
come to the committee and he will give clear indication that he 
offered no severance to Mr. Messer. Now your job will be to 
listen to all of the comments made, all of the comments made 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now . . . Order. In order 
for question period to function in an orderly way, it needs the 
cooperation of all the members of the House. Now I’ll ask for 
the cooperation of the members of the opposition to allow the 
minister to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again, Mr. Wright will come 
before the committee which you are a part of and he will give 
testimony. And as indicated earlier today, he has indicated to 
the press and to anyone who cares to ask him that he offered no 
severance on behalf of the board of directors of CIC to Mr. 
Messer. 
 
So you’re going to have two conflicting opinions on the same 
set of circumstances. Your job will be, to the member from 
Rosthern who yells from his seat as usual, you’ll have to decide 
where the truth lies given the set of circumstances that you’re 

given. 
 
As it relates to Guyana, you will know that it was also 
indicated, and Mr. Wright will tell you this as well if asked, that 
our legal opinion in CIC is that we have no legal obligations to 
the Government of Guyana. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, today under oath Mr. Messer 
and Mr. Christensen confirmed that there were reports 
identifying the potential dollar extent to which the government 
or SaskPower or SaskPower Commercial would be legally 
liable for pulling out of the deal. 
 
Today we asked for those documents and all related documents 
related to this Guyana deal — which were clearly articulated as 
a part of the reason that you terminated Mr. Messer — were to 
be tabled by the committee, and your majority overruled that. 
 
When will you take responsibility for releasing this information 
to the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I said to the member opposite 
the last time the Guyana issue was dealt with, it was in a 
committee where you were asking questions about it. You 
remember that. You will remember that. And then you go on to 
say, I knew nothing about Guyana. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now I will ask for the 
cooperation of the members. And it is simply not acceptable in 
question period to be having a continuous commentary, and I 
will ask for the cooperation, I will ask for the cooperation of all 
members to enable the minister’s answer to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to the 
member from Melfort, when he was in the committee dealing 
with Guyana he did not take an opportunity to say that he was 
opposed to it, that he didn’t like it. He didn’t say a word, didn’t 
say a word. In fact he was complimentary to the people 
bringing the information. He was complimentary, giving 
indication that he supported the Guyana deal. 
 
Now I just can’t understand how Mr. Messer and the people at 
SaskPower . . . one day you’re saying they all should be fired 
because they’re incompetent and today you’re saying they’re 
the sole authority on which you hope to build the inquiry’s 
mandate. Now it can’t be both. It can’t be both. It can’t be that 
Mr. Messer and Christensen are the authority but at the same 
time a week ago you wanted them all fired. Which is it? 
Where’s your credibility? It’s no darn wonder the party didn’t 
elect you. It’s no wonder the party didn’t elect you as its leader 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
credibility isn’t an issue here, yours is. Mr. Minister, when are 
you going to take responsibility? You have not been forthright 
with us about Channel Lake; you haven’t been forthright with 
us about Jack Messer’s severance; you haven’t been forthright 



822 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1998 

with us about Guyana. Mr. Premier, this man will not be 
forthright with this Assembly. Why don’t you fire him and let 
someone else deal with this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I am very, very pleased 
to speak to this question. This minister, the Deputy Premier, the 
government, has tabled every relevant document on its own 
with respect to Channel Lake — Mr. Speaker, on its own — we 
tabled 150 pages on the opening day of the legislature. On our 
own . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair is again having 
difficulty being able . . . Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll try one 
more time, Mr. Speaker, to make my point. 
 
The Deputy Premier, on behalf of the government, tabled on 
opening day of the legislature a hundred and fifty pages of 
Deloitte Touche reports, CIC reports, subsequently directed 
them to go to Public Accounts Committee. They didn’t want it 
to go to Public Accounts Committee, referred it to Crown 
Corporations; tabled a thousand documents — I don’t mean 
pages but documents — and more that have come to light; a 
credible television list of witnesses that have come forward and 
testified in this matter; has answered every question 
consistently and credibly and has maintained that posture on 
behalf of the government. This person has told the truth about 
everything that this government does, as this government has 
told the truth about this particular matter. 
 
Something that he hasn’t, because when he got up in the House, 
he swore his allegiance to the Liberal Party — swore his 
allegiance to the Liberal Party — and then betrayed them 
publicly. This government, this minister, and this caucus never 
has done that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, it is now pretty clear why you don’t allow your 
back-bench members to vote freely. I think it’s even a mistake 
for you to even let them speak. The member from Redberry 
Lake seems to be suggesting that expanding hepatitis C package 
would lead to claims from drug users. Mr. Premier, we are 
talking about people who got hepatitis C through tainted blood, 
not drug use. 
 
One of the cases that has been brought to our attention is Scott 
Mamer of Melfort who has been living with this deadly disease 
all his life. That’s because Scott contracted hepatitis C in 1982 
through a transfusion he got when he was seven days old, Mr. 
Premier — seven days old. Not a drug user — a seven-day-old 
infant. He has lived with this disease ever since. 
 
Mr. Premier, can you explain how it is fair for your government 
to turn its back on Scott Mamer? 

Mr. Premier, will you as well allow your members to vote 
freely on the motion that will be coming before the Assembly 
this afternoon. Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to respond again 
today to the issue that I spoke to yesterday. And I want to 
advise the members one more time in the Assembly, that this 
issue of hepatitis C and the compensation package for 
Canadians across Canada has been viewed and reviewed and 
discussed and deliberated at length. And it is unfortunate, Mr. 
Speaker, but true, that on all occasions, on all occasions the 
health care system cannot — cannot — compensate for every 
harm that’s brought to people through the delivery of its 
process. It cannot do that. 
 
And today, like the member opposite, we too feel like he does, 
we feel like he does and we sympathize deeply with those 
people across Canada who do not fit within the scope of 
decision that all Canadian Health ministers and the federal 
government made. 
 
Now to suggest . . . to have the member suggest today that 
people on this side of the House have not had an opportunity to 
debate this or discuss this, or send me away to Ottawa and 
Toronto, where we’ve gone to have the debate collectively with 
ministers, is absolutely false. Because on this side of the House 
we make decisions that’s inclusive, that’s inclusive. And it 
never, in the day that I’ve served in this government, has there 
been anything that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I 
questioned why the Premier would deny a free vote on the issue 
of compensating all victims of hepatitis C. After all, members 
unanimously passed a motion with the same intent on 
December 15 — December 15, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP have expressed some concern about a free vote on the 
issue; that it could result in a vote of non-confidence in this 
government. I’m not sure that there shouldn’t be one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, providing House leaders can agree, a free vote can 
take place without the government risking a vote of confidence. 
Once again, Mr. Premier, will you allow your back-benchers 
and all your members to vote with their conscience? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the members of this 
party, the members of this government, always try to act with 
our individual conscience; we try to reflect the public interests 
with the best conscience that we can in our decisions. 
 
The hon. member quotes the resolution of December, which 
resolution was acted upon. The resolution that we voted for was 
acted upon. It was acted upon by his Liberal federal 
government. It was acted upon by all the provincial 
governments and the best possible settlement in very difficult 



April 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

circumstances. An offer of settlement, as the Minister of Health 
has indicated, has come forth under very difficult 
circumstances. 
 
We have acted on the resolution. We act on our consciences; we 
act in the public interest with the best conscience and 
compassion that we can exhibit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
 

Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, more than 200 representatives 
from health districts and other organizations are meeting today 
in Regina and tomorrow to discuss priorities relating to the 
development of the Health Information Network. A news 
release says these discussions will, and I quote: “. . . help guide 
initial implementation of the SHIN technology and software 
over the next year.” 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re only now determining what SHIN 
(Saskatchewan Health Information Network) might look like in 
its final form but you’ve already spent in excess of $7 million 
on technology and software which may not even fit the final 
requirements. Mr. Minister, don’t you think you’ve put the cart 
before the horse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 
knows, that we have been consulting with the public since 
November of . . . from 1997. We’ve been consulting with the 
public and we have received a variety of different information 
from the public across Saskatchewan telling us what they want 
to see in the new piece of legislation that soon I’ll be bringing 
to this Assembly and sharing with this Assembly of which we 
can debate and discuss at length. 
 
And again the member indicates that today we have 200 more 
people who are here discussing the value and the process of 
how we’re going to enrich the services across Saskatchewan 
through the new information technology. 
 
Now we have set aside $40 million in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, over the next couple of years to bring to fruition the 
initial stages of SHIN, like our partners to the east and west. 
Only in Alberta they’re spending 300 million and in Manitoba 
they’re spending 200 million over the same period of time. 
 
But we’re proceeding on a different path, Mr. Speaker, although 
we want to achieve the same objectives. We’re doing it 
cautiously; we’re doing it in consultation with Saskatchewan 
people to ensure that we have the best services, particularly, Mr. 
Speaker, for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, privacy seems to have become 
an expensive second thought to this government. The master 
services agreement for SHIN states that $7 million has already 
been spent and several irrevocable decisions will have been 
made regarding technology and software. At the same time 
SHIN chairman, John Grossman, admits in a February 11 letter 

to the deputy minister of Health that, and I quote, and that’s this 
letter here, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The right of an individual to request non-disclosure of 
portions of a record will create significant technical 
challenges for SHIN. 
 

Mr. Minister, you’ve spent millions on technology which may 
not meet the needs of SHIN. You’ve got major privacy 
concerns that you haven’t yet addressed. 
 
Mr. Minister, given the track record on NDP investments, will 
you get a clear picture of what the end product is going to be 
before you toss away millions more dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I brought to the 
attention of the member opposite on several occasions what the 
intent will be in Saskatchewan at the end of the day when we 
have in this province the technology system that provides a 
broad range of services to Saskatchewan people, and 
demonstrated that through the examples of telehealth, of which 
he’s had some experience to see and witness and realize, what it 
will provide for Saskatchewan people particularly in the rural 
part of our province. 
 
But keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that this isn’t only a 
Saskatchewan initiative; this is a Canadian initiative. And just 
recently, Mr. Speaker, in Alberta, in Edmonton, of which the 
member opposite and his party were invited to attend, the 
federal Liberal government had a large convention, bringing 
people from across Canada together to demonstrate, Mr. 
Speaker, to demonstrate what health information can and will 
do into the future. 
 
So if the member opposite is suggesting for a minute that there 
has been a useless expenditure, of where I hear him say, in 
information technology, he should be standing up . . . or going 
back to his desk, writing a letter to the federal minister, Allan 
Rock, and tell him that the investment that they made in 
information technology for Canadians today is useless. 
 
So you should get up and send that letter to them, Mr. Speaker, 
but in Saskatchewan we’re going to promote and grow this 
province and health services in the way in which Saskatchewan 
people are accustomed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, on April 2 the Deputy Premier 
assured this House that the reason Jack Messer was paid 
severance was because there was a legal opinion recommending 
it. Now we find out that the truth is completely different. 
 
The decision to pay severance to Jack Messer was made one 
week before the opinion of MLT (MacPherson Leslie & 
Tyerman). What’s going on here? 
 
The Deputy Premier told the House at the same time that I was 
faking it and should apologize for even asking him why we 
were paying severance. For the past two months nearly, he’s 
been standing in this House accusing everybody of fibbing and 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1998 

misleading and lying. Will the Deputy Premier now admit that 
he is the one who is misleading the House and he is the one 
who should apologize? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite . . . and I think he’s referring to the minute from the 
CIC board meeting, which we released to the committee, for 
March 3 which says: 
 

John Wright is to meet with Mr. Messer and indicate to 
him his resignation unconditionally was required by 6 p.m. 
Wednesday, March 4. 

 
Further, John Wright was not authorized to discuss any 
issue of severance with Mr. Messer. 

 
I think that’s key to the questions that were asked earlier. 
 
And Mr. Wright has indicated that Milt Fair, the Vice-Chair of 
SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) board, would acquire 
the services of an outside legal adviser, such as a retired judge, 
to work out any package that would be appropriate in terms of 
severance. 
 
I don’t know how more consistent that can be with the fact that 
we turned the file over to Mr. Milt Fair with the distinct 
approval of his to work out severance, if any. 
 
Now if you ask Milt Fair, you ask John Wright, they will 
confirm this to you over and over again. There’s absolutely 
nothing inconsistent with this minute and the concept that I’ve 
relayed to you over and over again — that this decision was 
made independently by Milt Fair with independent counsel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Alice in Wonderland was right. 
This just keeps getting curiouser and curiouser. 
 
This morning it was revealed that Brian Topp, senior adviser to 
the Premier, was in attendance at the CIC board meeting to 
discuss Jack Messer’s severance. Mr. Topp was obviously there 
on the Premier’s instruction, to act as his ears and eyes. 
 
Can the Premier tell this House what was the debriefing given 
to you by Mr. Topp regarding the discussion? What instructions 
did you give regarding what was to happen about Mr. Messer’s 
severance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Again I say to the member 
opposite, and I can’t be more than clear, that the issue of 
severance was not dealt with by the board of Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
The minutes show that. The minutes show that. I have said it. If 
you ask Mr. Wright, our chief of staff, he will tell you that — 
that the issue of severance was handed over to the Vice-Chair of 
SPC board of directors, Mr. Milt Fair, who in conjunction with 
legal counsel decided the rate of compensation, if any, that 

should be paid to Mr. Messer. And that is absolutely as it 
happened. 
 
As to the presence of the Premier’s staff at CIC board meetings, 
it’s common. If we go back in the history of CIC, it is 
absolutely normal and common that members of the Premier’s 
staff would attend on those occasions. And that’s often the 
occasion where they would be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Prostitution 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is the 
third legislative session that I have risen in my place to appeal 
to the Minister of Social Services to sincerely address the 
problem of the sexual abuse of children through the child 
prostitution slave trade. But alas, it has been to no avail. 
 
To the Minister of Social Services: why won’t you act? What 
are you waiting for? And when can Saskatchewan’s child 
victims of sexual abuse count on you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is refreshing to have a 
member from the opposition stand in her place and raise in this 
House an issue of substantial concern. In response to her 
question, I’m not sure where the member has been, Mr. 
Speaker. If she will review even this year’s most recent budget, 
she will see in that budget, three-quarters of a million dollars — 
$750,000. That’s one-half a million dollars more than last year 
dedicated — dedicated entirely — to meeting the needs of these 
children on our streets who are being abused by adults. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are taking some of the most progressive action 
in Canada by working with the communities of this province in 
addressing this tragic situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, why am I not surprise that this 
minister is treating this issue so very frivolously when he has 
made it clear to me in front of one of his colleagues that his 
government does not consider the issue of child prostitution to 
be a top priority this session. How, Mr. Minister, can you and 
your government marginalize this serious human atrocity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I endeavour to remain 
calm. It is clear to all, except perhaps the member from 
Humboldt, that this government has taken a very, very proactive 
stance in working with communities to address the issues of 
those children on our streets who are being abused. In regard to 
all children and all families in this province, this government 
has taken a very proactive stance. 
 
Now what the member refers to is a draft of some legislation 
that she would like to see passed in this session. That’s what she 
refers to — her personal Bill. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have assured 
that member, I have assured that member that this Bill is being 
reviewed by our Department of Justice. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask that member, has she taken her 
Bill to the aboriginal community of Saskatchewan? Has she 
taken that Bill there? Does she have their support for this piece 



April 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

of legislation? Has she taken it to the various community 
groups in Saskatchewan? Has she been and consulted people? 
Because that’s the way government should function. That’s the 
way we function. We talk to people before we bring legislation 
into this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to advise the minister that yes, I have. I have talked to some 
of the aboriginal community. I have spoken to the police force 
in all three cities. And, Mr. Speaker, the time for this rhetoric 
and these empty gestures and feeble initiatives is long past due. 
And time for action by this administration is long overdue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in July 1997 the street project of Regina Health 
District estimated that there are approximately 150 prostitutes 
16 years and under in Regina, and an additional 140 between 17 
and 19 years of age. Saskatoon and Prince Albert also have 
serious child prostitution problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to substantively address this problem I have 
introduced this Bill entitled The Protection of Children 
Involved in Prostitution Act. In addition there are many severe 
penalties that would be imposed on johns and pimps. 
 
Mr. Minister of Social Services, I ask you once again, will you 
please support this Bill? Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’m going to ask the member from 
Humboldt to stand now in her place and apologize to 
community groups in Prince Albert, to community groups in 
Saskatoon, to community groups in this city, to people across 
this province, when she describes what these individuals and 
groups are doing as feeble efforts. Mr. Speaker, she should 
stand in her place and apologize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across this province, service clubs, for instance, 
last year joined with us in communicating a broad public 
relations strategy. We have a group of people in Saskatoon 
known as the Communities for Children who have worked . . . 
been working day and night on this issue. We have workers in 
Prince Albert, right on the streets of Prince Albert, working 
with children who are being abused. 
 
For her to stand in the House, to stand in the House today and 
describe these as feeble efforts, is a shameful behaviour and she 
ought to stand and apologize to those groups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have not done enough. We are going to 
continue to work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 227 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 1998 (FREE VOTES) 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 
227, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Amendment Act, 1998 (FREE VOTES). 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to request leave to make a statement of importance to 
the people of Saskatchewan concerning the Day of Mourning. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And when I 
say thank you, sir, I mean it in every sense of the word, for it 
was you who, about 10 years ago, introduced the private 
members’ Bill to this Assembly which allows us to take this day 
to reflect on the risks Saskatchewan men and women face every 
day on the job. The Bill you introduced, and which was passed 
by the Legislative Assembly of the day, made Saskatchewan the 
first jurisdiction in Canada to recognize a Day of Mourning for 
workers killed or injured on the job. 
 
Once again Saskatchewan’s lead has been followed by others, 
and jurisdictions across Canada now recognize a Day of 
Mourning. This is an accomplishment for which you, Mr. 
Speaker, and this Assembly can take a great deal of pride. 
 
Every day in our country someone is killed or injured in the 
workplace. and every day the rest of us carry on at our jobs as 
though nothing has happened. Well obviously something has 
happened. 
 
Today is the annual Day of Mourning for workers killed or 
injured on the job — the one day of the year when we don’t 
carry on as though nothing has happened; the one day of the 
year when we consciously and actively remember those people 
and their families. Today those families are grieving and we 
grieve with them. Today we solemnly reflect on the loss these 
families are continuing to experience and the loss everyone in 
society experiences when someone is killed on the job. 
 
Today we also remember all those who have also been seriously 
injured or contracted an illness at work, and we remember those 
men and women who have been left with a permanent disability 
as the result of accidents at work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot undo the past. We cannot ease the grief 
of the families who have lost a loved one. We cannot ease the 
pain of someone who has been hurt or become ill. What we can 
do is reaffirm our commitment to the ongoing promotion of 
prevention and safety programs in the workplace We can 
reaffirm our support for the enforcement of occupational health 
and safety rules and regulations. And we can state 
unequivocally that even one death is too many, even one injury 
too grievous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 34 people died as a result of workplace accidents 
in Saskatchewan in the past year. I would like now to read their 
names into the record, that all shall remember. 
 
Louis Adamyk, Dean Anderson, Vic Begrand, Tony Culic, Neil 
Cunningham, Lorne Czinkota, Peter Dizy, Mark Edwards, 



826 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1998 

William Fedek, Ann Francis, George Gallagher, Larry Hamlin, 
Wayne Hicks, John Hill, Dennis Irven, John Kemp, Lorne 
Kovach, Daryl Larsen, Jim Leech, Thomas Lupanko, Wayne 
Marcoux, Anton Margetts, Diane McLaren, Howard Miller, 
Peter Poworski, Shannon Reinhart, John Sarauer, Trevor 
Schlosser, Kevin Stones, David Wallace, Todd Wharington, 
Clifford White, William White, and Tyler Wirachowsky. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now ask all the members of this Assembly to rise 
and join me in observing a moment’s silence. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to comment on 
the ministerial statement, please. 
 
The Speaker: — It was not a ministerial statement, it was a 
statement made with leave. The hon. member for Saskatoon 
Greystone requests leave to make comment on a similar subject. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to 
all of my colleagues in the House. The significance of this Day 
of Mourning has been heightened for me, Mr. Speaker, since I 
have listened recently to far, far too many tragic stories of 
families who have lost a loved one in a work-related accident. 
Not only is the fatality itself tragic, but the disrupted lives of 
those left behind are immeasurably changed for ever. Wives 
without husbands, husbands without wives. Children left 
without parents, parents left without a child. Colleagues minus a 
team mate, and friends left without one more person to rely 
upon. And illness and injury devastates the normalcy of 
day-to-day living just as much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The greatest message of concern and caring that this 
government could make on this solemn day is to assure the 
widows and widowers who lost their spouses before 1985 and 
then remarried before 1985, that they could have their pensions 
returned to them. Their deceased loved ones deserve this 
honour, and their loved ones who have had to struggle without 
them deserve this as well. And I hope that this particular day 
will bring this government to do the decent and right thing. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to make some 
comment on behalf of the Liberal opposition with respect to the 
Day of Mourning. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for 
allowing me an opportunity on behalf of my caucus to comment 
on the Day of Mourning for workers killed or injured on the 
job. 
 
This is a day when we remember not only those who have lost 
their lives or have been injured as a result of their work, but it’s 
also a time for us to express our sympathy to those families who 
have lost a loved one. We also would like to express our wishes 
for a healthy recovery to those families whose family members 
were injured on the job. 

Last year 34 workers died here in Saskatchewan as a result of 
workplace accidents — 34 people who will no longer be 
coming home to their families and loved ones. 
 
We have to ask, Mr. Speaker, is enough being done to ensure 
that workplaces are becoming safer. Is enough being done to 
prevent these needless tragedies from occurring again in the 
future. I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, that the answer is no. Not 
enough is being done. 
 
On a per capita basis, in Saskatchewan we are amongst the 
highest in workplace fatalities and injuries in our country. 
Among the highest, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the government’s 
promises and commitments, made to the working people, that 
they would be proactive. 
 
The rewrite of the occupational health and safety regulations 
that this government promised when it came to office took 
years to do and it’s still not complete. The mining regulations 
under occupational health and safety are still not finalized. 
 
They cut the programs and staff of the Workers’ Advocate 
office. Their cuts hurt the Department of Labour inspectors, and 
only now are they starting to recognize the problems. There are 
still problems with the Workers’ Compensation Board. And it 
goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. And it’s all on the shoulders of 
this government. 
 
Every year in Saskatchewan, between two and three dozen 
workers are killed at their job. Another one hundred or so 
workers are permanently disabled at their job. Injuries which 
result in only a temporary disability number approximately 
15,000 a year in Saskatchewan. 
 
Are we doing enough? I don’t think so. Do we need to do 
more? The answer is yes. Preventing accidents simply makes 
good sense for all of us. 
 
It doesn’t matter whether you are an employer or an employee, 
time away from work costs everyone. There is the time off 
work, medical attention, drug costs, and rehabilitation costs. 
These are not just the costs of doing business; they are a cost to 
society. 
 
It’s in everyone’s interest to promote safety and safe 
workplaces for the working people of Saskatchewan, not just on 
this Day of Mourning but throughout the year. That’s what I 
believe in, that’s what the Liberal opposition believes in, that’s 
what our party believes in. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 2:29 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 9 - The Parks Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 18 - The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 24 - The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1998 
Bill No. 28 - The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment 

Act, 1998 



April 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

Bill No. 1 - The Arts Board Amendment Act, 1998 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 34 - The Appropriation Act, 1998 (No. 2) 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:32 p.m. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to table, 
pursuant to section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, the 
Report of the Provincial Auditor to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan on the financial statements of the Crown 
agencies for the years ending in the fiscal year ended March 31, 
1997. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Seventy-five Minute Debate 
 

The Speaker: — And also before orders of the day, I wish to 
make a statement regarding the application of the rules to the 
seventy-five minute debate. 
 
Upon review of the record of the last seventy-five minute 
debate on April 7, 1998, the Chair has recognized that I erred in 
the application of rule 17(5) when I stated that the 65-minute 
portion of the debate had to end early in order for a vote to be 
held after the question and comment period. 
 
It should be understood that the seventy-five minute debate has 
two parts, a 65-minute period of address followed by a 
maximum 10-minute question and comment period. Should 
either portion not consume the maximum time provided, then 
the question shall be put. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I hereby submit the answer to question no. 
53. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to question 53 is provided. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — And, Mr. Speaker, in the tradition of open, 
accessible, and responsible government, I also table the answer 
to question 54. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 54 is also provided 
and tabled. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I count it 
an honour to be able to stand in my place this afternoon and 
speak a few moments to this motion that I will be presenting a 

little later that encourages the provincial government to work 
with the federal government to indeed address a very serious 
concern. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly appropriate that we’re 
raising this question today, not only because the question we 
raise, and the motion, coincides with a similar motion that is 
being debated in Ottawa at this time and will be voted on later 
this evening, but as well, Mr. Speaker, when we think about the 
fact that just a few moments ago we paid tribute to those who 
have lost their lives or have been injured in the workplace, and 
it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, the question we raise today 
is of similar significance. 
 
Today will be remembered as an historic day in the Canadian 
House of Commons and it will be remembered as an historic 
day in this legislature. It is the day where federal 
parliamentarians and Saskatchewan legislators will be voting on 
a motion to compensate all victims of hepatitis C infected 
through the tainted blood supply system. 
 
It should have been a day for elected officials to vote from their 
heart and not from their sense of what is right . . . and not from 
fear of the harsh NDP whip. But to use the words of Dick 
Proctor, the NDP’s federal cousin, the Prime Minister has 
placed a muzzle on many of his back-bench MPs; and in my 
words, I expect the Minister of Health and the Premier will do 
the same today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would plead to what is good in all of the 
members opposite to listen to the two examples I will give you 
today. One is the story of a man infected by hepatitis C in 1991, 
and despite the fact that the Red Cross has admitted they knew 
in 1993, he wasn’t diagnosed until 1995 when he took it upon 
himself to be tested. The other story is about a baby boy born 
quite prematurely and in desperate need of a blood transfusion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the blood that saved Scott Mamer’s life is the 
same blood that will most likely take it away. Think about it for 
a moment. Think about it and then decide for yourselves if 
these two individuals deserve compensation. And if the answer 
is yes, how can you deny that there are thousands of other 
stories out there just like this. 
 
Think about it and ask yourselves, how would my constituents 
want me to vote on this motion. Before I continue I also want to 
plant one further seed in the minds of the members opposite. 
Think for a moment about the emotional, physical, and financial 
hardship this disease and your government’s refusal to fairly 
compensate is having on these victims and their loved ones. 
 
Not only have many of these people been forced to accept the 
fact that they may die from hepatitis C, but their lives have been 
turned upside down. Some have lost their jobs, some have lost 
loved ones, and some, yes, Mr. Speaker, have already lost their 
lives waiting. 
 
We see today a situation as Canadians we never wanted to see, 
and I’m sure the members opposite still refuse to see — a 
situation where innocent victims are forced into bankruptcy 
because they fell ill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are people just like you and me — proud 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1998 

people who never thought in their wildest dreams they would 
have to accept social assistance from the government or be 
stripped of their ability to support their families. Yet this is the 
situation many victims find themselves in today. This is the 
dignity you have granted these victims in the last days of their 
lives. 
 
Now I want to return to the arbitrary parameters that your 
Minister of Health helped develop and continues to support. Mr. 
Speaker, 1986 to 1990 is not an appropriate time frame, and if 
the Premier were listening during question period, the Premier 
would know that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will assume not, and repeat these examples for 
you now. I would like to begin by saying the individual who 
was infected in 1991 does not want his name released because 
his case is currently before the courts, and I respect that. It is 
before the courts because, despite the fact that he has been 
written an admission of guilt from the Red Cross, the 
government will not compensate him for this wrongdoing. 
 
Here we have an individual who received many blood 
transfusions in the early 1990s after he received a liver 
transplant. In 1995 when the Krever inquiry was under way, he 
asked himself whether it was possible that his blood had been 
infected. When he was tested in 1995 he learned this was 
exactly the case. But how could this be the case if the Red 
Cross was testing for hepatitis C after 1990? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will tell you how it happened. It happened 
because in 1991 the Red Cross began testing blood with what is 
referred to as the first generation test. But in 1992 they changed 
their testing methods to what is referred to as the second 
generation test. Why the change? They changed their testing 
method, Mr. Speaker, because the first generation test was far, 
far from foolproof. 
 
Let’s return to my example. 
 
The blood unit received by this individual in 1991 tested 
negative for the first generation test. So did three other units 
provided by the same donor. But the donor of these four units 
tested positive in 1993 using the second generation test. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention that the members opposite 
don’t need to believe me. My details all come from data 
received by this individual during mediation with the 
government, the federal government, and the Red Cross. 
 
So what does this information tell us? It tells us lots. It tells us 
that the Red Cross knew he was infected in 1993 but failed to 
tell him. It tells us that there are likely three other individuals 
who received this tainted blood, who are infected with hepatitis 
C and quite possibly don’t know it. It tells us that the first 
generation test wasn’t good enough. It tells us, Mr. Speaker, 
that 1990 is simply not an appropriate parameter for 
compensation. 
 
I would also like to say, Mr. Speaker, that this individual that I 
have made reference to has a clear letter from the Red Cross 
stating that he was implicated by the blood supply. I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this was a bureaucratic slip. I believe 
the Red Cross never intended to release this information, but it 
did. And here it stands as proof. 

In realizing their error, Mr. Speaker, the Red Cross sent him 
another letter stating that notwithstanding the fact that he 
received a unit of blood which tested positive for hepatitis C in 
1993, there was a possibility that the donor contracted the 
disease before he made the donation. Mr. Speaker, here we have 
a recipient with hepatitis C. We have a donor with hepatitis C. 
What are the odds that this is a coincidence? 
 
Despite this clear evidence, what has this government forced 
this victim to do? Mr. Speaker, he’s been forced to go the 
courts. It is clear, Mr. Speaker, that this is their strategy. If 
victims have to go to the courts for compensation, maybe 
enough of them will die before they have a chance. Shame, Mr. 
Speaker. Shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to turn to the other example I 
cited earlier regarding those infected prior to 1986. 
 
But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to share with the 
Assembly the member from Redberry’s rare quotation in 
today’s Leader-Post. He said he was concerned that these 
people had contracted hepatitis C through drug use, not the 
blood supply. Mr. Speaker, what an absolutely insensitive 
comment. Nobody in this Assembly is suggesting for a minute 
that we compensate hep C victims who contracted the disease 
through outside means. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question before us today is about people who 
contracted hep C through the blood supply. End of story. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the member opposite, 
that he give Mrs. Mamer of White City a phone call and repeat 
his insensitive comment to her. Because you see, Mr. Speaker, 
Mrs. Mamer’s son, Scott, contracted hep C when he was seven 
days old — from the blood supply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would the member opposite say that Scott is dying 
of hep C because he abused drugs? I don’t think so. 
 
I think that is the crux of the problem today. I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite believe the rhetoric they are 
being fed instead of using their heads and using their hearts. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe even in Ottawa today we will see 
members listening to a Prime Minister who has become very 
insensitive to the needs of the people he has been elected to 
serve. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it very . . . somewhat interesting to see the 
Prime Minister’s standing and raising the issue of human rights 
in a country where we all believe they’ve been abused. So we 
ask, what is the Prime Minister doing today to raise the issue of 
the rights of hep C victims? Mr. Speaker, we see the Prime 
Minister muzzling his members. I ask the Premier, will you 
allow your members to vote on this issue freely? 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, as I raise this question, as I bring forward 
this motion, as I think of the numbers of the injured workers 
that we just talked about a moment ago, I hope and I pray, Mr. 
Speaker, that we do not forget the hepatitis C victims outside of 
the years 1986 to 1990; that we recognize that they are facing 
the same circumstances, same problems that individuals 



April 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

through the 1986-90 period are facing — that they face the 
same health problems, that they fact the same financial 
problems, and, Mr. Speaker, may not have the privilege of 
enjoying life to its fullest as you and I have the privilege of 
doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just before I move the motion, I have to say, as we 
were chatting with one person . . . or a couple of individuals, 
they have raised it very clearly with us and have been very 
forthright in bringing forward the fact that the costs that they 
have had to face, the enormous waste of the . . . weight of the 
financial burden upon them has put them in a position where 
they almost feel like beggars. They feel like second-class 
citizens in our province. A province where I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, men and women across this province look at where the 
NDP proudly . . . or would like to stand proudly and say that we 
have one of the best health care systems in the world, and 
certainly in all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that is indeed the case, if indeed we are going to 
show the compassion and understanding of how we would 
reach out to those less fortunate, I would ask all members of 
this Assembly to read the motion very carefully and to allow an 
opportunity this afternoon to stand in their places and vote in 
favour of this motion. 
 
I therefore move, seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial and federal 
governments to act on the recommendation of Justice 
Horace Krever to compensate all victims who contracted 
hepatitis C from tainted blood. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am wanting to tell 
the Assembly that I stand here today to speak freely, and I will 
be voting freely, on the motion this afternoon. 
 
I want to start by saying I am deeply offended by some of the 
comments made by the member from Moosomin, who says that 
members on this side believe the legal case should be carried 
out so that people will die before their cases are dealt with. It’s 
shameful, disgusting, unacceptable comment on the part of the 
member from Moosomin. 
 
But I want, Mr. Speaker, to deal very specifically with some of 
the issues that we are dealing with today, because these are very 
important, very serious issues from a very dark period. I want to 
tell you this is a very important debate for me personally 
because, like others in this Assembly, I know people who have 
been affected and infected by tainted blood that was in the 
system. 
 
I know people who were dependent upon our blood system, 
were not only infected by it, but were misled and deceived into 
believing that the system was safe. So like many members in 
this Assembly, I have to tell you this is a very personal debate. I 
say that also in part because I am one of the people who is 
dependent from time to time upon the blood system in order to 
deal with a somewhat unusual blood disorder I have. 

The result is that from time to time bumps become bruises, and 
from time to time in the case of injury, I’ve had to rely on the 
system to ensure that blood products are available to stem 
serious bleeding. In my particular case, I’m fortunate to have 
rarely needed these products. But I know many, many people 
who are not so fortunate. For some people with more severe 
blood disorders like hemophilia, the need for blood products, 
particularly clotting agents, was a regular and necessary part of 
life. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, that these people, myself 
included, were never told the blood we were receiving was not 
tested against HIV (human immunodeficiency virus)or hepatitis 
C. We were not told that there was a risk of potentially 
contracting AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) or 
developing liver disease as a result of these blood products. 
 
By the mid-1980s there was certainly some discussion, 
particularly around HIV, that it could be spread and be 
contracted through blood, but we were told that here in 
Saskatchewan the odds were a million to one that you would 
ever get the virus. Unfortunately the odds were not a million to 
one; they were much worse. 
 
The fact that not only did the Red Cross and the governments 
know that there was a risk of infection from these diseases, but 
they knew that there were tests available at the time and not 
being used, is unbelievable and unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that I think that great progress 
has been made by doctors and researchers during my lifetime to 
better understand and treat the strange blood disorders and the 
many ailments that people have. And as a result, lives of many 
people, myself included, have been improved. 
 
I want to tell you though that none of that — none of that — 
mitigates the fact that the people responsible for the blood 
supply system did not inform patients adequately of the risks 
and did not take steps to test for the terrible viruses when the 
tests were available. 
 
Many people in my position did not have the option of refusing 
blood products. When faced with profuse hemorrhaging, or the 
risk of such during surgery, you simply accept the blood 
products available. Fortunately most of the blood in the system 
was not contaminated. I’m indeed fortunate to never have 
received poisoned blood. Others, Mr. Speaker, others I know 
very well, were never so lucky. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very angry about the way the blood system 
has been managed. I am angry people died because the system 
didn’t safeguard the supply of blood. I am angry that people are 
going to come down with diseases because the tests weren’t 
done on the supply. I’m angry that we were lied to and misled 
about the consequences and the problems in the system. And 
I’m angry that it took a public inquiry to force those responsible 
and in charge of the system to accept the responsibility. Mr. 
Speaker, I am angry about this and I think we all have a right to 
be angry about this. 
 
But I want to tell you, in terms of the Krever report, to me the 
single most important finding of Krever was, in fact, that 
someone was at fault. The problems in the system didn’t just 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1998 

happen; they didn’t just occur. It wasn’t inevitable, once testing 
became available. 
 
It happened because it was allowed to. The fact it was a Tory 
government in charge in Ottawa and in Regina at the time, to 
me is irrelevant. I have to tell you that the fact it has taken our 
own government some six years to accept responsibility, is to 
me now water under the bridge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe, and I believe every member here today, 
agrees that the government, not as a political entity but as a 
legal entity, must bear its share of responsibility. The question 
now is, what should be done about it. 
 
Compensation is a necessary component of that. It’s necessary 
because the government and the blood supply system were 
negligent in not testing the supply when those tests were readily 
available. But compensation in and of itself does nothing to 
mitigate the results of that inaction. 
 
I received a phone call from a constituent a few days ago who 
will now be compensated as a result of the agreement reached 
by the ministers. That person asked me simply: what now? 
What’s the appropriate thing to do with the compensation? It 
can’t be used to prolong a person’s life. It’s not going to ward 
off the advance of the disease. It’s not sufficient, likely, to 
offset possible loss of income, and it isn’t needed to provide 
medical care. So what’s appropriate? What do you do with this 
blood money? 
 
Well I guess the question was somewhat rhetorical, but I think 
it drives right at the heart of the debate today. Certainly 
compensation is a necessary part of the solution when testing 
should have been undertaken and wasn’t. The government was 
and should have been able to protect the blood supply system 
during those five years from 1986 to 1990, when testing was 
readily available elsewhere, and as such it is responsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the government has a responsibility to 
deal with the issue of culpability by providing compensation to 
those it could have and should have protected. The courts may 
indeed in time decide that the definition of culpability has been 
too narrowly applied, and nothing in our debate today precludes 
that action. But the question of compensation addresses solely 
— solely — the issue of culpability. It does not address the 
issue of compassion. 
 
I believe that we as a legislature, as a government, have an 
additional responsibility as a guarantor of the blood supply 
system, as protectors of medicare. Mr. Speaker, we have a 
responsibility to ensure that now, after all is said and done, now 
that all victims will have access to the best quality health care 
available to deal with the illnesses. We have a responsibility to 
ensure that a new blood supply system is developed. And we 
have a responsibility to ensure that this never happens again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, like others who have depended 
on the blood supply system in the past, I know there are things 
that government cannot protect us from. I know there are things 
that we will learn in the future about new viral threats that may 
put the supply at risk again. But I also know that today we have 

an opportunity and the ability to act surely and supportively to 
ensure that quality medical care and services are available to all 
the victims of this virus, whether they attain it through the 
blood system or through other means. 
 
That latter question, the question of providing free medical 
services to all victims regardless of culpability, regardless of the 
means of infection, that to me, Mr. Speaker, is the true test of 
compassion. As such I want to move an amendment to the 
motion. 
 
I want to move an amendment: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all words after 
“Assembly” and substituting the following therefor: 
 
expresses its compassion for all victims of contaminated 
blood; recognizes the agreement between Canada’s 
governments to compensate victims who became ill 
because of negligence or fault; reiterates Saskatchewan’s 
commitment to provide the best possible health care and 
expanded services to all hepatitis C patients; and urges a 
continuing dialogue between governments and patients to 
ensure the best possible health care is provided. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member for Estevan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair would like to take a moment to 
review the amendment to ensure its admissibility. I find the 
amendment in order. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join this 
debate today. I’m also pleased to speak in support of the 
government amendment on this very serious matter. 
 
Our provincial Health minister is to be commended for the good 
work he has conducted as Chair of the national committee, 
knowing that this is an important task to undertake, but also 
knowing that it would be a thankless task in many ways. 
 
In spite of knowing how the oppositions would latch on to the 
issue as a political football, our minister knew that this issue 
was too important to ignore. He chose to do the right thing in 
spite of the political risks involved. This is the kind of 
government that we are and I am proud to be a part of a 
government with these ideals. 
 
Thanks to the efforts of our Health minister and the time and 
energy he has devoted to this issue, we do have a national 
package of financial assistance for people who may have 
received tainted blood or blood products between January 1, 
1986 and July 1, 1990. 
 
Let me repeat this. Because our minister was so determined to 
find support and agreement amongst other provinces and their 
governments, because he persisted on this issue, today we have 
an agreement to pay victims where no agreement or package 
existed previously. The package that was agreed upon by all the 
other governments is reasonable. It uses common sense, and I 



April 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

know that this is something that the members opposite are 
allergic to. 
 
I want to assure Saskatchewan residents that the ministers of 
Health across the country have worked collaboratively on this 
very important issue. We will continue to work together to 
ensure a safe, secure, and accountable blood system for the 
future. 
 
Transfusion-related HCV (hepatitis C virus) infections prior to 
1986 are tragic, but the scientific knowledge and technology 
available at that time was not sufficient to have prevented the 
tragedy. We feel deep sympathy for those who may have been 
infected before 1986. 
 
When governments provide financial assistance in the health 
sector, it must be done on the basis of clear rationale. It would 
be unrealistic to expect governments to provide financial 
assistance for misadventures that occur in the health system 
through no fault of any person or agency. 
 
Does being reasonable please the members opposite? Of course 
not. They don’t want anything to work in health care because 
they would rather see the system destroyed. They do not believe 
in universal, publicly funded health care. Criticizing the 
hepatitis C package is just another way for them to destroy 
public confidence and create fear. They are trying to tell people 
that our health care system is failing. They are creating panic 
where there should be considerable pride. 
 
The fact is Saskatchewan does have the best health care in 
Canada. And Canada has one of the best health care systems in 
the world. Anyone who had the misfortune to be ill or has had a 
loved one who has gotten ill outside our borders will tell you 
that. 
 
Does that mean that things are perfect or that there is nothing 
left to do? Of course not. But I know this. In their negative 
scare tactics, the members opposite are either naïvely or 
deliberately trying to take our health care apart. 
 
I was listening with some amusement, but mostly déjà vu, as the 
members opposite play Chicken Little whenever they talk about 
health care. So much of the debate in health care issues today is 
exactly the same as it was in 1962. The Tories and the Liberals 
went kicking and screaming into changes to health care then, 
just like they are now. 
 
If you talk to people involved in the great medicare debate 35 or 
so years ago, they will tell you that it was the same Chicken 
Little story then — the sky is falling, the sky is falling. If you 
don’t do this or if you don’t do that, the sky will fall in on 
health care. That was the story from the Liberals and the Tories 
in 1962, and that is the story from the Liberals and the Tories in 
1998. 
 
In the story of Chicken Little, the main character, Chicken 
Little, was just quietly minding her own business pecking at the 
ground when an acorn falls from a tree and hits her on the head. 
This had never happened to her before. So she goes in a panic 
to all her friends and warns them that the sky is falling in. 
 
So Chicken Little, Goosey Lucy, and several others began 

running in circles telling everyone they came across. They 
didn’t have any solutions of course, but they were scared and 
didn’t know what else to do. 
 
Until they came across Foxy Loxy. He listened to their story 
and he had a solution. He offered to protect the whole barnyard 
troop in his sturdy rock lair. So Chicken Little and all the others 
followed Foxy Loxy into his lair. And sure enough, Chicken 
Little and the other did not have to worry about the sky falling 
in. Foxy Loxy ate them all for dinner. 
 
Now I’m not entirely sure who on the other side is Chicken 
Little and who is Foxy Loxy. But it doesn’t really matter. The 
end result is the same. There are people who want to gobble up 
health care. They want to have an American-style, for-profit 
kind of health care where if you have the money, you get 
treated, and if you aren’t rich, you go without health care. 
 
These people know that the only way they can get private health 
care is by destroying the public’s confidence in what is truly a 
great system. They have to convince the public that the sky is 
falling in. As a result, they will attack and criticize anything and 
everything in health care. 
 
That is why the opposition is making such an issue out of the 
Plains hospital. They know their position doesn’t make any 
common sense, but that doesn’t matter to them. They are only 
concerned about scaring people about health care. That’s why 
they shout so loud when we try to interject some facts into their 
fearmongering. That is why they shout to drown out the facts 
about an issue like the Plains hospital. 
 
The hepatitis C issue is very similar to the Plains issue. To 
listen to the opposition, the sky will fall in when the services at 
the Plains are transferred to the General and the Pasqua. 
 
And members of the government realize these are very 
emotional issues for a lot of people. And emotion is very easy 
for the opposition parties to tap into, for they can say anything 
they want; because as long as they are in opposition, they never 
have to worry about doing anything. They’re not burdened by 
the little things like balancing the budget or providing other 
services like education, social programs, highways, and interest 
on the debt. Their whole issue is to spend more on health care. 
 
They have submitted petitions every day in the House telling us 
to provide adequate funding for the Plains. This is very easy to 
say, but not once have they said where to take the money from 
— take it from Education, take it from Social Services, Justice, 
Highways. Or maybe they’re just going to go back to deficit 
financing or raising taxes. 
 
Every day more than 35,000 people make contact with the 
health system. Can we do more? Of course we can. Are we 
doing more? Yes, we are. 
 
In ’96-97 we performed 469 more angioplasties — that’s a 109 
per cent increase. In ’96 we performed 4,600 more cataract 
procedures than ’91 — that’s an 81 per cent increase; ’96-97 we 
performed 430 more total hip and knee replacements than we 
did in ’91-92 — that’s a 30 per cent increase. And also, Mr. 
Speaker, we are increasing the number of MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) scans. We didn’t even have an MRI scan in 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1998 

1991 and this year we will perform 5,300 in this province alone. 
 
I am proud to say that we are investing in quality health 
services for Saskatchewan, unlike the federal Liberals, who 
have cut our funding from 50 cents on the dollar to 13 cents. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, earlier I spoke about how ethical and 
courageous our Health minister is. He did the right thing and 
coaxed and led our nation into an agreement for hepatitis C 
victims. This is no small feat in itself, to get the provinces and 
Ottawa to agree on anything, particularly where money is 
involved. But our minister achieved the impossible and did get 
agreement on this issue, even though there were certain political 
risks. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I cannot 
believe what I am hearing coming out of the mouths of the 
members opposite. It’s absolutely astonishing. And for the folks 
that are watching here today, I can imagine what they are saying 
to themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 200-plus spin doctors that the members of the 
government have in their back rooms write out a speech, bring 
it out, hand it to them, and like trained seals, Mr. Speaker, they 
stand there and they read it. The last member doesn’t even 
know which motion he is on, for heaven sakes, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re talking about compassion for hepatitis C victims in the 
province of Saskatchewan, across Canada. And he’s blabbering 
on about the Plains Health Centre and the wonderful things that 
he and his minister and his government have done for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Absolutely ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to bring the House back to the topic of the 
day, which is the issue of tainted blood, and to a resolution that 
was brought forward in this House back in December. And I 
think for the sake of the members opposite, if I could, I’d like to 
read into the record the two resolutions/recommendations that 
were unanimously accepted by all members in this House, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Firstly (that) the Governments of Saskatchewan (and 
Canada) consider, as soon as possible, setting up a 
compensation plan for victims who were given 
contaminated blood or blood products, including the 
victims of hepatitis C; including interim compensation to 
be provided until the final details of the compensation 
program are agreed to; 
 

And secondly: 
 

That the governments of Saskatchewan and Canada 
consider including secondary victims in the compensation 
program; establishing the program so that other social 
benefits received by the victims are not compromised; and 
ensuring that there is access to care and to just and 
equitable allowances established according to the severity 
of the disease, following a consultation with the 
organizations representing the victims. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that is the resolution, a motion that was moved in 
this House by myself, seconded by the member from North 
Battleford, on December 15 and agreed to by all those members 
opposite. Very, very easy to stand up and echo hollow words, 
Mr. Speaker, in this House to get out of a situation; say yes, 
we’re all for looking after these people. 
 
And what do they do? Now they stand in this House today and 
say that we’re going to be compassionate. We tell everybody 
we’re compassionate. But when it comes to looking after them, 
they’re on their own. Let them go on their way. If they follow 
the arbitrary boundaries that were set up by that Minister of 
Health, who was Co-Chair of that committee and the rest of the 
provinces, the Government of Canada, Mr. Speaker, so be it. 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, someone that’s contracted this 
disease on the last month of 1985? And they’re being told, no, 
because you should have waited a month to get the disease. Or 
if you contracted something a month after the year 1990 was 
over: oh, sorry, you know. Does it make any sense, arbitrary 
guidelines? Arbitrary dates never make any sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The interesting part about this whole debate right across 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that all different stripes of 
governments across Canada voted for this package. Their 
ministers went into a room some place and decided this is what 
the governments could go for. Looked at their budgets; and 
certainly governments have to be accountable to the province 
on economic issues, but they forgot about compassion. 
 
They didn’t bother talking to the member who just spoke from 
Estevan about what they should do, what he was hearing in his 
constituency. They didn’t talk to him; they didn’t hear that. 
They went down there, they made the deal on behalf of the 
government, and that’s what they’re sticking to. 
 
The other interesting thing, and it’s come to light in the last 
couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that all oppositions 
across Canada of all stripes are against this thing. They’re 
against it. They’re standing up now. People are coming out, 
their constituents are telling them, hey, the governments have 
made a mistake. We want you to go and stick up for us and look 
after our sick; the ones that through no fault of their own have 
contracted a disease because of tainted blood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where’s the compassion? I ask the members 
opposite: where’s the compassion? It’s great to stand up and 
protect the Health minister and say what a wonderful job he did, 
and how he marched down with the ministers and the 
government and stood up for his government and his members. 
But he should have been standing up for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Show some compassion. 
 
The interesting thing as well, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that day in 
and day out we stand in this House, sit in this House and talk, 
and we’re away from our constituents at great lengths of time. 
And it’s easy to kind of lose that touch, lose that sense of 
compassion with the people that we serve, the ones, the very 
people, that elected us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’ll tell, when a member of your community comes down 
with this disease because of tainted blood it hits home. It hits 
home, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll tell you what hits home more, is 



April 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

when people are coming to you and saying, Mr. So-and-so 
received tainted blood. He doesn’t fall into these arbitrary 
guidelines; therefore he’s not going to be helped. And they’re 
saying to me, that’s wrong, that’s totally wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so maybe these members need to go out and talk to their 
community. Maybe they need to go out and talk to their 
constituents and come back and vote and talk to us with their 
conscience. Talk to us about what they feel in their hearts, what 
they feel is right. Money isn’t the end all and be all to 
everything, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d ask the members across the House, who’ve modified 
the motion today to completely change the meaning so that they 
could say yes, we want to feel compassion and sound like yes, 
we’re feeling compassion for the people in this province . . . 
We’re not going to help them but we feel sorry for them. Mr. 
Speaker, it doesn’t hold water. And I hope that they’ll come to 
their senses and do the right thing. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And for 
the benefit of my friend, the member from Arm River, I would 
like to say that I stand here and speak freely. In fact I have 
never felt any other way but that what I stand and say here are 
my own thoughts, and certainly that’s the case in the few 
comments that I want to make today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that members of the House, members of both sides of 
the House, indeed all people in Canada, care very deeply about 
the people that have been infected by hepatitis C through some 
most unfortunate events in the blood system which were so 
eloquently outlined by my colleague, the member from Regina 
South. 
 
(1515) 
 
Some months ago therefore, members of all governments, 
provincial ministers of Health from B.C. (British Columbia) to 
Nova Scotia, ministers from the territories, they came together 
to make a decision on a compensation package on this 
important issue. Ministers of Health worked collaboratively and 
the package that was announced in late March reflects a 
collective decision. 
 
Thirteen governments, Mr. Speaker, announced a compensation 
package of $1.1 billion for people who contracted hepatitis C 
through blood in the 1986-1990 time period — we realize that 
during this period some infections might have been avoided 
because testing was available then — and the Government of 
Saskatchewan stands solidly behind this package. 
 
I’d like to quote the minister, who was Chair . . . who is Chair 
of the provincial-territorial council of Health ministers, and like 
my colleague from Estevan, I’d like to commend him on the 
work that he’s done. But this is what he said on April 6: 
 

As Health ministers from every province, we worked 
together to reach a consensus on this very difficult issue. 
This was not an easy decision to reach. This is a very 
complex issue and we have come up with an approach that 
is national in scope, fair, and reasonable. 
 

That’s what the minister said. I’d also like to quote from, briefly 

from a Globe and Mail article of yesterday, April 28, and it says 
this: 
 

All victims of hepatitis C deserve our sympathy and the 
best care that the health care system can provide, the best 
care that the system can provide. And that means medical 
care, hospital care, drugs, and help through social 
assistance. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are working to provide that care. We 
have worked with the people of Saskatchewan and health care 
professionals to ensure that health services are there when we 
need them; that they’re there for people infected with hepatitis 
C and that they’re there for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, before I take my place, may I just remind all 
of us here of some of the health initiatives in this last budget. 
 
This year’s Health budget is $1.72 billion, which is an increase 
of $88 million. Total funding to district health boards has grown 
to $1.1 billion, which is an increase of $30 million. And 
changes this year include increased payments for physicians 
and new funding for emergency physician service in rural areas; 
expanded specialized services outside major centres, including 
renal dialysis in Tisdale and Yorkton; operation of a new MRI 
in Regina and a CT (computerized axial tomography) scanner in 
Prince Albert; increased front-line staff; growth in home care 
services; training and new technology for emergency services; 
and development of the Saskatchewan Health Information 
Network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion, the main motion 
presented by the member from Moosomin, but I will be 
supporting the amendment presented by the member from 
Regina South. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with my colleague from Moosomin in this important dialogue 
regarding compensation for hepatitis C victims. I think that he 
has very clearly demonstrated the artificial parameters this 
government has created when they excluded victims infected 
before 1986 and after 1990. 
 
I would also like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I was extremely 
disappointed with the member from Redberry yesterday when 
he suggested these people may have been infected through drug 
abuse. We are not suggesting for a minute that we compensate 
everyone in Canada unfortunate enough to have hepatitis C. 
 
For goodness sake, Mr. Speaker, the only group in this 
Assembly that is concerned about protecting taxpayers’ dollars 
is the Saskatchewan Party. But we have before us a situation 
where thousands of innocent people have had their life turned 
upside down because of a negligent government organization, 
and compensation must be paid to all victims of tainted blood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a minute to talk to the 
Assembly about another compensation situation. Do the 
members opposite remember the time when their colleague, the 
minister responsible for Municipal Government, received 
$95,777 in compensation for diseased chickens? 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1998 

Let’s look at this, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite have 
zero compassion for people who have had their lives turned 
upside down, for people who will likely die because they were 
infected with hepatitis C by the blood supply. They will not 
compensate these human beings, these innocent victims, but 
they’ll give almost a hundred thousand dollars in compensation 
to one of their own to destroy a flock of chickens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she received compensation based on 80 per cent 
of the value of the birds destroyed and 66 per cent of the other 
costs associated with the destruction, clean-up, and disinfection. 
And what are we giving victims of hepatitis C that don’t fit in 
the arbitrary parameters? Nothing. Absolutely nothing! 
 
I want each and every one of you to think about this for a 
minute because, Mr. Speaker, this is truly a disgusting display 
and an absolute lack of compassion for human life. 
 
Here we have a government who compensates for the loss of 
the life of a chicken but will do nothing for a human being, and 
what does this say about the value they place on human life? 
What does this say about their priorities? 
 
Mr. Speaker, today a number of victims infected by tainted 
blood supply joined us in your gallery to hear what the 
members opposite have to say about their future. We spoke to 
many more victims who wanted to be here today but they just 
couldn’t because it would be too taxing, both physically, 
emotionally, and financially on them and on their family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on at length, but I will say to the 
members opposite that when you get up today to speak and 
when you get up today to vote, you’re not only speaking to us 
but you’re speaking to the guests in the gallery and the people 
who are watching us on TV, our guests and those people whose 
very futures rest on your shoulders, and what will they do? 
What will you do? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move a subamendment, seconded by 
the member from Rosthern: 
 

That the following be added after the word “provided” 
 
and that all persons who contracted hepatitis C from 
tainted blood prior to 1986 or since 1990 receive 
compensation from provincial and federal governments 
comparable to the compensation offered to victims of 
tainted blood from 1986 through to 1990. 

 
The Speaker: — Once again, not having had previous notice of 
the subamendment, the Chair would like to take a moment to 
reflect on its admissibility. 
 
Order, order. Although the debate is not proceeding, the Chair 
does request the order in the House, please. 
 
Order. Having reviewed the subamendment, and I first of all 
would remind the Assembly of the words of the subamendment: 
 

and that all persons who contracted hepatitis C from 
tainted blood prior to 1986 or since 1990 (and I underline 
the words) receive compensation from provincial and 
federal governments comparable to the compensation 

offered to victims of tainted blood from 1986 through 
1990. 

 
It is one of the characteristics of a private members’ resolution 
that it cannot require the expenditure of funds. It may urge but it 
cannot require the expenditure of funds, and as I review the 
words of the subamendment, the two words that draw my 
attention are the words “receive compensation” and for that 
reason the subamendment is not in order. 
 
Debate will continue. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was interested to 
listen to the comments from the member from Arm River, and 
to begin with, anyone who has known me during my lifetime 
would never consider me a trained seal. I stand here today 
freely and the opinions I express are my own, and I certainly 
will be supporting the amendment made here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to put into the record some facts on 
the hepatitis C compensation package and how it came to be. 
Yes, it is true with the member from Arm River said, we did all 
agree in the House to do something about the people that 
received the tainted blood, and our minister took a lead 
throughout this country to do something about it. And to get 10 
ministers across Canada and the federal minister and territorial 
ministers to come to an agreement was quite an achievement. 
 
But I’d like to put this into perspective by laying out some facts, 
Mr. Speaker. I want to assure Saskatchewan residents that the 
Minister of Health, the ministers of Health across this country, 
worked together on this very important issue. And I think we 
will continue to work together to ensure a safe, secure, and 
accountable blood system for the future. And I agree with the 
member from Regina South when he said it was a sorry day 
when we didn’t have a safe blood system and we will do 
anything we can in our power to assure that it is safe in the 
future. 
 
The governments recognize that January 1, 1986 to January 1, 
1990 some of the infections might have been avoided. Financial 
assistance is therefore being offered to people who were 
infected as a result of the administration of blood or blood 
products during this period. Transfusion-related HCV infections 
prior to 1986 are tragic, but the scientific knowledge and 
technology available at that time was not sufficient to have 
prevented the tragedy. 
 
While we feel deeply for those . . . sympathy for those that were 
infected from 1986, when governments provide financial 
assistance in the health sector it must be done on the basis of a 
clear rationale. 
 
There are potential risks and benefits associated with virtually 
every aspect of the health system. Risks must be balanced 
against the often lifesaving benefits of the various medical 
procedures that are performed in the health system. It would be 
unrealistic to expect governments to provide financial 
assistance for misadventures that occur in the health system 
through no fault of any person or agency. 
 
It would be difficult to justify introducing no-fault assistance to 
blood recipients only and not for individuals who experience 



April 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

other health care related misadventures such as drug, vaccine 
reactions, and surgical problems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
1986 to 1990 is a time period during which some measures 
might have been taken to reduce HCV infections through blood 
transfusion. Prior to 1986, Canada followed the testing and 
screening standards in place in other jurisdictions to reduce 
blood-related infection. 
 
(1530) 
 
In 1986-87, American blood banks began to use surrogate 
testing for liver function tests, etc., to screen blood. This 
protocol was not introduced in Canada. It has since been found 
that the surrogate testing may have prevented a number of the 
transfusion-related infections that occurred between 1986 and 
1990. By 1990 the hepatitis C virus had been isolated and 
testing of donated blood for the virus was implemented in 
Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those were just some of the facts that I thought 
we should relate in the debate. I want to say that, like the 
member from Estevan said, we always wish and feel that we 
could do more. Governments have set aside up to $1.1 billion. 
The federal government will provide up to $800 million and the 
provinces and territories up to $300 million. 
 
In addition to the financial assistance package, provinces and 
territories will provide medical, hospital, home care, social 
assistance, and other services. It will cost . . . (inaudible) . . . an 
additional $1.6 billion over the next 30 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it is important to note that this government spends $1.72 
billion on health in this budget, the most that has ever been 
spent in Saskatchewan — $88 million more than last year. 
Through all the cuts made by the federal government across 
Canada, $8 billion, we have made up all the cuts to us. 
 
Hepatitis C victims, along with all Saskatchewan residents, can 
rely on us to provide the best health care possible. I’m proud of 
the system that the people of Saskatchewan and their 
governments have been able to develop. Health care workers, 
administrators, volunteers, municipal governments, senior 
governments, have all developed one of the best health care 
systems in the world. Let us make sure that the blood supplies 
that we have today are safe for our people in the future. 
 
Saskatchewan people are compassionate. And we will do all our 
best to support hepatitis C victims. So, Mr. Speaker, I will 
support the Health ministers across Canada for doing their best. 
 
Now as the member from Regina South and the member from 
Estevan have said, if there is any possibility of us doing 
whatever we can to assure the best service to victims, we will 
do that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me assure you that I speak freely on this. 
And in our caucus, I think . . . Maybe we should educate the 
opposition as to how it works. The reason you see a unified 
caucus like ours is because we have many, many discussions, 
many votes, and many fights among ourselves, and we try to 
come up with the best government policy that we can. 
 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take my place and support the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I guess it’s 
been a rather interesting discussion we’ve had, and I would 
support all government members to support our original motion 
in the first place. 
 
There’s a few things here that need to be underlined. We’ve 
heard a bit of rambling over there about the freedom that’s over 
there. We know the freedom may be there in their minds, but 
after they’ve been NDP for so long they’ve been told that that’s 
freedom, when someone else tells them what to think. And they 
think that way. And so that isn’t overly impressive. 
 
I think a couple of key things have to be pointed out with the 
debate that we’re dealing with on tainted blood. I think the 
concept of saying that we’re going to pick a particular date and 
anyone that falls outside of those dates gets no coverage, is 
totally immoral. What they need to do is look at somebody who 
happens to have contracted any of those difficulties before or 
after the dates that they’ve arbitrarily picked and say I’m sorry, 
we’re not going to do anything for you. Mr. Speaker, this is 
unthinkable. 
 
It’s just too bad we can’t just have a little bit of an event over 
here and bring Tommy Douglas back and see what he would 
say to the members who are sort of following his party in some 
way, shape, or form, and say this is supposed to be universal 
health care. Universal health care, Mr. Speaker. When we pick a 
date in time and say if you picked the disease the day after, you 
get help from this government; you pick the disease the day 
before, you don’t get it — that’s universal health care, Mr. 
Speaker? I think not. I think it speaks to the hypocrisy that we 
are seeing from this particular government. 
 
And then they want to take credit by saying our minister went 
to some conference some place and led the other provinces to 
this decision, and the federal minister. Well if that’s the kind of 
situation that we have, that the minister was sending out, to 
come with a conclusion like this, I think we’re in major trouble. 
 
It’s the whole concept that we’re dealing with of compassion. 
There is no compassion there, Mr. Speaker, it’s just pure and 
simple — a date in time they pick, and if you fall into that . . . 
It’s much like going down to your midway on the fair — you’ll 
probably go there this summer — and they’ll spin the wheel. If 
it comes up right this government will say, for compassion 
we’ll give you the prize. That’s about all it amounts to. If it 
happens to fit in, then it’s compassion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the discussion that we’ve heard from the 
government’s side against the motion that we presented is 
unthinkable; it’s unsupportable. There have been lives that have 
been lost. There have been costs that have been incurred, and 
the one thing that they haven’t dealt with at all to this particular 
point are all those people that are outside of those dates. Not 
just the personal agony that’s there because of the disease that 
they have, but the other part that’s there is that their whole lives 
are financially destroyed. Their families are suffering because 
all the financial resources they have are now being put to 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1998 

maintaining a life. 
 
Now this government needs to support those people. This 
government needs to go ahead and take its responsibility. This 
government needs to be responsible for that and the sooner the 
member from Lloydminster understands that and goes back to 
her community and say, I’m going to support those people; I’m 
going to support those families, the better we will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, the original motion needs to be 
supported, but in view of the fact where we’ve gone in the 
debate, I move a subamendment: 
 

That the following be added after the word “provided” 
 
and it is recommended that all persons who contracted 
hepatitis C from tainted blood prior to 1986 or since 1990 
receive compensation from provincial and federal 
governments comparable to the compensation offered to 
victims of tainted blood from 1986 through 1990. 

 
And this is seconded by the member from Cannington. 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, not having had previous notice of 
the subamendment, the Chair would like to take a moment to 
reflect on its admissibility. 
 
Before going any further, the hon. member who seconded the 
motion is not eligible to second the amendment, and I’ll ask the 
hon. member for Rosthern if he would like to designate a 
different seconder for his motion. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The amendment will be seconded by the 
member from Canora. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I find the subamendment in order. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And just for the record, 
I want to state that I clearly volunteered to enter into this 
debate. It’s an emotional debate and it’s one that affects a great 
many people, not only in Saskatchewan but right across all of 
Canada. In today’s motion of course, we’re primarily focused at 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Tainted blood is a serious problem and literally there are 
thousands of people who live every day with this very issue — 
thousands of people who live every day knowing that they have 
hepatitis C that they contracted through a blood transfusion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It is almost beyond words to describe our feelings for these 
people and our sorrow on the one hand that they contracted 
hepatitis C through a blood transfusion. On the other hand, I 
think that it is incumbent that we remind ourselves that for 
many of these people, for many of them, if that blood had not 
been available in their moment of need, the discussion would be 
completely academic, completely academic. 
 
Then we move to what for me is the crux of the matter. And 
that is, when should the Red Cross and the health system 
reasonably have known and reasonably have had a test 
available, Mr. Speaker, to test blood for hepatitis C. The best 
information that I have been able to garner is consistently that 

in North America the testing was first available on or about 
1986. From 1986 to 1990, while the test was available, we 
clearly did not test. Many, many people, thousands of people, 
contracted hepatitis C in that time frame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We — the Red Cross, the health system — should have known; 
therefore must now accept and shoulder some of the 
responsibility, if we might, for not having gone through with 
the testing or not seen that the testing took place when it should 
have. 
 
There is never an easy way out of this. There’s never an easy 
answer. And indeed we have to do everything we can to utilize 
our health system, our safety-net system, provide whatever 
supports we can for people who perhaps have contracted 
hepatitis C outside of the ’86 to 1990 period. I don’t feel any 
less sorrow for them. I don’t think that their pain or their 
suffering is one iota less than for the people who contracted 
hepatitis C from the 1986 to 1990 period. 
 
But there is two things goes on. One, there is clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, a system, a safety net, if I could describe it, that in 
Saskatchewan we’re very, very, very proud of. It’s a safety net 
that indeed many of us would like to see the level of safety 
elevated, or more dollars put in, if I can describe it that way. 
But nevertheless the safety net is there; the health care is there. 
The universal access to health care is there in Saskatchewan. 
And we value that very, very much. 
 
(1545) 
 
So it all boils down, it all boils down, this question, to when 
should the Red Cross, when should the health system, have 
reasonably been expected to test the blood donations. When 
should they have reasonably been expected. 
 
As I said, the best information I have is from 1986 on. Now you 
could argue whether it should have been October or November 
or December or January, and I’m open certainly to those sorts 
of arguments. 
 
But 1986 was when the test became available in North America, 
when the issue was widely acknowledged, and when we should 
have, in North America, in Canada to be more specific, we 
should have been testing. From that moment when we should 
have, but didn’t, that’s when we should be providing some 
payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve used about a third of my speaking notes on 
this issue, but I see that we have a minute forty-five left in this 
debate. It is the intention of the government that this issue get 
voted on. And that’s why I will forgo the balance of my speech. 
 
I thank hon. members of the Assembly for allowing me this 
opportunity to speak on an issue that affects literally thousands 
of people in Saskatchewan, and many more thousands 
throughout Canada. And I look forward to the vote on this 
issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? That 
being the case, then the debate will cease and pursuant to rule 



April 28, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

17 the House will move to a maximum 10-minute period of 
questions and comments, at the conclusion of which the 
question shall be put, all of the questions shall be put. The 
House is now open to questions or comments by members. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the member from Lumsden, Regina Lumsden, I 
believe. Madam Member, you stated in your comments that you 
were supporting the government’s motion that compensation 
not be paid to those victims of hepatitis C who contacted the 
disease through tainted blood because . . . you’re saying that by 
agreeing with and supporting the amendment as presented by 
the government. 
 
Madam Member, how can you possibly deny these people their 
opportunity for compensation if you indeed follow the tenets of 
Mr. Douglas and his compassion for the people when he 
brought in health care which was not related to any time frame 
in which a person contracted their disease or their reasons for 
utilizing the health care system. There was no time frame 
placed on that. It was universally available to anyone. Why is 
not the compensation for hepatitis C? 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a 
pleasure to have a chance to answer a question on this debate, 
which I very much enjoyed participating in. 
 
In response to my colleague’s question, health care services will 
continue to be available for all people, whether they’re part of 
the hepatitis C package or not. I mean that’s the commitment of 
those of us who support the views of Tommy Douglas. I mean 
that’s . . . we’ve always maintained that what we want to do is 
provide health care services for people that are there when they 
need them and we will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 3:49 p.m. until 3:59 p.m. 
 
Subamendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas —10 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Draude Heppner 
Osika Hillson Aldridge 
McLane   
 

Nays —28 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Lingenfelter Tchorzewski Johnson 
Whitmore Lautermilch Kowalsky 
Crofford Calvert Bradley 
Koenker Trew Renaud 
Lorje Sonntag Scott 
Cline Serby Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Thomson   
 
The division bells rang from 4:05 p.m. until 4:15 p.m. 

Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 28 
 
Romanow Flavel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Lautermilch 
Crofford Calvert Bradley 
Koenker Trew Renaud 
Lorje Sonntag Scott 
Cline Serby Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Thomson   
 

Nays — 10 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Draude Heppner 
Osika Hillson Aldridge 
McLane   
 
The division bells rang from 4:18 p.m. until 4:48 p.m. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded 
division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Romanow Flavel Van Mulligen 
MacKinnon Mitchell Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Lautermilch 
Upshall Crofford Calvert 
Bradley Koenker Lorje 
Sonntag Scott Cline 
Serby Hamilton Stanger 
Jess Wall Kasperski 
Ward Murray Thomson 
 

Nays — 9 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Draude Heppner 
Osika Aldridge McLane 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Conference of Mennonites 
of Saskatchewan Act 

 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure to rise on behalf of the Conference of Mennonites of 
Saskatchewan to move second reading of this Bill this 
afternoon. And before I do so, I would like to provide just a bit 
of background or perspective pertaining to the legislation so 
that the public can be familiar with what’s transpiring. 
 
The object of this Act is essentially to provide the Conference 
of Mennonites of Saskatchewan with the flexibility, among 
other things, to adopt a parliamentary system of government, 
and to schedule conferences and meetings without being 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1998 

constrained by the notice provisions of The Non-profit 
Corporations Act. The Act also contains other provisions 
relating to the general conduct of the affairs of the Conference 
of Mennonites of Saskatchewan in accordance with their 
bylaws. 
 
Many will know that the Conference of Mennonites of 
Saskatchewan was originally formed pursuant to The Societies 
Act in September of 1960. When The Non-profit Corporations 
Act of Saskatchewan came into effect, the Conference of 
Mennonites of Saskatchewan was continued as a non-profit 
corporation. And for many years the Conference of Mennonites 
of Saskatchewan has had a parliamentary method of 
governance. That is, delegates are sent to meetings of the 
Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan from constituent 
churches. Each delegate who attends such a meeting is entitled 
to a single vote, to introduce resolutions, and to participate in 
the debate. 
 
Each constituent church is entitled to name one delegate from 
each 25 members of that church. In addition there is a provision 
for youth delegates; and each member of the congregation 
which has an organized youth program is entitled to send one 
youth delegate to the Conference meetings. 
 
The affairs of the Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan 
has been governed between meetings of the Conference by an 
executive committee. Some of the individuals of that executive 
committee are elected by the Conference. Other individuals 
have been nominated by virtue of their position with affiliated 
Mennonite organizations such as Saskatchewan Women in 
Mission and Rosthern Junior College. 
 
The Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan recently 
became aware that there is a conflict between the provisions of 
The Non-profit Corporation Act and the bylaws which have 
been in effect for many years. The Non-profit Corporation Act 
does not envision governance by a parliamentary method of 
governance; therefore the organization has had to amend its 
bylaws to carry out its activities differently than this has been 
done for the past 38 years. 
 
This does not fit with the traditions or history of The 
Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan. Accordingly, at a 
meeting recently held in Osler, the Conference unanimously 
determined that it should petition the legislature for continuance 
pursuant to a private members’ Bill — thus the legislation 
before us today. 
 
The Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan can only 
govern itself in accordance with its history and traditions if this 
private members’ Bill is passed. There will be no change to the 
nature of the activities which The Conference of Mennonites of 
Saskatchewan carries on by virtue of the continuance. 
 
Accordingly, I move Bill No. 301, The Conference of 
Mennonites of Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time 
and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ 
Bills. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Fondation Fransaskoise Act, 1998 
/Loi de 1998 sur la Fondation Fransaskoise 

 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Minister, I would move that Bill No. 
302, The Fondation Fransaskoise Act, 1998, or Loi de 1998 sur 
la Fondation Fransaskoise be now read a second time and 
referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................818 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................818 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................818 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Day of Mourning for Killed and Injured Workers 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................818 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................818 
 Grant to Big Sisters Association of Saskatoon 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................819 
 Free Vote on Hepatitis C Victims Compensation Package 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................819 
 Modern-day Good Samaritan 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................819 
 Political Program on Yorkton Radio 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................819 
 New Nursing Home for Shaunavon 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................819 
 Saskatchewan Party and Day of Mourning 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................820 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................820 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................820 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................822 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................822 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................822 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................822 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................822 
 Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................823 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................823 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................823 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................824 
 Child Prostitution 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................824 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................824 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 227 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 1998 (FREE VOTES) 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................825 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................825 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................826 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................826 
ROYAL ASSENT .............................................................................................................................................................................826 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................827 
 
 



 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on Seventy-five Minute Debate 
  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................827 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................827 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................827 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................829 
  Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................830 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................832 
  Murray...............................................................................................................................................................................833, 837 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................833 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................834 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................835 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................836 
  D'Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................837 
 Recorded division (subamendment)............................................................................................................................................837 
 Recorded division (amendment)..................................................................................................................................................837 
 Recorded division (motion as amended).....................................................................................................................................837 
PRIVATE BILLS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 301 — The Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan Act 
  Koenker .....................................................................................................................................................................................837 
 Bill No. 302 — The Fondation Fransaskoise Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur la Fondation Fransaskoise 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................838 
 
 


