





























































Hansard: June 01, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1457 
 June 1, 1998 
 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the 
communities of Oxbow, Alameda, and Wapella. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from Alida, Glen Ewen, 
Oxbow, Alameda, Frobisher, Carnduff, across the south-east 
corner, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Oxbow, Alida, 
Redvers, and Willowbrook. I so present. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I as well have a petition to present 
to the legislature this afternoon, dealing with the issue of the 
Plains Health Centre and the moratorium that has been 
proposed for the health centre. These petitioners come from the 
Oxbow, Bienfait, Glen Ewen south-east corner of the province 
of Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise again in the Assembly today to provide a petition on behalf 
of people of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are all from the 
community of Bethune. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition, and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take immediate action to 
allow the North to join the rest of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
all from Patuanak, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with respect 
to petitioners concerned about the closure of the Plains hospital. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Weyburn and Yellow Grass. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions from citizens concerned about the dangerous and 
confusing entrance to North Battleford. The prayer of relief 
reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to relocate Highway 40 to east of the 
David Laird Campground in order to alleviate the 
congestion at the entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 

. . . (inaudible interjection). . . No I’m not going to stand in 
front of the highway, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Your petitioners this afternoon come from North Battleford . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order, order, order. 
I will want to remind the hon. member that he’s not permitted to 
engage in debate while presenting petitions and I know that 
he’ll want to conduct himself accordingly. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise on 
behalf of citizens who are concerned about children who find 
themselves in custody battles, and in particular Steven and 
Kimberly Walchuk. And the prayer reads: 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may take the required action to allow the 
children named to remain in the custody of maternal 
grandparents, and that appropriate amendments be made to 
the justice system. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures are from Melville, Bangor, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again on behalf of citizens who are seeking justice for men and 
women who have lost spouses in work-related accidents. And 
the prayer is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

All of the people who have signed today, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people from 
Cabri, Saskatchewan as well as from Success, Saskatchewan, 
I’m happy today to present a petition which of course goes 
along with all of the others asking the government to 
double-lane the No. 1 Highway, and I’m happy to present their 
petition on their behalf today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; saving of the Plains Health Centre; halting 
investments in foreign countries by Saskatchewan Crown 
corporations; having the Workers’ Compensation Board 
reinstate pensions for disenfranchised widows; and taking 
action to ensure that the required level of service in 
radiology is maintained in the North Central Health 
District. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my distinct 
pleasure today to introduce a group of 75 grade 8 students from 
the St. Francis School in my constituency. They’re seated in the 
west gallery and they’re accompanied by Ms. Folk, their 
teacher, as well as Mr. Dauphinais and Mr. Benko. And they’re 
waving to us. And I’m also going to be doing a collection 
between our members to pay for the drinks afterwards because 

it’s a very large group. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker — it’s not every day I 
get to introduce two groups of students. And seated in your 
gallery, in the Speaker’s gallery, we have 27 grade 4 students 
from the St. Francis School. And they’re with their teacher, 
Laurie Ruhr. I want to welcome them as well to the Assembly 
and I look forward to meeting you as well after question period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Hospital Crisis in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal caucus 
gets hundreds of letters from people across Saskatchewan 
complaining about government in action. Lately we received a 
number of letters regarding individuals and their experience 
with Saskatchewan’s hospital crisis. When we receive these 
letters we try to respond to them the best we can; sometimes we 
bring them up in question period or deliver a member’s 
statement on them. 
 
However today we received a number of letters from people 
pleading for help for one man battling a life-threatening cancer, 
and one of these letters, Mr. Speaker, speaks for itself and I’d 
like to read it: 
 

I am writing this letter in hopes that you will be able to 
help Alick Paterson who is a friend and colleague of mine; 
he was admitted to RUH and diagnosed with metastatic 
melanoma on May the 15th. At that time, he was told that 
he had an appointment with an oncologist on May the 19th. 
But now he has been told that he will have to wait until 
June 11th. 
 
Given that he was told his life expectancy is probably only 
seven months, one month of that precious little time will be 
wasted while he waits for medical help. Is there nothing 
that can be done to get him in to see an oncologist and 
begin anti-cancer treatment? This is clearly a matter of life 
and death; please, is there something that you can do to 
intervene on his behalf and for the sake of his family. 

 
Mr. Speaker, for this government it seems the bottom line is 
what matters. For people like Dr. Paterson your struggle isn’t 
with balancing the books, it’s life and death. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Services and Facilities in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the weekend 
I and some other Regina MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) were quoted in the media about the Plains hospital. 
This Regina MLA would like to restate the following: not one 
MLA in this caucus stands with those who favour two-tiered, 
user-fee medicine. That is why not one MLA in this caucus will 
stand with the members opposite on health care. Every MLA in 
this caucus does stand with those health professionals and 
health care users who are committed to better health services. 
 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

 

Mr. Speaker, people do become attached to hospitals 
responsible for saving their lives or family members, but we all 
know quality health care has nothing to do with bricks and 
mortar. 
 
Every MLA in this caucus remembers the decision on the Plains 
was made in 1993. It was aired in the 1995 election and 
reviewed by the health board in 1996. And because we know 
what motions we vote on, we remember that this legislature 
voted on this matter as recently as December 17. 
 
Every MLA in this caucus knows that services offered in the 
Plains building are going to be continued and improved in two 
modern hospitals serving Regina and southern Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m going to continue to support what’s right: better services 
and better facilities. That’s what’s being built right now in this 
city for the people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sanctions for Nuclear Testing 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
to express my grave concerns about the series, the recent series, 
of nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan in violation of 
the nuclear test ban treaty. This is a profoundly disturbing 
development that potentially affects all life on our planet. 
 
It is important for those of us who represent the citizens of our 
province to state our deep regret over these actions, and we 
should send a statement of support to the federal government 
endorsing their comments and sanctions taken in response to 
these short-sighted and provocative undertakings. 
 
I most certainly encourage this Assembly, our Assembly, to 
pass a unanimous motion that indicates unequivocally to the 
Hon. Lloyd Axworthy, that Saskatchewan concurs with the 
federal stance in requesting India and Pakistan refrain from any 
further testing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Prospects in Regina Area 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Tuesday, 
May 26 at 10 a.m. Regina’s CKRM Radio reported the 
following story and I quote: 
 

Job prospects look bright in the Regina area. The latest 
survey from MANPOWER Temporary Services says 40 
per cent of local employers plan to add staff over the next 
three months . . . None of the local employers surveyed 
plan to cut jobs. The greatest growth is expected in 
construction, manufacturing, and the retail sector. 
 

Mr. Speaker, my thanks go out to those local employers who 
are making this good news possible and we all applaud their 
efforts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Melville Citizen Honoured 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
acknowledge and congratulate a gentleman from my 
constituency that has been recognized provincially. Mr. Ted 
Starchuck has been a St. John Ambulance council volunteer in 
Melville for nearly 30 years, and at the Saskatchewan council 
investiture in Prince Albert, he was invested as a Commander of 
the Order of St. John. 
 
Mr. Starchuck is one of only two people designated commander 
in the province. The St. John Ambulance organization provides 
a wide variety of functions today adhering to its motto of “In 
the Service of Mankind.” 
 
It is always a pleasure to see someone that has dedicated much 
of their free time to such a worthy cause being recognized in 
such a fashion. I invite my colleagues here in the Assembly to 
join me in acknowledging Mr. Starchuck in his dedication to 
this organization and congratulating him on his designation. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Graduate Congratulations 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this as we all well know is 
the season of graduations and convocations from our 
elementary schools, our high schools, our technical colleges, 
and our universities. And, Mr. Speaker, every student 
graduating this spring deserves the congratulations of this 
legislature. But today, Mr. Speaker, I wish to recognize one 
graduate of particular note — a constituent of yours, Mr. 
Speaker, and someone who is known to many of us in this 
legislature. 
 
This graduate was one of the graduating class of the Palliser 
campus of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology) on the weekend, who graduated with a 
business diploma in accounting. This graduate returned to 
school as a mature student, as a mother with a career and a 
family business and an ongoing and active political 
involvement in our community of Moose Jaw. 
 
In her studies she achieved an academic average of 97 per cent, 
and, as a result, Mr. Speaker, received the Governor General’s 
bronze medal for having the highest average of any graduating 
student at Palliser. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this graduate’s name is Karen Hagel, our friend 
and your spouse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in congratulating 
Karen for her outstanding achievement. And by the way, a 
dozen red roses from her husband would seem appropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Hockey League 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
constituents of Athabasca I’d like to congratulate the successful 
1997-1998 Northern Hockey League and the championship 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

team, the Canoe Lake Young Guns. 
 
Although this is quite late, there is no question that this league 
not only provided northern Saskatchewan communities with 
entertainment and many hockey fans, but they have also raised 
the skill level and interest of the best game on the face of the 
earth. 
 
In the initial season of the NHL (Northern Hockey League) 
there are many people that said it could not work. Well not only 
did the season work out well but the calibre and fan 
participation proved that competitive contact hockey in 
north-western Saskatchewan certainly has a place in the North 
in general. 
 
I want to especially thank the championship team, the Canoe 
Lake Young Guns, for the gesture of putting up Ernie Iron’s 
jersey alongside their championship banner to commemorate 
his contribution to their team and to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I know that this was a class act that their families certainly 
appreciated. And I want to congratulate the Canoe Lake Young 
Guns for putting up that jersey in memory of Ernie Iron and 
also providing the fans with great hockey and of course putting 
that championship game together. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Count Von Imhoff’s Legacy 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
begin by thanking the member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood for 
taking my place at an event in my constituency just a few days 
ago. 
 
The community of St. Walburg recently held a ceremony to 
honour two artists. As every Saskatchewan scholar knows, St. 
Walburg is the town made famous by the artist Count Bertold 
Von Imhoff, a German who in 1913 came to the north-west as a 
young man and promptly began painting seemingly non-stop 
until his death in 1939. His work graces many churches in our 
fair province and there is still a large collection of his work in 
St. Walburg. 
 
To commemorate this rather unique immigrant, the St. Walburg 
Tourism and Heritage Society raised $60,000 with which it 
commissioned a bronze statue of Count Imhoff on horse. The 
statue was unveiled at the ceremony. Jacquie Mysko, 
chairperson of the society, Carl Imhoff, the Count’s son, and his 
wife Gladys, as well as people from across the province were in 
attendance at the unveiling ceremony. 
 
Congratulations to the society whose work has enhanced the 
attractions of north-west Saskatchewan. Congratulations also to 
another artist, St. Walburg’s Susan Welder who was recently 
named Citizen of the Year. These two artists have contributed 
greatly to the community. One put St. Walburg on the map, the 
other continues St. Walburg’s artistic heritage. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Closure of Plains Health Centre 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions 
today are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, it’s now clear that you 
have no intention of listening to Saskatchewan people and 
allowing a full debate and vote on the future of the Plains 
hospital. 
 
For four weeks you have blocked a free vote on the future of the 
Plains. On Friday you refused to allow an emergency motion 
from the third party on the future of the Plains. That’s why we 
are now appealing directly to the Speaker to allow an 
emergency debate and vote on this very important issue. We 
will be suspending our bell ringing today to let the Speaker 
make his ruling. We are hopeful that the Speaker will rule in 
our favour and this important debate and the vote will be held 
today. 
 
Mr. Premier, if this debate does proceed, will you allow your 
members to vote on behalf of their constituents? Will you allow 
a free vote on the future of the Plains hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the question is 
hypothetical — to state it obviously — since you’ll have to 
make a ruling and you have not made a ruling. I will say as a 
matter of general principle, members on this side of the House 
speak freely and independently on behalf of their constituents 
— in caucus and in the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, if 
your members are allowed to vote independently that would be 
very unique for your . . . but I look forward to that opportunity. 
Mr. Premier, it looks like some of your own members would 
even prefer a free vote on this issue. The member for Regina 
Wascana Plains says if the majority of her constituents 
supported the Plains remaining open that’s how she would vote. 
Why not give her the opportunity? 
 
Mr. Premier, even your former MLA, Ed Whelan, says you’re 
on the wrong side of this issue. What does it take to get you to 
start listening? Mr. Premier, why don’t you let your members 
vote according to the wishes of their constituents? Why won’t 
you allow a free vote on the future of the Plains hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said this answer or 
given it before and I’ll give it one more time. The 
announcement with respect to the Plains was made, I think, in 
1993-94. An election was fought, on a number of issues albeit, 
in 1995. The Plains was one of them. I fully recall the 
demonstration which was staged at that time by those who 
wanted to keep the Plains open. 
 
The decision is final. We are now weeks or months away from 
opening up a brand-new complex in Regina which will provide 
the people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan with the very 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

 

best care and service, and larger space and service for southern 
Saskatchewan, that we can possibly afford. 
 
And as I said before, with respect to votes, the first answer I 
gave to the first question speaks to that matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

More Nurses for Rural Health Districts 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP (New Democratic Party) likes to pick 
winners and losers in the health care system, and the big losers 
always seem to be rural Saskatchewan. That’s what happened 
when the NDP closed 52 rural hospitals. That’s what happened 
when the NDP decided to close the Plains hospital, the hospital 
that served southern Saskatchewan. And now rural hospitals are 
the big losers again in the NDP’s plan to hire 200 new nurses. 
 
Mr. Minister, 18 out of 30 health districts, rural health districts 
by the way, will get absolutely nothing out of this 
announcement. Mr. Minister, nurses are understaffed and 
overworked in hospitals all over Saskatchewan. Why were 18 
health districts left out of your plan to hire more nurses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take the question on 
behalf of the government. There probably will be follow-up 
questions which the Minister of Health can address. 
 
I think what’s important about this question for me to respond 
to is this. The Conservative Party, the so-called Saskatchewan 
Party, and the Liberal Party in fighting to keep the Plains open 
in the face of now four years of construction and rebuilding — 
by the way at a cost of $28,000 a day, I’ll even leave those 
arguments aside — in effect, if they were to succeed, would be 
committing a hundred million dollars to the bricks and mortar 
of the Plains hospital. 
 
Now they’re getting up and asking for more money for more 
nurses — not bricks and mortars — but for services. You 
cannot have both. You can only be a Tory and have the 
mathematics work out both ways. And we’re not Tories. 
 
And we don’t believe in bricks and mortar alone. We believe in 
services at the front line where the people of Saskatchewan 
need the health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Premier, what we’re doing on this side is we’re listening to our 
constituents. And that’s something that’s not happening on that 
side of the House. 
 
Mr. Premier, can you honestly say that the Assiniboine Valley 
Health District doesn’t need more nurses? Can you honestly say 
that the Living Sky Health District doesn’t need more nurses? 
What about Moose Mountain or South Country — not one 
additional nurse in any of these health districts. And there’s 
about a dozen more that were left out in the cold as well. 
Hospitals in these areas are suffering from the NDP’s attack on 

health care just as much as anyone else. 
 
Mr. Premier, how did you determine that some health districts 
get new nurses while others didn’t? Why are you again picking 
winners and losers in our health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say to 
the member opposite that when he talks about pitting rural and 
urban Saskatchewan — which is what he’s doing — and this is 
a clear exemplification again by the member opposite because it 
is clearly, Mr. Speaker, the exact practice that the Tory 
government of the 1980s did in spades. 
 
And the member from Saltcoats has always been on that side of 
the camp. And now he returns back to that side of the camp and 
espouses exactly the same Devine propaganda that we heard in 
the ’80s. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, take a look at health care 
investment this year. Take a look at it. We’ve spent 48 million 
new dollars on physicians in this province, Mr. Speaker — 48 
million — of which we’re putting a lion’s share of that 
expenditure to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re taking 88 million brand-new dollars of which $30 
million is going specifically to district health boards, Mr. 
Speaker, and a large portion of that money is going to support 
rural communities across the province. 
 
Now we put in additional funding for nurses in this province 
which the people of Saskatchewan have been calling for, the 
nurses themselves, the government of the day. And the member 
opposite stands up and says we shouldn’t be making an 
investment in nurses of the province. And this is typical Tory 
policy. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meadow Lake Pulp Mill 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, my questions this afternoon are for 
the minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). Mr. Minister, last year the NDP 
agreed to start paying all of the operating losses at the Meadow 
Lake Pulp mill even though your government only owns half of 
that company. The CIC annual report says that CIC does not 
expect these losses to exceed $10 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, an order in council signed by you and the Premier 
on May 26 authorizes $15 million to go to the Meadow Lake 
Pulp mill to fund cash flow deficiencies. That’s already $5 
million more than the pay out forecast in the CIC report 
released just a few weeks ago. 
 
Mr. Minister, why does the bill for this keep continuing to go 
up? Why did you agree to a deal where taxpayers only own half 
the company but gets stuck with all of the losses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I find it ironic, as I’m 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

sure you and the members of the public do, when a member 
who went to Conservative conventions at the time this deal was 
being arranged between the Devine government and the 
company, Millar Western — that today he stands in his place 
and questions the fundamentals of the deal which in many ways 
the public lauded as a great environmental project but still to 
this day has to prove its economic base. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was surprised last week when the member from 
Melfort criticized his former colleague, Mr. Devine, for the 
investment in Crown Life and wondered out loud how we could 
ever get the money back. 
 
Today the member from Kindersley says he wonders why the 
deal that his Devine government made isn’t making more 
money. So I say to the member opposite, when he gets up 
tomorrow morning he should ask that question while he’s 
shaving, looking in the mirror, why did we make that deal and 
why did we put so much money into it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
problem is we have no guarantee that $15 million is going to 
cover the expected losses. By the time you get done paying 
down the operating losses on this deal, Channel Lake could start 
looking like a bargain for taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Minister, how many more potential . . . how much more is 
potentially exposed for the Saskatchewan taxpayers? Can you 
give us an assurance today that $15 million will be the extent of 
it, or how much more will taxpayers in Saskatchewan be on the 
hook for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to the 
member opposite that these are the questions that he should 
have asked when he was at his conventions with his 
Conservative colleagues back when the investment was being 
made. Because I say to him clearly that there is no option — 
there is no option — except to stay in this deal, other than to 
shut it down. 
 
Now he may be arguing that what we do is shut down the 
Meadow Lake plant. That may be. Having invested the money 
— having invested the money that member and his party did 
back earlier in the decade and in the 1980s — he’s now arguing 
that we should shut it down. 
 
And I say to him he should come clean and it would be good for 
him to admit that the $15 billion that they ran up was a mistake. 
 
Now he may be arguing that you should shut down the Meadow 
Lake project but if he believes that, then he should stand in his 
place or move a motion or a resolution arguing that point. But at 
this point in time we support the project that you invested in, in 
order to keep the jobs in that area of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Resources for Acute Health Care 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health has 
indicated on a number of occasions that the Liberal opposition 
is fearmongering when we suggest that the current bed crisis in 
Regina and southern Saskatchewan is putting lives in jeopardy. 
 
In fact on March 23, the minister told this House, and I quote: 
 

I want to ensure the member opposite and the people of 
Saskatchewan that nobody has died in this province who 
required emergency services. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister, do you stick by this claim? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well in saying that, Mr. Speaker, to the 
member opposite, that in the time that I’ve had responsibility to 
oversee this portfolio, and in the time that I’ve served on this 
side of the House in government, I have not personally received 
an information that says to me that somebody has lost their life 
because we have not been able to provide emergency services in 
the facilities that we have across the province, Mr. Speaker. I 
have not received that communiqué or information from 
anyone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition has obtained 
a letter written by Yorkton doctor, Joseph Javier, dated October 
7, 1997. This letter indicates a patient was in distress because 
his lungs had filled with fluid. 
 
For two days — two days — a number of attempts were made 
to transfer the patient to the Plains hospital for treatment that 
could not be offered in Yorkton. Before a bed became available 
in Regina the patient suffered a heart attack, developed 
respiratory failure, and was placed on a ventilator. He died 
unfortunately on October 1. 
 
The minister was sent a copy of this letter dated October 7, 
1997. Why then in March of this year did the minister say that 
nobody has died in this province who required emergency 
services? And why was this House misled? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you and to 
the member opposite that I am appreciative of the information 
that the member has access to. And say to the member opposite 
that I too have had an opportunity to review that file with the 
East Central Health District. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite, if in fact you’re 
saying today that this patient has died because of poor medical 
service, then I say to you, Mr. Member, that I would want then 
a copy from the physician. A copy of a letter from the physician 
who says that in fact this individual died because there has not 
been appropriate services available for this individual. 
 
And I would say to you, Mr. Member, that I have had this 
discussion with that individual physician and he has not 
provided me with that. And so I ask you clearly, if you could 
obtain that piece of information on my behalf, I would be very 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

 

happy to receive it from a physician. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition has also 
received a letter written by a Regina cardiologist regarding this 
specific case. The letter states, and I quote: 
 

I feel sorry that we were unable to help this gentleman. As 
you will recall from our numerous phone conversations, I 
tried my best to get the patient to the Plains Health Centre; 
unfortunately there was no critical care beds either in CCU, 
COU, or ICU. 

 
To the minister, these letters confirm that a patient died because 
there was no available critical care beds at the Plains hospital. 
How can you suggest that there is not a bed crisis? How can 
you tell this legislature that no one has died because of a bed 
shortage when we have just provided evidence that someone did 
die? 
 
And I want to send this over to the minister — the relevant 
correspondence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what I want to say to the 
member opposite is that I don’t make it a practice, and won’t 
today, to review in detail the individual cases that come to my 
attention and/or the member’s attention. 
 
But this is a commitment that I will make today, Mr. Speaker, 
that I will undertake to do a full evaluation of this particular 
case and will ask the member opposite to participate in that 
exercise. And will say to the member opposite that at the end of 
the day, we will need to reveal whether or not what he portrays 
here today is in fact factual. Because if in fact you’re stating 
today that a member of this community, Saskatchewan, has lost 
their life because there isn’t sufficient facilities or services, 
that’s a serious, serious concern of mine. 
 
If you make the accusation, however, that in the attempt to save 
somebody’s life there has been a concern about the practise of 
the physician community, that’s a serious, serious allegation — 
that I say to you my friend — and we will undertake to examine 
that in its fullest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, all the people that we’ve heard 
from, all the concerns that have been expressed about the 
shortages of beds during critical times — it’s so evident. Yet 
the government continues to insist on shutting down and 
reducing the numbers of beds. That’s just unthinkable. 
 
We’ve also obtained a copy of a letter regarding this issue from 
the head of cardiology in Regina. Doctor Naiyer Habib writes: 
 

The beds are limited and the administration is aware of it. 
There is always a solution to a problem, hoping that the 
solution is sought before the problem occurs. 
 

Mr. Minister, there is an obvious solution to this problem. Save 
the Plains hospital, keep more beds in the system. Will you 
make that commitment today so we don’t see even a suggestion 
of a repeat of this kind of a tragedy? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite, and have on many occasions said this, that from time 
to time across the province in certain locations there is stress 
and pressure on the health care system. I’ve said that. And I’ve 
said to the member opposite that from time to time some of our 
emergency wards are under some difficulty. 
 
But I say to the member opposite that when I look at the 
number of beds, acute care beds, that I have in the province 
today, and I look at what the average daily census of beds are in 
the province today, that number is significantly different by 
anywhere from 5 to 700 beds on any given day. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, if the issue and the question 
here is, whether or not we have enough acute care beds in the 
province — I’m on record saying that in Saskatchewan we have 
enough acute care beds, and from time to time we need to do an 
examination of where we need to possibly provide some 
additional enriched services. 
 
But HSURC (Health Services Utilization and Research 
Commission) has advised the province in their review, that of 
780 beds that they studied, 25 per cent of those acute care beds 
— the patients did not need to be in them. 
 
And I’ve said this to the House, and I continue to reiterate to 
you, that the number of beds that we have in this province today 
for acute care services, in my opinion and from what 
professional people have studied it say to me, that we have 
enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, one final quote from Doctor 
Joseph Javier who writes, and I quote: 
 

Bed closures save money but lives are lost. From my 
perspective the loss of the Plains Health Centre and further 
bed closures province wide will most undoubtedly see this 
scenario repeated. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister, the current bed crisis has already 
claimed one life and that is one life too many. It’s time to begin 
basing our needs . . . our bed counts on needs and not on dollars 
and cents but strictly on common sense. 
 
I will ask once again, will you save the Plains hospital? Will 
you make a commitment to the people of this province that no 
more beds will be lost in this Regina system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, on many occasions — many 
occasions — I’ve said to the member opposite the decision on 
hospital beds in Regina has been made. It’s been made for some 
time now. It was made in 1995. 
 
And the district health board has indicated that 675 beds are 
going to be the number of beds that will be serving Regina and 
the southern part of the province. I say to the member opposite 
that he believes that the number of beds in the system translates 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

to good services. 
 
And I’m going to ask the question of my good medical friend, 
as yours is, Dr. Javier who quotes today, “that people’s lives in 
fact may be in jeopardy because of there not being sufficient 
hospital beds”. And, I say to you, in the regional hospital of 
Yorkton in 1973 there were 245 beds. Today in the regional 
hospital of Yorkton, 25 years later, we have 107 beds. 
 
And today when you look at regional hospitals and tertiary 
hospitals across the province, you’ll find that they receive and 
provide better services. We have stronger specialities today than 
we ever had in the history of our province; we have better 
technology to do that. We have more outpatient services. And 
never, ever across this nation or anywhere have the number of 
beds translated to the quality of health care and I say that to you 
and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nurses Required to Update Training 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Although one must be suspicious about the motive and the 
timing, I want to congratulate the government on its recent 
announcement to hire 200 nurses, in an attempt to stabilize a 
situation that daily grows more critical for patients and health 
professionals. 
 
Individual nurses have been unable to find work because of 
policies put forth by this government. Those nurses are now 
facing further financial penalties as they try to secure one of 
these so-called new jobs. These nurses had jobs. Many of them 
have subsequently left Saskatchewan or have given up their 
dreams of becoming a nurse. And now they find themselves 
forced to update, after which they still have no guarantee that 
they’re going to be able to get one of these new jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s quite obvious that my question this afternoon is for the 
Minister of Health and it is as follows: what is your government 
going to offer nurses caught in this situation, a situation not of 
their making but that of a government that failed to plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that one of the issues that you raised with me is not 
unlike the one that we talk about when we talk about physicians 
and that is that in Saskatchewan we train nurses and we train 
physicians to a level of high degree. And in Saskatchewan 
today we have a tremendous demand for our professional 
community to work all over Canada. 
 
And when you talk about the kinds of demands that are within 
the system today on health professionals — and we’ve 
acknowledged that they’re great — the reality is that they also 
come to recruit our nurses out of our province and the rationale 
being is because they’re extremely well-trained. 
 
Now if the question is whether or not we need to provide better 
working environments for nurses, we say that in our case we’re 
providing some of that today. We’re enriching some of the 
facilities which they’re going to work in. We’re advancing the 
kinds of new equipment in some of the facilities that we’re 

talking about. 
 
So into the future with the Department of Education, and 
district health boards, and SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations) — we’re working in partnership to 
enrich the value of working environments and opportunities for 
nurses across the province. And that will continue to be our 
focus into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, this is quite interesting 
because updating will require nurses in our province to pay 
anywhere from $2,500 to $3,000 and then face a further 
financial penalty because they must mentor for a month or even 
more. And during this time they will receive no salary and the 
end of it all they have no guarantee of a job. 
 
My question to the minister is this: will you, Mr. Minister, 
agree to create a bursary for nurses in this particular situation? 
And will you work with the associations involved to ensure that 
these individuals are not lost again to our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, just 
recently in our announcement of 200 additional nurses for the 
province, we indicated that we would be working closely with 
the human relations committee. And the committee would be 
made up of professional organizations and unions in all of the 
disciplines in which health professionals are working today. 
And clearly we’re going to be examining all of the options that 
are available to us, or should be available to us, in order to 
retain and recruit and further advance the educational 
opportunities for people who are working in the front line — 
which nurses are a part of. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that much of this discussion 
will need to occur with the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association who have a position that, by the year 2000, all 
nurses in the province who are practising need to have their 
baccalaureate. And clearly we’re going to be working closely 
with the unions and the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association) to try to see how we might be able to 
blend that. 
 
But this is an issue that will require some of that dialogue. And 
the human resources committee of course will be part of that 
discussion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Canadian Light Source Synchrotron Project in Saskatoon 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, with leave to make a somewhat extended ministerial 
statement on the Synchrotron project. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be able 
to rise today to announce the deadline has been met for the 
filing of a letter of intent to the Canadian Foundation for 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

 

Innovation for the $177.9 million Canadian Light Source 
Synchrotron Project. 
 
Over the weekend an agreement was reached with the 
Government of Canada that closed the $14.2 capital deficiency 
required to complete the financial arrangement for the 
Synchrotron project. 
 
Under the agreement Saskatchewan will contribute a total of 
$20 million to the CLS (Canadian Light Source) over four years 
starting in 1999. The federal government will match this 
funding. Half of the money will go toward building the facility; 
the other half will go toward operations. 
 
We will operate the facility as a non-profit corporation that will 
be a partnership of the governments, the university, and 
industry. 
 
Now that we have sent in the letter of intent, we will proceed to 
the next step — formal application to the Canadian Foundation 
for Innovation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CLS project is about collaboration at the 
highest level in science between industry, universities, and 
governments. We are hopeful that we will get a final decision 
from the Canadian foundation by the spring of 1999, and we 
have every reason to believe the decision will be a positive one. 
We will then begin design and construction shortly thereafter. 
 
The Synchrotron will generate 2,000 person-years of 
employment during construction and will create 200 permanent 
jobs. It will also create approximately $35 million in increased 
R&D (research and development) spending across Canada. 
 
But even more important is what the Synchrotron means for the 
bigger picture. Once Canada’s Synchrotron is built and 
operating, the country will have an important link to a growing 
global network that places a high value on innovation and 
discovery in a knowledge-based economy. 
 
The Synchrotron will aid in the development of products that 
may include things like improved pesticides and more 
frost-resistant crops. This opens up new industries in our 
province, will provide direct benefits to farmers in terms of new 
crops and new uses for those crops, and it means more jobs for 
people. 
 
The Synchrotron also means advances in cell research for faster 
and better cancer treatments. This means a better quality of life 
for individuals in Saskatchewan, in Canada, and in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is good news for Saskatoon, good news for 
Saskatchewan, and good news for Canada. I wish to take this 
opportunity to congratulate everyone involved in the process for 
cooperating and allowing this very, very important project to 
proceed. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We would want to 
congratulate all involved with this very positive development 
for Saskatoon and for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

From time to time, in fact it’s more often than that, the 
members opposite like to point out that the opposition is 
opposed to positive development. Nothing, as you know, could 
be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. We believe in hopes and 
dreams and opportunity, and that’s what this announcement 
represents. 
 
Positive developments like this should and could be followed 
by far more. In agriculture the opening of markets for farmers, 
allowing the nuclear cycle to be exploited for positive gain, 
opening the door to trade and development, lowering taxes, 
cancelling the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement), are just a few suggestions that this government 
could look at. 
 
But in this case this is indeed a positive development for 
Saskatchewan. We are hopeful that this project will go ahead in 
its entirety. Good jobs, very good jobs, for Saskatchewan 
residents could result; investment could result — positive 
benefits for all of Saskatchewan people. 
 
We would like to congratulate the people of Saskatoon and 
everyone that was involved in bringing this very positive news 
forward today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Canada is the last 
country in the western industrialized world to acquire a 
Synchrotron, so this is good news for our country, and will be 
especially good news for us if it is located in Saskatchewan. 
 
It will strengthen our biotech industry. It will strengthen 
agriculture and medical research especially. It will strengthen 
our university. And it will mean that some of our most brilliant 
graduates can find work here in this province. 
 
At a time when our federal system is under such stress, it is also 
good to see that our various levels of government can work 
together in the national and provincial interest. If I may say 
though, it was craftily suggested last week that the hold-up in 
getting this project on the rails was the federal government. 
 
My understanding is that Ottawa has been an enthusiastic 
backer of the Synchrotron project from day one and the 
question mark was whether or not the province would come on 
board. And I am pleased that they have today, even if my 
understanding is they are riding in the caboose and not the 
engine. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, though hopefully, despite us having the 
highest income taxes in Canada and among the highest business 
taxes in Canada, that professionals will find work in this 
province and will want to locate and work in the biotech 
industry that will locate in Saskatoon. 
 
The Synchrotron is an important step in the building of a 
high-tech base for this province and I applaud our governments 
for working together for the benefit of Saskatchewan and to see 
the benefits of attracting industry, reducing red tape, and 
reducing taxes so that the Synchrotron can become the 
cornerstone of a flourishing biotech industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 214  The Recall of Members Act, 1998 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move first 
reading of Bill No. 214, The Recall of Members Act, 1998. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, we have a very diligent caucus 
and a diligent civil service and have been pleased to be able to 
submit the answers to questions. I hereby submit the answer to 
question 66 and request leave to submit the answers to 
questions 67, 68, and 69. 
 
And in doing so, Mr. Speaker, I just want to take but one 
sentence forward, and that is a special thank you from our 
government to our civil service for doing the work that enables 
the members to have timely answers to these questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The answers to questions 66, 67, 68 are 
provided and the Chair asks, was question 69 dealt with? And 
69 as well; 69 is provided as well. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Education Amendment Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As members 
will know, The Education Act, 1995 provides the fundamental 
legislative basis for our province’s public education system 
from kindergarten to grade 12. It establishes the governance 
structure of school divisions under the jurisdiction of locally 
elected boards of education and it provides for matters relating 
to curriculum, facilities, funding, and so on. 
 
Bill No. 57 incorporates amendments to many sections of the 
existing Act. These amendments can be divided into two main 
categories. First, there is a small number of amendments 
dealing with diverse but important topics. Second, there is a 
large number of amendments all dealing with the same general 
area, the restructuring of the francophone component of our 
public education system. 
 
I will deal with each of these two categories of amendments in 
order. These amendments cover four topics. First, boards of 
education and francophone school boards are given explicit 
authority to participate in the coordination, administration, and 
delivery of pre-kindergarten programs. As well, the Minister of 
Education is given authority to develop policies in this area. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is now well-recognized that for many young 
children, access to programs before they reach school age can 
have a significant impact on their future education and 
development. As part of the action plan for children, our 
government is strongly supporting a variety of head-start and 
early invention programs. 
 
One aspect of this broad objective is pre-kindergarten programs 
operated in conjunction with the community schools. As boards 
of education become increasingly involved in such programs, it 
is important that their authority to do so be reflected in statute. 
That is the purpose of these amendments. 
 
I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that the amendments are to 
those sections of the Act that set out the powers of a board, not 
the sections which set out the duties. We’re not imposing any 
legal obligation on boards for the funding or administration of 
pre-kindergarten programs in our province. 
 
The next in this first category of amendments deals with the 
election of boards of education in urban school divisions. 
School divisions whose geographic area is less than the 
prescribed threshold are not legally required to be divided into 
subdivisions for the election purposes. The Minister of 
Education is authorized to create a ward system in these urban 
school boards but only if requested to do so by the board of 
education. 
 
A new provision is being added in this area. In the future, if a 
public vote is held within an urban school division and the 
majority of those who vote support the establishment of a ward 
system, the board of education will be legally obliged to apply 
to the minister to establish wards for this purpose. 
 
Some members may be aware that public votes on this were 
held in the Regina public school division in the fall of 1994 and 
in the Saskatoon public division in the fall of 1997. In both 
cases a substantial majority of the voters supported a ward 
system. 
 
Regina Public School Board subsequently chose to take no 
action in response to the vote. I understand that the Saskatoon 
Public School Board will soon be considering the outcome of 
the vote in that city — a vote that passed by some 80 per cent. 
 
The amendment which we are including in the Act does not 
apply retroactively to either of these two cases. Nevertheless, I 
believe it is important that the rules regarding public votes of 
this type be clear for the future. 
 
The third amendment is a straightforward one dealing with the 
application of land title fees to property transactions by boards 
of education. The intent of the existing legislation is that where 
a school division’s restructure and title to the property is 
transferred to a new or different board of education, the boards 
involved should not be liable for the normal commercial land 
titles fees. 
 
As a result of changes in the fee structure over the years, the 
current wording of the Act no longer achieves this objective. 
We’re simply revising the wording to restore the original intent. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, that this problem was addressed on 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

 

an interim basis last year through regulations. This statutory 
amendment provides a more appropriate long-term solution. 
 
The fourth and final amendment in this first group deals with 
provincial collective bargaining for teachers, and specifically 
with a process for the resolution of grievances under the 
provincial collective agreement. The sections of the Act which 
deal with this matter use the term “parties” — parties to the 
grievance and parties to the agreement. 
 
The purpose of the amendment is to confirm that for purposes 
of these sections, the parties referred to are the two provincial 
bargaining committees. That is, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation committee on the one hand, and the government 
trustee bargaining committee on the other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from our perspective, this amendment does not 
reflect a substantive change in the current provisions but rather 
a confirmation and clarification of these provisions. It’s 
important to point out that over a period of 20 years since this 
legislation was first passed, the two provincial bargaining 
committees received and dealt with all aspects of grievances 
under the provincial agreement without any question being 
raised as to the validity of this process. 
 
Over the past two years, the correct interpretation of the 
legislation has been called into question by the school trustees, 
and the purpose of the amendment is to confirm that for the 
future, the structure and process that have been used for many 
years is still the process to be used. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn to the area which encompasses 
the vast majority of the amendments to this Bill. This area is the 
structure and governance arrangements for the francophone 
component of our province’s education system. 
 
The basis of this legislation is section 23 of Canada’s Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms. Sections 23 set out the constitutional 
rights of parents of a linguistic minority to have their children 
educated in that language. In Saskatchewan this means French. 
 
Section 23 also includes the concept that where numbers 
warrant, francophone parents have the right to establish and 
govern their own schools and to receive public funding for 
those schools in the same way as any other school jurisdiction. 
 
Following court decisions in Saskatchewan and elsewhere about 
10 years ago, a lengthy and detailed process was undertaken in 
our province to develop appropriate arrangements to satisfy 
these constitutional obligations in our province. 
 
That process culminated in substantial amendments to The 
Education Act in 1993 to create a new francophone component. 
The francophone component had two major parts to it. First, 
eight francophone educational areas were established in 
communities with a substantial francophone population, and a 
ninth one was established later. 
 
(1430) 
 
Each of these areas and the fransaskois school within it was 
governed by a locally elected francophone school board called a 
conseil scolaire. In addition there was provincial coordinating 

body called the conseil général made up of representatives from 
each of the conseil scolaires. This provincial body arranged for 
specialized services such as special ed consultants, and it also 
handled requests for programs from francophone parents who 
lived outside of one of the francophone education areas. 
 
The structure of the francophone component in all of its details 
were worked out through a collaborative process in which all of 
the stakeholders were closely involved. The result was 
consensus on all major points. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s francophone community now has 
several years of experience with this new component of the 
education system, and many boards of education and many 
communities have examined ways to strengthen programs and 
to be more effective through restructuring of the divisions. 
 
The francophone school boards and their communities have 
also been looking for ways to achieve the same objective. Last 
fall the conseil général, on behalf of all of the conseil scolaires, 
submitted a series of recommendations to our government for a 
major restructuring of the francophone component. And over 
the past few months we worked with representatives at the 
conseil général and francophone parents in developing 
legislation to reflect these recommendations as fully and clearly 
as possible. 
 
The Saskatchewan School Trustees Association and the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, as major stakeholders in 
this matter, have been closely and continuously involved in the 
consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that this restructuring has the 
support of all parties involved. And I’ll outline the key elements 
of the change. 
 
First, the conseil général and all the nine existing conseil 
scolaires will be disestablished. In their place will be a new 
Conseil scolaire fransaskois which will serve as one board of 
education governing all fransaskois schools in the province. 
 
Instead of being independent governance areas, the francophone 
education areas will now become subdivisions like subdivisions 
in school divisions . . . that is the francophone parents in each of 
the areas will elect one member of the new conseil scolaire. A 
number of functions currently carried out by the conseil 
général, such as handling program requests from parents outside 
the francophone education area, will be taken over by the 
conseil scolaire. 
 
For each fransaskois school there will now be a local 
community parent council and this council will be elected by 
the parents and will be made up of parents plus one other 
francophone from the community. The local council will have a 
strong role in an advisory capacity to the provincial conseil 
scolaire, including being involved in the development of all 
policies. It will also have the authority to handle a variety of 
matters which this conseil scolaire may delegate to it. 
 
These new local parent committee councils will play an 
important role in ensuring that parents in each francophone 
community continue to have significant influence with respect 
to the operation of their school board. 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

For funding purposes, provincial operating grants will now be 
made available to the one new conseil scolaire, rather than to 
the existing individual conseils. The new conseil scolaire will 
be responsible for establishing a budget and allocating funds to 
the schools in the same way as the board of education of the 
school division. 
 
As I’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, the initial requests for these 
changes came from the francophone community itself. Trustees 
and officials of the francophone component, as well as the 
parents of other individuals involved, are to be commended for 
their forward-looking approach to the governance of 
francophone education in Saskatchewan. 
 
The new structure will enable funding to be reallocated from 
administrative areas and used for direct services and supports 
for classrooms and students. Staff time will be used more 
efficiently. Measures will be in place to ensure strong, local 
input to decisions of the new francophone board of education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with these amendments to The Education Act, and 
as you know, our province has been involved in voluntary 
restructuring of our school divisions unlike other parts of 
Canada where they forced amalgamation, our province has 
moved from 119 school divisions to 107 voluntarily. With these 
amendments to The Education Act, we will move from 107 
school divisions to 99 school divisions. That’s a significant 
reduction in school divisions across the province without any 
kind of legislation. It’s been done voluntarily by local people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill incorporates amendments dealing with a variety of 
important matters within our public education system. It reflects 
the necessity for continuous updating of the legislation in 
response to evolving needs and circumstances. 
 
I’m therefore pleased to move, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 57, 
An Act to amend The Education Act, 1995, be now read a 
second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave of the 
Assembly to return to routine proceedings to move an 
emergency motion dealing with the Plains hospital. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member from Cannington requests 
leave of the House to move to a matter previously available on 
the agenda. The request for leave is not in order. The House is 
currently in the midst of a proceeding and is incapable, is 
incapable of moving to another matter except by a superseding 
motion . . . is the only means by which it can continue. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to reply to Bill No. 
57, comments made by the Minister of Education regarding Bill 
57. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as noted by the introduction of the Bill, we have a 
number of issues that are being put forth as far as the changes to 
The Education Act. Well, I recognize that a number of the 
changes to this Bill are housekeeping in nature or are of 

significantly lesser importance than I believe two of the changes 
that the minister’s put forward. 
 
The changes to the pre-kindergarten program, the changes to the 
ward system, the changes suggested by the minister to the land 
titles — those kinds of changes to The Education Act are 
required. They are necessary and I think they will improve the 
delivery of education. They will improve the efficiency of 
boards of education, and, as well, I think people will feel that 
the boards of education represent them in a far better capacity. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk about two of the issues that 
the minister put forward in her address. 
 
First of all dealing with the question of the amalgamations, or 
the voluntary getting together of all of the francophone boards 
of education across the province, the Minister of Education has 
indicated that this has been a long consultation process. She’s 
indicated that all of the partners in education have been 
involved, that there has been a spirit of collaboration and 
cooperation in terms of working out all of the different nuances 
that will be necessary. Because what you have occurring, as the 
minister has indicated, is that the boards of education currently 
which represent all of those school divisions will become one 
board of education. And they will have subdivisions 
representing all of those other communities. They have worked 
through all those things and are there. 
 
However the one, I think, that has caused the greatest amount of 
concern, Mr. Speaker, is the changes to the grievance 
procedure. And I want to indicate very clearly, that the groups 
involved, the different parties involved in the changes to this 
section of The Education Act, do not agree. Very clearly by the 
materials that I have received from the various groups, there is a 
great deal of concern as to whether or not this is the correct 
move. 
 
I have been consulting with these groups and have, as I’ve 
indicated, a very different point of view from the two groups. 
And I’m hopeful that the Minister of Education can meet with 
the two groups to resolve, as she’s indicated — in that 
collaborative, cooperative spirit that has reached the decision on 
the francophone question — I would hope that the same kind of 
decision could be reached on this question around grievances. 
 
And I think there has to be that kind of opportunity to indeed 
look at the seriousness of this. The problems that occurred last 
year in education with the changes that were made to The 
Education Act resulted in conflict. And as a result we have that 
same type of spirit that is missing, Mr. Speaker. And I would 
ask that those kinds of things be looked at very quickly. 
 
And I would suggest that we do require as an opposition, we do 
require some more time to better meet with these groups to 
further understand what could be resolved. And with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move that we adjourn the Bill at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 
leave of the Assembly to return to routine procedures to deal 
with a motion concerning the Plains hospital. 
 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

 

The Speaker: — If I understand correctly, the Opposition 
Deputy House Leader requests leave to return on the agenda to 
the end of routine proceedings and just before orders of the day. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Plains Health Care Centre Closure 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a motion under rule 19 dealing with priority of debate in 
the Assembly. The motion that I would propose to read is as 
follows: 
 

That this Assembly direct the provincial government to 
take immediate action to stop the planned closure of the 
Plains hospital and instead make the necessary 
arrangements to ensure its continued operation in a 
response to the ongoing public opposition to the Plains 
closure and the ongoing hospital bed shortages in Regina. 
 

Under rule 19, Mr. Speaker, we are to present this letter to you 
at least two hours before — which was done, Mr. Speaker — 
and we would ask to proceed with this motion. 
 
The Speaker: — This morning, the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition delivered a notice for a priority of debate to the 
Office of the Clerk as is required under rule 19(2). The notice 
was accordingly distributed pursuant to the notification 
provision of the rule. 
 
And having reviewed the member’s case, I am now prepared to 
rule on the matter. It is the Speaker’s responsibility to determine 
whether the matter should receive urgent consideration. Under 
rule 19(5) the Speaker is obliged to pay — I quote: 
 

Regard to the probability of the matter being brought 
before the House within reasonable time by other means. 

 
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition states in his case that a 
decision to halt the closure of the Plains hospital must be taken 
now in order to make necessary arrangements to ensure its 
continued operation even though it is not scheduled to close 
until October of this year. 
 
The argument goes on to note that this subject is within the 
administrative responsibilities of the government and that 
similar motions have been debated in recent weeks without 
conclusion. 
 
In matters such as this, the question for the Speaker is whether 
the matter is sufficiently urgent for the Assembly to set aside all 
other business to discuss this matter now, or is there any other 
ordinary parliamentary opportunity available in which this 
matter could be raised? 
 
In determining the answer to those questions, it must be stressed 
that it is not the Speaker’s role to force the House to exercise 
these opportunities if they do exist. Whether the Assembly 
avails itself of those opportunities is a decision of the House 
collectively. 
 

In this case, the Speaker finds that in the immediate future there 
will be opportunities for this matter to be brought on to the 
order paper. As recently as last Friday . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Order. As recently as last Friday, notice for 
such a motion could have been provided to create an 
opportunity to debate this issue tomorrow on private members’ 
day. 
 
Also tomorrow’s debate could be resumed on motion no. 4 on a 
similar topic, capable of being amended. Or debate could occur 
on Bill 230, The Plains Health Centre Preservation Act. Similar 
opportunities will be available on subsequent days. For this 
reason it is the Speaker’s decision to deny the request for a 
priority of debate. 
 
(1445) 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Queen’s Bench Revision Act/ 
Loi portant révision de la Loi sur la Cour 

du Banc de la Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Queen’s Bench Revision Act. 
 
The Queen’s Bench Act was first passed in 1915. Although it 
has been amended innumerable times since then, a surprising 
number of provisions remain in their original form. The result is 
a hodgepodge in which some sections are clear and easy to 
understand while others are incomprehensible to anyone other 
than a legal historian. 
 
In keeping with the practice over the last three years, this 
legislature will once again be asked during this session to 
approve the re-enactment in French and English of a number of 
Acts from a list which the French community in Saskatchewan 
has identified as being of the greatest importance and usefulness 
to them. The Bill before us today is one of those Acts. 
 
Our practice in preparing these bilingual Acts is to make no 
changes of substance. However before this Act could be 
translated into French, the English version required revision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us today contains four schedules 
that contain separate Bills. They are before us today, within one 
Bill, for ease of reference for members and for the easier access 
of the public to this Act. This is not an omnibus Bill, but rather 
one that re-organizes The Queen’s Bench Act to make its 
provisions more easily understood by the public and legal 
practitioners. 
 
While there are very few substantive changes in the Bill, The 
Queen’s Bench Act in Schedule A enacts two changes of 
substance to which I would draw your attention. First, 
jurisdictional provisions that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair is having some 
difficulty being able to hear the minister provide his debate to 
the House on the second reading of the Bill and I’ll ask for the 
cooperation . . . Order. The Chair asks for the cooperation of all 
hon. members to enable the minister to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — While there are very few substantive 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

changes in the Bill, The Queen’s Bench Act in Schedule A 
enacts two changes of substance to which I will draw your 
attention. 
 
First, jurisdictional provisions that refer to the jurisdiction 
exercised by courts in England in the 1800s are replaced by a 
simple statement that the court has jurisdiction in all matters. 
Second, the grounds for an order of judicial separation are 
changed to reflect the current grounds for divorce. 
 
Schedule B, The Administration of Estates Act separates out 
provisions which contain the law that applies to estates which 
are now buried in The Queen’s Bench Act and which are 
subject to complaint because it is not readily apparent to users 
that they would be contained in that Act. Again those new 
provisions in this Act move matters of substantive law from the 
Queen’s Bench rules to the Act and fill in gaps in existing 
provisions only. 
 
Schedule C contains The Interpretation Amendment Act, 1998. 
It moves to The Interpretation Act, 1995 provisions respecting 
the demise of the Crown from The Queen’s Bench Act. The 
only substantive changes in the Bill enact two clarifications of 
the law: the first adds a definition of “must” to the Act; the 
second extends the rule that regulations survive a re-enactment 
of an Act so that it also applies where an Act is amended. 
 
Schedule D contains The Queen’s Bench Consequential 
Amendment Act, 1998. Mr. Speaker, for ease of access and 
housekeeping purposes, this Act amends other Acts to make 
them consistent with the provisions of the new Queen’s Bench 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this housecleaning of the Queen’s Bench Act 
substantially improves the law by making it clear and more 
understandable. Gender neutral language is adopted, the 
numbering of the sections is regularized, archaic terminology is 
eliminated. These are all common forms of housekeeping 
amendments which are necessary from time to time, especially 
in such an archaic piece of legislation as The Queen’s Bench 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to enact The 
Queen’s Bench Act, 1998, The Administration of Estates Act, 
The Interpretation Act, 1998, and The Queen’s Bench 
Consequential Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following on the 
minister’s comments. As he mentioned, it is a Bill that’s sort of 
technical in nature and updating the Act to bring it up to today’s 
standards. And we would certainly feel that if there are any 
questions to be asked on the piece of legislation, that we would 
be prepared to do them in the committee, and see that the 
process is handled in that fashion. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 47 — The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker our 
caucus has no major objections to this Bill. On the whole this is 
very positive legislation that protects both the consumer and the 
insurance industry in a number of ways. The insurance industry 
is a complex one for many people, and the need for effective 
protection for the consumer cannot be stressed too highly. 
 
We are encouraged by the provisions of the Act, which give the 
insurance superintendent powers to bring actions against 
companies engaging in misleading or deceptive conduct. The 
Act also gives a superintendent greater powers to discipline 
insurers that engage in any of the range of fraudulent activities. 
 
Further to this end, the Act gives the superintendent the 
freedom to bring in experts, such as forensic auditors, to assist 
with the examination of alleged offences. The Act also restricts 
insurers or other agents from making the sale of insurance a 
condition of sale of another product. 
 
These and several other aspects of the Act go far to provide 
improved protection for the consumer. Our caucus, Mr. 
Speaker, is fully supportive of all such moves. While it makes 
these provisions on behalf of consumers, it also provides greater 
fairness for the insurers. It does this through such things as 
allowing insurers, or anyone else directly affected by the 
superintendent’s decision, to appeal a decision on points of law 
to the Court of Queen’s Bench. This eliminates the previous 
state of affairs where there was no further appeal to these 
decisions. 
 
This Bill also expands the rights of people who have suffered a 
financial loss from an individual who seeks redress through the 
individual’s insurance. This measure helps to ensure the orderly 
and fair resolution of civil disputes. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, on the whole our caucus feels that this Bill 
is fair and balanced to all parties involved. There is only one 
area where we would raise concern. The Bill provides a 
superintendent with the power to enter in and inspect any 
commercial premises if he has a reasonable grounds to suspect 
an offence. 
 
Strangely the Bill gives superintendent the right to obtain search 
warrants but does not require him to obtain one before making 
an inspection. This strikes us as a particularly useless provision. 
Why would the superintendent apply for such a search warrant 
when he has absolutely no need to obtain one? 
 
Further, this raises serious questions about privacy and 
commercial confidentiality. While we recognize that the 
superintendent needs flexibility to do his job effectively, we 
think that legislators should always be hesitant to give an 
official broad powers to intrude in the places of business of 
private citizens at will. Therefore we feel this provision should 
be reviewed more closely before this Bill is passed. 
 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

 

This is, by the standards of this session, a relatively lengthy and 
complicated Bill, so we would be looking forward to going over 
it clause by clause in committee to ensure that the public 
interest is being served in all cases. However, those are points 
of detail best left to the committee and we have no objections to 
seeing this Bill pass second reading at this time. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

Bill No. 55 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 55 — The 
Power Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a very routine Bill and 
our caucus sees little reason to hold up the proceedings of this 
House on this particular piece of legislation. If we can answer 
our . . . I think the questions that have been put forward have 
been answered in a fashion that is sufficient enough for us. So 
we see no reason to hold the Bill up any further. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 54 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 54 — The 
Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the questions that we have 
we feel can be sufficiently dealt with in committee so we’ll be 
asking them at the appropriate time. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I rise to say that the Liberal 
opposition has enormous concerns about some of the 
underlying principles of this Act. I think it is crystal clear that 
the experience we have had in the last while underlines the need 
for more accountability of our Crowns to the government and 
people of Saskatchewan, and to this legislature, rather than less. 
 
And I’m concerned that it may become even more difficult to 
get information on what our Crown corporations are doing and 
how they are accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. I think 
there are serious questions that arise when we find out that the 
company that we are now having the current inquiry into was 
sold initially for the purpose of preventing information coming 
before this legislature. 
 
And we now have firm testimony and firm evidence that the 
whole purpose in selling the company so hastily in five weeks 
was so this legislature, and in turn the people of Saskatchewan, 
would never have to find out what happened over their 
company. And then to make it even more galling and insulting 
we have Saskatchewan Power officials tell us unctuously that 
we the people of Saskatchewan are the shareholders. I’m sorry, 
but we have been treated very shabbily as the shareholders of 

the company, as the owners of the company, when it is felt it is 
fair game to deceive, mislead, and hide from us the owners, and 
yet that is what happened. 
 
(1500) 
 
And I am concerned that this legislation may not assist in 
making our Crowns more accountable to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Certainly I do agree, Mr. Speaker, that if we as a 
province are going to continue to own a power company worth 
$5 billion, it is not acceptable to make the president of that 
power company the Premier’s campaign manager. Nor is it 
acceptable to fill the board with people who are political 
supporters of the government in power. 
 
It is not so much an issue of patronage, although that’s a very 
real issue. But the issue is not patronage; the issue is expertise. 
The issue is that you cannot run a $5 billion corporation with 
campaign managers with little or no other background for 
running a corporation of this size. So if we want to own these 
corporations, we have to make sure that the expertise is in 
place. 
 
And I realize when I say this that I ironically find myself lining 
up with Jack Messer who said that we have to take the politics 
out of the Crowns, although of course it’s ironic coming from 
his mouth because we all know how he got his job in the first 
place. But having said that, but having said that, he is in fact 
right. 
 
You can’t have billion-dollar corporations and put them in the 
hands of campaign managers who may have been very good, I 
concede, very good at running campaigns, very good at raising 
campaign funds for the successful party, but whether they know 
a whole lot about running a power company or a phone 
company is another matter. And the same goes for the boards. 
 
But the answer, Mr. Speaker, is not to make the power 
corporations less answerable to the government, the legislature, 
and the people of Saskatchewan. Indeed what I see is something 
in the nature of a catch-22. We are also told that our public 
corporations have to run more like private businesses. Well I 
think we all want our corporations to act in a proper 
businesslike manner, but — but, Mr. Speaker — there is an 
important proviso here: namely, the reason you have public 
ownership is because these corporations are serving as 
instruments of public policy. 
 
Now if our Crown corporations are not instruments of public 
policy, then I would submit there is simply no argument left for 
public ownership. So if they function solely as private 
businesses, then that’s precisely what they should be. 
 
We set up public corporations to serve public policies. And 
indeed historically I think we all know that the reason why we 
had public corporations was that there was concern that the 
private sector might be interested in providing telephone and 
power service to our major cities and ignore the rural areas. So 
there was a public policy need that we felt could best be 
answered by setting up Crown corporations. So that’s why we 
went the Crown corporation route in the first place as opposed 
to simply leaving the job to private enterprise. 
 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

Now that might need some updating, but the basic principal 
remains sound, and the basic question is still there. What public 
policy objectives do we still have with our Crowns — which 
means that the Crowns should be publicly owned as opposed to 
sold off. 
 
And so, as I say, while I agree with the statement that we want 
our Crowns to behave in a proper business-like manner, similar 
to the private sector, I do not agree that we want them to run 
simply as any private sector company would operate, because if 
we do, then they shouldn’t be publicly owned. It’s as simple as 
that. They can only be publicly owned if they are forming and 
serving public policy objectives. 
 
But I want to return to my point about the shabby treatment the 
people of Saskatchewan have received from some of the Crown 
corporation heads as our being supposed owners of these 
companies. 
 
And I want to say that I do not recall this legislature voting or 
endorsing foreign equity investments by our Crown 
corporations. And I submit that if the people of Saskatchewan 
— if the people of Saskatchewan are the owners of these 
Crowns — then their representatives in this Assembly should 
vote as to whether or not we want to invest $31 million in the 
world’s most indebted country to buy a power company. Is that 
really what we want to do? Now if it is, that’s fine by me, but I 
don’t think that is a question to be decided in the back rooms of 
Saskatchewan Power; it’s a question to be decided by the 
shareholders, by the people, and by their representatives, after a 
full debate on the issues involved. 
 
Is it right, Mr. Speaker, that corporations that were initially 
established to make sure that rural Saskatchewan would have 
power service are now putting our money at risk in a cable 
company in Chicago, in an electric company in a country few 
Saskatchewanians have ever heard of before? Is this what we 
want? Is this a valid purpose? Is this a valid purpose for our 
Crowns? 
 
Well the hon. member across the way says that our Crowns can 
no longer exist simply to serve this province. I frankly don’t 
agree. I just don’t agree. And I concede I don’t know a great 
deal more about the intricacies of running a power corporation 
than Jack Messer does. 
 
But I am told by some of the experts that the fact is it is not 
outdated to say we could have a telephone company or a power 
company existing to serve the province and people of 
Saskatchewan, and that far from ensuring the future of our 
Crowns by embarking on these foreign investments, we may be 
putting the Crowns at risk. 
 
In fact hon. members will recall, Mr. Speaker, that Manitoba 
Telephones passed out of public ownership simply because of 
their unwarranted and unwise investments around the globe. 
Simply because they ceased serving the province of Manitoba, 
got involved in some high-flying and very ill-advised 
investments around the world, and the end result was that 
Manitoba Telephones passed out of public ownership into 
private ownership, leaving us with the only publicly owned 
telephone company on the continent. 
 

So I simply do not accept, I do not accept the NDP argument 
that we can’t have Crown corporations to serve Saskatchewan. 
That the only way we could have Crown corporations is if they 
are getting involved in globe-trotting boondoggles, and these 
globe-trotting boondoggles are somehow going to save our 
Crown corporations. 
 
Now that’s a basic philosophical argument and I concede, you 
know, that members opposite should be able to place that 
argument before this Assembly; we will place our arguments. It 
should be debated in this Assembly and debated in the province 
as a whole and let the people of Saskatchewan decide if this is 
the direction we want our Crown corporations to move. 
 
And while I say I certainly stated my position, if there is an 
agreement in the province that this is what we want our Crown 
corporations to be doing — we actually want our Crown 
corporations to be involved in cable companies in Chicago, 
electric companies in Guyana; we want them in El Salvador, we 
want them in Peru, we want them in the Philippines, we want 
them in Uruguay — if that’s what the people of Saskatchewan 
say, then so be it. We are still a democracy. 
 
But my suspicion and my belief, Mr. Speaker, is that the people 
of Saskatchewan will say that the Crown corporations were set 
up by the Liberals in the early years of this province to serve the 
needs of rural Saskatchewan, and that’s still why we have them. 
We want public policy objectives within the province being 
served by our Crowns. 
 
We do not want globe-trotting boondoggles. We are not happy 
with the fact that we pay the highest power rates in western 
Canada to finance some of these boondoggles. We do not think 
that is why Saskatchewan Power was established in the first 
place. We do not think that is why we have Saskatchewan 
Power today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, not only am I confident that that is what the 
people of this province would say, I am also confident that if we 
have a president of SaskPower who is knowledgeable and has a 
background in the running of power corporations as opposed to 
a background in the running of NDP campaigns, I’m confident 
the president of SaskPower too would have a different view on 
the situation. 
 
But certainly it is almost secondary to me as to what we would 
ultimately decide. But what I am absolutely certain of is that if 
the people of Saskatchewan are the owners of these companies, 
then these companies must be committed to providing accurate, 
timely information to this Assembly and to the people. 
 
In Channel Lake, Mr. Speaker, the company and SaskPower — 
and I specifically accused them of this and I will do so outside 
the House if called upon — were committed to preventing the 
people of Saskatchewan from finding out what they were up to. 
What the owners of that company were not supposed to find 
out, what SaskPower was doing with their money and their 
corporation. I find that scandalous and outrageous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m concerned with this Bill, I am concerned with this Bill 
that we are not strengthening accountability to this House and 
to the people. I am worried that we are further weakening it. My 
concern is, Mr. Speaker, that what we are really setting 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

 

ourselves up for is the “health districtization” of our Crown 
corporations. 
 
Well why do we have health districts, Mr. Speaker? Well I 
think we have health districts so that members opposite can tell 
us, oh we didn’t shut down Rabbit Lake; the health district did 
that. We didn’t shut down the Plains; the health district did that. 
 
Well you see, members opposite, we call them the government, 
but that’s inaccurate, Mr. Speaker, because that suggests they 
have responsibility. And actually the members opposite, they 
can blame the health district, they can blame Ottawa, now 
hopefully they can blame the Crown corporations. But they can 
say, we have no responsibility here; we will . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, there is always someone to foist the blame 
off on rather than say we are the Government of Saskatchewan, 
we must take ultimate and final responsibility. 
 
And it seems to me that if we are going to have public 
ownership of our Crown corporations, that intrinsic in that 
notion is that the government will take responsibility as the 
owners and as the representatives of the people of 
Saskatchewan. And they will work to correct the management 
that says, we don’t want the people of Saskatchewan finding out 
what the Crown corporations are doing. 
 
So the issue, the issue is to strengthen accountability and not 
weaken it. The issue is to be able to accept responsibility rather 
than push it off on others. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the hon. member for Saltcoats 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to, for the 
member from Moosomin, introduce students from the Grenfell 
Elementary School. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 18 grade 2 
students with teacher Betty Parley, and chaperons Kelly Derby 
and Patty Welch. And Mr. D’Autremont will be meeting with 
them shortly, for Mr. Toth. 
 
I would ask the members to welcome them here this afternoon, 
and hope they have a good visit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I will want to remind the hon. member, and 
I’m sure that in the future in making comments in the House, 
he’ll want to avoid making use of proper names in the House. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 
(continued) 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. I’d like to thank the member for 
Saltcoats. I appreciate the interruption. I needed some time to 
catch a second wind here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me the Crown corporations are a 
special mix. On the one hand they need to behave in a 
business-like manner. And that includes, as I say, putting a 
board and a CEO (chief executive officer) in place who knows 
how to run a power corporation. People who have expertise 
beyond, as I say, running NDP campaigns . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, it’s an important point. 
 
But the other side of it is that our Crown corporations aren’t 
merely private sector businesses. They are Crowns because they 
are serving public policy objectives, and if we abandon the 
concept of our Crowns serving public policy objectives, we 
must inevitably abandon the concept of public ownership. 
 
We have to, however, abandon the idea that our Crown 
corporations exist so that various ministers and CEOs can fly 
around the world getting us involved in foreign adventures in 
which we have no expertise and little prospect of profit. 
 
(1515) 
 
And let us strengthen accountability. If the people of 
Saskatchewan are truly the shareholders and owners of these 
corporations, we will want to keep them informed and we will 
want to have free and open debates in this House before we 
engage in foreign investment. 
 
And that is why we will be moving an amendment to say that 
there will be no foreign equity investments without a debate in 
this House. And I call upon all members who believe in 
democracy and who believe in our Crown corporations as being 
servants of the people of Saskatchewan, to make that into a 
principle of day-to-day operation rather than an empty pious 
phrase which is devoid of practice. 
 
So we are trying to move into the 21st century with our Crowns. 
We know that our Crown corporations played a significant role 
in the original development of this province, and they still can. 
But they are not going to play a role in the future of this 
province if they are used for back-door taxation. They are not 
going to play a role in this province if they involve themselves 
in globe-trotting boondoggles which do not have public 
confidence and which will simply expose us to ridicule and 
loss. 
 
And the last point, Mr. Speaker, which I would ask the member 
for Lloydminster especially to pay particular account of because 
I haven’t actually used this one before, is the question of public 
utility rate reviews. It is scandalous, Mr. Speaker, that we are 
now the only jurisdiction on the continent that does not have 
rate review. And it is even more scandalous when one thinks 
that these are public companies, again servants of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well if they’re servants, why can’t there be rate review similar 
to what every state and province in North America enjoys. Why 
does there simply have to be an announcement that, well we’re 
jacking up the rates again; we know that we had $150 million 
profit last year but we’re going to need a rate increase. 



1474 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

Well why do we need a rate increase? Well we need a rate 
increase because we’re thinking of moving into Peru, or we’re 
thinking of moving into the Republic of Gavoombabaga, or 
some other place that sends us all scrambling for our atlases 
wondering where the Deputy Premier is going to be visiting 
next. 
 
So let’s not have these foreign investments without a full public 
debate by the people and their elected representatives. And let’s 
not have rate increases just to build up a war chest for the NDP 
in an election year or to build up a travel fund as they tour the 
world and visit countries that I say I have trouble locating in my 
atlas. 
 
It could be, it could be that my NDP friends are right that we in 
Saskatchewan should have the highest power rates in western 
Canada, as we do under the NDP. But I can’t help but wonder if 
we had rate review, if we actually had rate review, that there 
might be ways we could control rate increases. 
 
And maybe the people of Saskatchewan would be able to come 
before those rate review commissions and say, why don’t we 
hold down telephone rates by not losing $16 million on a 
Chicago cable company. I think most of the people in 
Saskatchewan would say, I would rather have a lower telephone 
rate than lose $16 million in a cable company in Chicago. 
 
And there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the hon. member 
says it is ridiculous and a fabrication for anybody to say that we 
have the highest power rates in western Canada. Well I must 
say how thrilled I am to hear her contradict the Minister of 
Finance, because that’s what he said in his budget speech. 
 
So we see another example yet again this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, of NDP back-benchers who are no longer able to 
stomach government policy. Yesterday we saw the hon. 
member from Wascana criticizing the Health minister — here 
she has to sit with him — but she was criticizing his policies. 
Today we see the hon. member for Lloydminster calling the 
Finance minister’s budget ridiculous. And I must say she has a 
point. 
 
But ridiculous or not, truth is truth, and the truth is we have the 
highest power rates in western Canada. And the reason we have 
the highest power rates in western Canada is the NDP needs 
back-door taxation. They need money for their international 
junkets. They have lost sight of serving the people and province 
of Saskatchewan, which brings me back to the Act presently 
before this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say with all the non-partisan conviction I can 
muster, let us get back to the philosophy and purpose for which 
our Crown corporations were initially established. Let us get 
back to the idea of basic service at basic rates. Not taxation, not 
foreign adventures, not gambling in Vegas or wherever, but 
service to the people and province of Saskatchewan at 
reasonable cost. 
 
And I think that if we do that, we will find our utilities will be 
in public hands as we enter the 22nd century. But my 
prediction, Mr. Speaker, my firm prediction is if we continue to 
use the Crown corporations for, one, back-door taxation; two, 
foreign adventures; and three, a soft landing for campaign 

managers for the NDP, we will lose public ownership and they 
will be sold off into private hands by this government. 
 
And that is why, Mr. Speaker, I say that the need is to 
strengthen accountability to the people of Saskatchewan. My 
concern is that I see this legislation going in the opposite 
direction. I see this legislation as a back-door way to pave the 
road for sell-off of the Crown corporations as their policies 
inevitably fail. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it was not my intention to 
enter this debate. However, there were a couple of remarks 
made by the member opposite to which I feel a response is in 
order. 
 
The member in his remarks talked briefly, Mr. Speaker, about 
the inquiry that Crown Corporations Committee is having with 
respect to the Channel Lake. And he used the words that they 
— and he didn’t say who — but he said that they deceived and 
they misled and they hid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sit in the committee and so does the member 
opposite. I sit in the committee and so does the member 
opposite, and I say to the member, if he feels strongly that 
somebody deceived or somebody misled or somebody hid, it’s 
up to him in the committee to point that person out, to ask that 
particular question, and to say . . . And I never did hear him say 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to set the record on that, that that kind of language 
certainly does not help our Crown corporations and it does not 
help public confidence in the system and the member himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what we could say is that mistakes were 
made, better communication could have been had. But certainly 
it is out of order, completely out of place for the member to use 
those words. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 12  The University of Saskatchewan 
Foundation Repeal Act 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Before I call clause 1, I’ll invite the 
minister to introduce her official. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today 
is John Biss, the executive director of the university services 
branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Welcome, Madam Minister, and to your official. 
 
We just have a few questions to clarify some of the things that 
we have already raised. And I’ve had the opportunity to speak 
on the telephone with Dr. Ivany, president of the University of 
Saskatchewan, and one of his officials as well, and I think a 
number of the concerns that were expressed by some 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

 

individuals have been clarified to a degree. 
 
So, Madam Minister, just a couple of questions still remain 
unanswered. Could you indicate what the balance of the 
foundation is that will be wound down. What is the financial 
balance that exists currently? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The known bequests that would be left 
are half a million. Now if someone has left something in a will, 
that would become known at a future date. But the known 
bequests are a half million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. The money that is currently in the 
foundation, are there restrictions on the funds that have been 
placed in that foundation as to where they can be spent or how 
they can be spent? Do you have current restrictions on the 
money that’s there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, any restrictions that the person 
that makes the bequest puts on it continue to stay with that 
bequest. And even in the instance when it’s transferred over 
into the University of Saskatchewan proper, it would still be 
under the conditions of the bequest placed on it by the person 
who donated it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister, that was the 
concern expressed by one individual as to whether or not those 
would carry forward. 
 
As far as the specific uses, have there been or are there . . . in 
the current foundation, are there specific capital projects that the 
money has been designated to, and do those also carry forward 
as far as their usage in the future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’re not aware of any capital asset 
money. The money is really student bursary types of money so 
it’s . . . there isn’t any of that kind of money at the moment. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, the winding up of the 
University of Saskatchewan Foundation indicates that their 
assets — after of course liabilities are taken care of and all bills 
are paid — that the assets will be transferred over to the general 
administration of the University of Saskatchewan. Will this be 
true for all of the assets after the liabilities? 
 
Can you assure the people of Saskatchewan that all of the 
amounts that currently sit within the University of 
Saskatchewan Foundation will indeed be transferred over to the 
general administration of the university? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. The Act provides for the winding 
up of the foundation and the transfer of the bequests and 
donations, and also appoints as trustees the chancellor, the 
president, the Chair, the Board of Governors, and the President 
of the University Alumni Association to ensure that those duties 
are properly carried out. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Over the last number of years or few years, 
how active has the foundation been in terms of receiving 
bequests or donations or grants? 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think its inactivity is what has led to 
its demise; 1993 was the last time they actually had to meet to 
conduct any new business. So really this is just a winding down 
of something that has essentially ended in fact. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. And 
my final question, in section no. 4, Madam Minister, you 
indicate that the — I think it reads “the trustees shall take all 
reasonable steps to notify the public including creditors of the 
foundation of the winding up of the foundation.” 
 
And I guess the definition that I might be concerned about is, 
how the words reasonable steps will be interpreted? Do you 
foresee any conflict in terms of people of coming forward 
sometime from now saying we weren’t notified, we weren’t 
aware, and we have some concern about the foundation, or we 
actually did not become aware that indeed the foundation was 
being wound up and everything now is being transferred over? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Not anything that we would know of 
because there is only this one fund and it is already been 
referenced, and people know that this is the fund under 
discussion. So it’s well known that this is the fund that’s being 
transferred. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — The creation of the University of 
Saskatchewan Crown Foundation I think is something that has 
occurred a number of years ago, and you’ve indicated that the 
foundation that is being wound down today by this Act will be 
. . . has not been in use since 1993. Is that one of the reasons 
why this Act or this foundation has become so inoperative 
because of the fact that the Crown foundation was originated? 
 
And then my second question, Madam Minister, would be: is 
the Crown foundation fulfilling all of the requirements that the 
previous foundation did prior to 1993? And are you satisfied 
with the mechanisms that are in place to ensure that all of the 
proper kinds of bequests, donations, whatever comes by way of 
people wanting to contribute, will indeed be handled by the 
mechanism that you have in place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well the issue is more around the 
taxation laws, and the Crown foundation gives the necessary 
charitable donation status in order to make sure that the money 
is able to be used in that purpose for the university. It might be 
of some extra use to know that, as well as being reviewed by 
the internal auditors at the university: it’s also subject to the 
review of the Provincial Auditor as well. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Teachers’ Dental Plan 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Beside me is Michael Littlewood, director of legislation and 



1476 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

third party funding. Beside me is Craig Dotson, deputy minister 
of Education. Behind me is Norma Knuth, supervisor of 
financial affairs, and Shirley Robertson, manager of 
superannuation programs. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Madam Minister, welcome to you and your officials. A few 
questions of clarification, Madam Minister. 
 
I note that the explanations on Bill No. 41 indicate that it is a 
requirement as a result of the negotiated contract, and we 
understand that. Could you explain the differences now in 
dental plans of other groups. And the question I’m leading to, 
Madam Minister— is you’ve indicated that there will be now a 
20-day waiting period — are most dental plans at the six-month 
waiting period? And is this a significant move within this set of 
negotiations or is it occurring in other groups as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, my officials aren’t familiar 
with other dental plans. But what I can share with the member 
is that in the teaching profession you have permanent contracts 
and temporary contracts. And this is in light of what’s 
happening in the workplace with regard to temporary contracts. 
 
I think if you were to look at other workplaces this would not be 
the case. You generally would have a temporary job that might 
last two years or a maximum of two years, and you would have 
permanent jobs. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I guess I 
was referring to the recent changes with the public employees’ 
plan that indicates that I think constituency assistants, for 
instance, will have a six-month waiting period before they can 
claim. And I note now that this is changing to 20 days. 
 
And I suspect that that means then a teacher who is a new 
teacher, who begins teaching in September, after 20 days they 
will be on the dental plan. And you acknowledge that that’s 
accurate. 
 
A clarification, Madam Minister, if there’s a contract, a term 
contract for anything greater than 20 days — let’s say 30 days 
— and that person then becomes eligible for dental plan 
benefits, what will be the period of time then that they will be 
eligible to receive benefits? Will it end at the conclusion of that 
30-day contract or will there be an extension? For instance, you 
know some dental work that is required on the 32nd day, two 
days after the contract is over; will they be covered under the 
plan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, Mr. Chair, in order for the teacher 
to receive benefits they have to have the work done during the 
term of their contract. With the exception of perhaps dentures, 
where they may have started while they were on the contract of 
employment and couldn’t finish that kind of work. But the 
expectation is that you’ll receive benefits if you obtain those 
services during the term of your contract. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m glad that 
that’s clarified. 
 

Madam Minister, one of the concerns expressed a number of 
years ago — and I think it’s still current as well — regarding all 
group dental plans — that plans like that were becoming so 
expensive that indeed they may not be able to be maintained. 
Could you identify some of the changes that have been 
enhanced during the last set of negotiations, and I’m not 
looking for every specific clause. What I’m looking for is how 
much improvement has occurred. 
 
I note that in your estimates . . . the costs of your budget this 
year over last year has about $34,000 of cost to the dental plan. 
Do we see sky-rocketing dental plan costs? And my concern, as 
expressed by a number of teachers is: will we be able to 
continue to afford the plan if it gets to a point that it costs the 
government so much money that suddenly they decide at the 
stroke of a pen that the dental plan doesn’t exist any more. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — To the member, Mr. Chair, what I can 
say about this particular benefit is that it’s collectively 
bargained so it couldn’t be deleted with the stroke of a pen; it 
would have to be changed at the bargaining table. 
 
We’ve added about a million dollars to the cost of the dental 
plan. What you need to know is that in previous years, all of the 
money allocated to the dental plan was not necessarily spent. 
 
In the dental plan there are no new codes that have been 
covered. There’s a higher percentage of coverage. The annual 
maximum amount that you can spend on dental work has been 
deleted and orthodontics for dependants is now partially 
covered. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, do you fear that carriers of the insurance plan — 
whoever they may be; I believe it’s Metropolitan Life right now 
— that they will be increasing their rates significantly as a 
result of claims on the dental plan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m not aware that they’re going to 
increase their rates and I’m advised that they have not increased 
their rates in some years. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, my final question here is 
. . . Obviously the dental plan is an asset to the teachers and I 
think that’s shown by the improvements that you’ve made to 
the plan. Teachers obviously consider that a priority. 
 
Is the dental plan — no doubt you keep statistics and records — 
is the dental plan, the number of people that use it, is it greater 
than the average, in the province of Saskatchewan, of other 
employee groups, as far as Metropolitan Life’s statistics? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don’t know the answer to that 
question. We just look after our own dental plan, so we don’t 
know what its costs are relative to other groups. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

 

Bill No. 42 — The Teachers’ Life Insurance 
(Government Contributory) Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Madam Minister, we note that in this Bill as well as the 
preceding one, I think the largest fundamental change is to the 
20-day clause in respect of the 50-day that used to exist. How 
many people do you see affected by the change here? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We anticipate that it’ll be less than a 
hundred people. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — How expensive will that be in terms of cost to 
the department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Seventy-five dollars per year per 
teacher. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you indicate in your explanatory notes that there was 
some concern, and actually I think you indicate that it is not a 
change but clarity of full or partial days. 
 
I recall some I think discussions — we’ll call them that, 
discussions and not bitter debates — about full versus partial 
and the kinds of things that have occurred at the teacher tables 
before in negotiations amongst teachers and of course amongst 
teachers and boards then. 
 
Is this the settlement of concerns that have been there before? 
Or is this just housekeeping in nature, and indeed there have not 
been concerns raised in the past about full versus partial. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This is housekeeping in nature. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Teachers Superannuation 
and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Madam 
Minister, you’ve indicated that the changes, some of the 
changes necessary in this Act, were due to some of the federal 
income tax regulation legislative changes. Could you indicate to 
this House what some of those federal changes were to enable 
us to better understand the changes as far as how they relate to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, what I can indicate to the 
member is that this is a matter of clarifying the legislation in 
order to satisfy the federal government. Particularly what we 
needed to do was clarify the definition of dependant, and 
secondly we needed to clarify how you can transfer funds from 
one pension plan to the other. So this is simply a matter of 
clarifying the intention of the legislation in order to satisfy the 

federal government. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, you indicated that there 
were some inequities that had existed before in the 
administration of the superannuation and disability benefits. 
Could you identify what some of those inequities were? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, this is a matter of fairness. In 
some cases we’d refund the member’s contribution plus the 
interest to the member in terms of their estate or to their widow 
or widower. 
 
In other cases, if the member was alive and they wanted a 
refund, we could refund them their money but we couldn’t 
refund them their interest on their funds, so it was a matter of 
just making the situation fair regardless of the situation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I think your department is familiar with the concern 
that was raised by a gentleman where his spouse was a teacher 
and of course still has contributions in the plan up to two years. 
But the changes that were initiated in 1989, if I’m correct, were 
shortly after her passing and as a result that money has 
indicated . . . or remains within the plan. And he feels that even 
though the changes that occurred in ‘89 correct everything since 
‘89 that that has left him in an awkward position, and that he is 
not able to benefit from the contributions that his spouse made 
during their years when she was a teacher. 
 
And I’m wondering, Madam Minister, is there any further 
concern within your department as to — or any other people 
who are raising those concerns — that say that this was not 
settled in the best interests of everyone, and whether or not 
there is possibly a method that by which you can resolve this 
gentleman’s concern? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There’s no retroactivity to this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, in clause no. 16 you talk 
about the ability to transfer, and I know that you indicated the 
commuted value. Could you explain the procedure that existed 
before versus what section 16 is trying to change, for clarity 
purposes, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This clause is for those folks who quit 
teaching some significant amount of time before they’re going 
to be eligible for their pension. So for example, if I’m aged 45 
and I quit teaching and then I’m not eligible for a pension. I 
won’t be eligible for pension until I’m 55. When I do go to 
collect my pension, my pension will be based upon my income 
10 years previous. So in fact I’ll be behind the eight-ball. I will 
be collecting a pension based on my income of 10 years 
previous. 
 
Now what they’ll be able to do is to take the commuted value of 
that investment and invest it in a fund of some kind with the 
thought that they will get a rate of return on that fund for 10 
years hence. And then they’ll be able to collect the money when 
they’re 55 and they should be in a better position. They will be 
better off, we believe, with this change to this particular clause. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, does this change affect both 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

pension plans that are in existence for the teachers’ federation, 
or is it just the current one? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It only affects the old plan. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule A agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the hon. member from 
Moosomin on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce a group of students from the Langbank 
Elementary School who’ve just joined us this afternoon. There 
are 12 students from the grade 5 class. They’re attended by their 
teacher, Laurie Dubé; chaperons Leanne Lawrence, Sharon 
Barbour, and Jeannette Ede. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to . . . I think it’s certainly a privilege 
for the students to be here, especially when we have the 
Minister of Education in the auditorium and the fact that our 
schools were two that joined together, are working together; 
and another question that we’ll be raising with the minister is 
the fact that there’s certainly need for a new facility. 
 
But I want to have the members join with me in welcoming the 
students that are here with us this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 

 
THIRD READINGS 

 
Bill No. 12  The University of Saskatchewan 

Foundation Repeal Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Teachers’ Dental Plan 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Teachers’ Life Insurance 
(Government Contributory) Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Teachers Superannuation 
and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, as 
well, a third group that’s here to join us this afternoon from the 
Moosomin constituency, a group of students from MacLeod 
Churchill Elementary School in Moosomin — 42 grade 3 
students who are here. 
 
And I see as well, this group of students I think has taken the 
Children’s Festival in as well. It’s a pleasure to introduce them 
to the Assembly. They’re accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 
Pam Foy, Miss Nancy McGonigal, and a number of chaperons. 
 
I’d like to invite them . . . And just for the sake of the students, 
the interest of the students, to the students, what we’re doing 
here at this moment in the Legislative Assembly, we have the 
Minister of Education and we’ll be addressing how she’s 
spending the money that’s been allotted to her department, how 
she’s spending it, and why she’s spending it in certain areas. 
 
So for the moment you have in this Assembly, I hope you’ll 
enjoy the debate that takes place. And I’d like to invite the 
members of the Assembly to welcome the students here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Education 
Vote 5 

 
The Chair: — Before we start, I would ask the minister to 
introduce her officials, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I too 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

 

want to join the member in welcoming all of the grade 3’s to the 
Legislative Assembly this afternoon. If you stay for a few 
minutes, I’m sure that you will hear the members opposite ask 
some questions. And as the Minister of Education, it’s my duty 
to respond to those questions in the best way I can. So 
welcome. 
 
Joining me today are Craig Dotson, who is the deputy minister 
of Education; he is to my left. To my right is Michael 
Littlewood, executive director, third party funding and 
legislative services. Behind me is Ken Horsman, the associate 
deputy minister. And sitting beside Mr. Horsman is Mae Boa, 
the executive director of finance and operations. 
 
Also joining us is Cal Kirby, director of capital facilities 
planning, and Karen Lautsch, who is the former senior policy 
adviser for school grants. She’s now working with the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education for one year. And 
joining us as well is Norma Knuth and Shirley Robertson, both 
from the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Madam Minister, welcome to all of your officials. I look 
forward to a productive afternoon. And I know that as the hour 
indicates, we’ll be back here this evening. 
 
And I’m wondering, Madam Minister, as I look back at the 
comments and questions of April 15, the last time that 
Education estimates were before this House, I had raised with 
you and your officials a number of questions and a number of 
concerns. I believe I had asked for eight specific points if you 
would be able to supply. 
 
And I’m wondering whether or not that information would be 
available today or maybe later on tonight if we’re able to secure 
that information during the recess time. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand that I can give you the 
questions four through eight. I can give those to you today. And 
the questions one, two, three were asked by your House Leader, 
and those questions are going to be submitted by our House 
business office to your House leaders in due course. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
While the information that I asked for in four to eight is going 
to be extremely valuable in terms of some of the questions that 
need to be addressed, I know also the other three questions are 
also . . . or the other three answers are also very important. And 
I was hoping that we would be able to have all of that 
information prior to Education estimates being voted off if 
indeed they do get voted upon this week. 
 
Nevertheless, Madam Minister, one of the points that we did 
talk about the last time you were here was the construction of 
schools and the renovation of projects and in fact that’s one of 
the items that I asked for. Madam Minister, we’re hearing a lot 
of concern expressed by boards of education, individual 
communities, around what regulations are in place for projects 
to be approved for construction. With respect to capital projects, 
is it the government’s policy to give priority to joint-use 
facilities? 

(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It’s one of the factors. Joint use is an 
extremely important public policy initiative of the province. We 
have been very pleased with the progress that has been made in 
various communities, particularly rural communities, when it 
comes to joint-use facilities where the regional college, the 
health board, the regional library, and other such community 
public services are co-located in the school. We think this is the 
way to go. It is not the key to receiving funding for capital 
projects. I would say the first priority is obviously heath and 
safety, and then the other factors such as enrolment pressures 
and joint use certainly come into play. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, have you or your officials 
been able to monitor projects that have occurred a number of 
years ago where there has been a joint-use facility constructed 
or renovated and shared, and are they totally supportive? Have 
there been any problems with shared agreements between 
municipal councils, health boards, public library boards, etc., or 
all projects that you have been involved with regarding joint 
use, are they all proceeding successfully? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’ve never had a complaint that I can 
recall. My understanding is that all these projects are 
proceeding successfully and the communities really appreciate 
the fact that some of these services are co-located in a school 
where children and young people are. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, the second use of school facilities seems to be around 
the area of sharing between the two systems in our province, the 
public system and the separate system. And there have been 
announcements by your department regarding the approval of 
some, as you’ve referred to them as, shared facilities I think, or 
as joint-use facilities between the public and the Catholic 
boards. Is this going to be a requirement now, Madam Minister, 
that indeed capital construction projects will only occur if there 
is a shared facility between both public and the separate boards? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No, it’s not going to be a requirement, 
but we do have a long history of comprehensive high schools in 
the province which is the sharing between public and Catholic 
ratepayers or children. 
 
I will say this, that joint use between the Catholic and public 
schools makes sense in some cases. We certainly have a 
successful project that’s just on the verge of being completed in 
Yorkton between the Catholic and the public school board. 
 
We have some discussions that are going on in the city of 
Regina between the Catholic and public school board. 
Oftentimes — or sometimes, I will clarify that word — 
sometimes a joint-use facility may mean that you will get your 
approval, because if you were to go forward with a single-use 
facility you may not get approval based upon your own 
particular observations on your need. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. With reference 
maybe to the facility that you’ve identified at Yorkton, do you 
foresee that there will be a reduction in the overall 
administrative cost because of the sharing of that facility? Or in 
fact are you looking at that facility as a test case to see whether 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

or not there is a situation that can occur where the two buildings 
are basically side by side, sharing a wall, but as my 
understanding, and I’ve been phoned a number of times, is that 
the people there see this as basically two separate systems, that 
all that they’re sharing is a wall; that indeed there won’t be 
much else shared and that costs overall will probably not be 
reduced at all. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I beg to differ with the member. 
There is sharing. There’s sharing of the mechanical system, 
there’s sharing of gymnasium facilities, there’s sharing of a 
resource centre, a library. By going together, the taxpayers of 
this province have saved $1 million on construction costs. 
 
Now are they going to save money on administration? The 
answer is no. Are they going to save . . . is the province, our 
taxpayers going to save money on construction costs? The 
answer is yes, we’ve saved a million dollars. 
 
Certainly the Catholic children are located on one side of the 
school, the public children located on the other, but they do 
share a gymnasium and the library and that sort of thing. As 
well, the city of Yorkton has gone in with the joint-use facility 
and they’re putting in the facility as well, which the children 
will have access to. It is a leading edge project. 
 
The other point I want to make is that joint use between the 
Catholic and public school boards is not new to the province, or 
in this . . . I mean it’s new to this province but it’s not new in 
the rest of the country. We have examples of joint-use schools 
in Ontario and in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m glad to hear 
that indeed the description of the project is far greater than what 
was described to me, and that indeed some of the things that 
people have been suggesting for a number of years are starting 
to proceed. 
 
The other side of the coin, Madam Minister — and there’s 
always two sides — is of course there is some concern in the 
separate community that the decision to share will eventually 
lead to amalgamation and the eventual, I guess, assimilation of 
the separate system into the public system. Has that concern 
been raised to you? 
 
And what kind of response would you give to a concerned 
person in Saskatchewan as to whether or not projects like that 
will eventually lead to a creation of one system, basically the 
public system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think that, as the member may 
not know, when Saskatchewan joined confederation in 1905 — 
and we’re about to celebrate our 100th birthday — one of the 
conditions going into confederation was that minority religious 
groups in the province would have access to minority religious 
schools. That is the foundation, one of the foundations, one of 
the principles of our province joining confederation. 
 
So I would say that Catholic people in the province of 
Saskatchewan should be comforted by the fact that this was the 
premiss, one of the premisses of our entry into Confederation, 
that they would have access, minority religious groups would 
have access to minority religious schools. So I don’t see us 

going the route of Newfoundland, which had a much different 
basis of coming into Confederation. 
 
Our Premier has stated on occasion, on many occasions — and 
he certainly meets with the bishops and the archbishops; I have 
met with the archbishops and the bishops — that this is a 
government that would never undermine the rights of Catholic 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I think one of the concerns expressed, probably 
because of the issue in Saskatoon regarding transferring of taxes 
between the public and the separate system, and that has been 
further inflamed I guess as a result of the discussion and the 
debate that’s going on in Saskatoon — it has been here in 
Regina for a number of years — there’s always discussion 
between the public system and the separate system regarding 
taxes. 
 
Does the current urban municipal Act, The Education Act, does 
it sufficiently describe how taxes are to be paid and is there a 
conflict that can be resolved? And the second part of that, 
Madam Minister, would be, are all people aware of their 
responsibilities, I guess, and their obligations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think it’s quite clear to the 
administrators in the Catholic systems across this province that 
only Catholics can give their taxes to a Catholic board. All 
other persons in the province that own property are to give their 
taxes to the public board in their communities. Only Catholics 
shall give their taxes to Catholic school boards. That is the law. 
That is very clear and that is the law. 
 
So if you were to decide, as it’s being suggested in some 
quarters, that your taxes could be redirected, and if you are not a 
baptized Catholic, a member of the Catholic community, to 
send your taxes to a Catholic board would be illegal. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Still on the 
topic of capital projects and construction. Madam Minister, in 
1991-92, I think your first term in government, the amount of 
money spent on capital grants I believe was about $70 million. 
And we’ve seen that decline now where we’re still sitting in the 
20 millions range over the last three or four years. 
 
I think as a result we’ve heard from a lot of boards of education 
from a lot of communities that indeed a lot of the renovations, a 
lot of the upkeep, the kind of work that requires significant 
dollar contributions, not only from the local taxpayers but from 
government as well, has not been forthcoming. And as a result a 
lot of those projects have been put on hold. We hear of safety 
concerns at schools. 
 
Madam Minister, I guess what my concern is and the concern of 
a number of people who have raised this with me is that as 
you’ve talked about joint use and the need to have joint use 
facilities as the wave of the future, which I don’t disagree with, 
that there is a concern that the projects that require completing, 
a simple matter, that we need to get busy with some of these 
projects that have been put on the back burner three years ago 
when we only had $21 million of capital grant monies. Last 
year they were put on hold. And I think your own numbers, if I 
recall, you indicated that I think in this House that there was 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

 

somewhere upwards of 200 applications for either capital or 
renovation. 
 
So, Madam Minister, is there a situation where school boards 
and communities need to be concerned about safety and does 
your department ensure that projects that are necessary, projects 
that will be controlled by safety factors will indeed go forward, 
and that indeed the monies will be provided to ensure that those 
projects can be completed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for the 
question because it’s a good question and I just want to put the 
answer to the question in this context. You’ll know that for the 
past several days the bells have been ringing in this legislature 
over the closure of the Plains, and the debate in this House and 
elsewhere has been around health care funding. 
 
The fact of the matter is that this province as you know when 
we came to government in 1991 was facing a $1.2 billion 
deficit. This province had the highest per capita debt and deficit 
in the country. And there was some steps that had to be taken if 
this province was not to go into bankruptcy. In fact, our Premier 
and our Minister of Finance had to make some trips to New 
York and elsewhere in order to show the bond dealers what we 
were going to do to get the situation under control. 
 
Well what do you do when you’re facing a real crisis — a real 
crisis when no one wants to lend you any money? And what 
you do is you begin to look at where can we reduce our 
spending in order to refinance some of the debt that was coming 
due and so on and so forth. And one of those places is capital. 
 
And so I think it’s a fair observation that in the last several 
years the province of Saskatchewan has not spent the $70 
million per year on school capital, and it’s a fair observation 
that there are over $300 million in capital requests for school 
facilities — and that’s a fair comment. 
 
Now when you get to a time when you have a little bit of 
money, and we have a little bit of money in this budget, if you 
look at where the vast majority of this money or a large part of 
this money was spent was in health care — $88 million. The 
budget of Education, we received a $7.3 million increase in 
capital, I believe it was, and $21 million increase in operating 
grants, so about 30 million. 
 
The fact of the matter is that every ministry in this House, when 
we go to put together our budget, has to deal with the reality of 
health care because it’s an extremely important topic to the 
citizens of this province. 
 
(1630) 
 
And so I think it’s fair to say that the real crisis in this province 
has been: how do we manage debt and deficit? How do we 
never go back to the days where we spent money? We have 
empty schools that are eight years old in this province. Go to 
Paddockwood. There were schools . . . There were decisions 
made that were political — let’s build a school — and 
Paddockwood is an example. That school is empty — there are 
no students there. 
 
So I would argue, sir, that we have in the last five years as 

government people tried to balance public expectations with 
what we really had in terms of money. And this year we had 
some additional dollars as a result of the improvement in the 
economy. Obviously we’re somewhat concerned about the 
drought and frost in your part of the woods and we’ll see how 
things are. 
 
But you know we’re a balanced government and we do things 
incrementally, and we are not going to spend money on capital 
projects when we don’t have it because that’s what happened 
. . . That certainly was done by your predecessors. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Madam Minister, thank you for those 
comments. First of all though, they weren’t my predecessors. 
Secondly, Madam Minister, if we take a look at your numbers, 
we take a look at your numbers on capital, you indicated, I 
think, 7 million. And when I look at the costs of school capital 
and the school capital interest payments, which are tied 
together, I see only an addition of about 5.7 million last year 
over this year. 
 
I think last year there were 26.8 million and this year your costs 
for capital and capital interest are 32.5. So I see a difference of 
5.7 million, not the 7 million that you had indicated. 
 
Interest is down, and I guess as you’ve indicated, interest will 
continue to go down year after year so indeed your department 
will have additional monies available because interest will 
continue to go down. We’ve seen that over the last three or four 
years because of the fact that your government has decided to 
spend less in capital since ’91; there were fewer projects that 
were financed. And as a result of the maximum 10-year term, 
we can look at it that probably down the road we’re going to see 
very little interest budget as far as a line item. 
 
Madam Minister, if you would clarify those numbers to indeed 
be able to indicate to us what is the total amount of money that 
will be spent on capital and capital interest this year over last 
year, I’d appreciate that. 
 
And secondly, Madam Minister, there have been changes to the 
way capital projects are financed. I recall years ago when I first 
became involved with the school division, I think the maximum 
amount that we were paying on a capital project regardless of 
size was 2 mills of local taxation, then it changed to 4 mills, and 
then there were caps. And now I understand that depending 
upon the assessment, school divisions could be paying 
anywhere from 40 to 60 per cent of a capital project. 
 
Madam Minister, have any changes to capital funding by . . . as 
far as the commitment from the province and the commitment 
at the local level, were there any changes this year in the way 
capital projects are being funded, and do you contemplate any 
changes in that formula for next year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There have been no changes in the way 
we determine the revenue sharing or the capital sharing for 
projects in this year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I indicated that the 
percentages were between 40 and 60 of the cost per school 
division. Is that an accurate . . . do you have those numbers 
available for what might be the lowest percentage that one 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

particular school division contributes and what would be the 
highest as far as across the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — On average we pay 60 per cent and it 
would depend on your assessment. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — As a result of that percentage, I guess when 
we’re talking about a construction of a large or a capital 
structure where we might be looking at 4 million or $5 million 
of total costs, have you had any concerns from boards of 
education that they are being prohibited from applying for that 
project because they would have to contribute 45 per cent or 42 
per cent of a four and a half million dollar project and they find 
that that’s just too expensive? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The department advise me that they 
have been involved . . . they’ve been advised by two boards, the 
Yorkton Catholic and the Estevan public, that this is a problem 
for them but they have many projects. I mean the Yorkton 
Catholic has the huge project right now with the joint-use 
facility. And in Estevan, I mean they have seen a lot of capital 
construction in the city of Estevan particularly in the urban 
board. Joint-use facilities, Pleasantdale, we’ve just announced 
another project. I mean this is a community that’s seen some 
major renovations and reconstruction to their school facilities. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, you’ve identified two 
boards that you’ve indicated are active in the construction of 
facilities within their divisions. I guess my question to you, 
Madam Minister, though is still have you heard from boards of 
education, because of the changes in downloading and indeed 
their costs becoming so high that they haven’t put forward a 
B-1 to your department to say that we would like this project 
done but we’re not even going to submit it because we won’t be 
able to afford it even if you approve it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I haven’t received anything to that 
effect. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. If we could 
change to a slightly different topic, Madam Minister, and that 
would be the area of transportation of school children. 
 
I think it was about a month ago, Madam Minister, when the 
Saskatchewan Safety Council asked the government to change 
the regulations regarding school bus stopping and operation at 
railway crossings. There seemed to be two different points of 
view. 
 
One where if a school bus is not required to stop at railway 
crossings, there was some suggestion then that there might be a 
lowering of the numbers of accidents that occur at railway 
crossings. 
 
The other groups have indicated, of course, that buses should 
stop at all controlled railway crossings because there might be a 
failure of the actual railway crossing lights to work. 
 
And I know that there was controversy and there was a number 
of articles in the paper that probably described both points of 
view very accurately. 
 
I’m wondering, has your department made any 

recommendations to government or have you continued your 
discussions with the Saskatchewan Safety Council to work out 
what might be a solution for Saskatchewan’s buses since we do 
have hundreds and hundreds of buses that are on the roads and 
many of them cross railway crossings every day? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — My understanding is that this matter 
has been referred to the Highway Traffic Board for their 
consideration. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, the department made some changes to the foundation 
grant formula last year and how you were allocating 
transportation grants. I think there was the exchange in terms of 
how the actual pupil count occurred. 
 
Did your department receive any concerns or complaints from 
boards of education to those changes that you implemented last 
year? And have you made any further changes to this year’s 
transportation grant? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — For the member’s information, last 
year we did change how we calculated numbers of days because 
we had a particular school division that went to a four-day 
school week. They in fact were not actually bussing children 
five days a week; in many cases they were bussing children four 
days a week. 
 
They expressed some concern about that and in this year’s 
formula or calculation for the rural transportation factor, there is 
some recognition for capital contained in the formula for 
transportation. So some of their difficulty has been partially 
resolved. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Your answer is 
a response to a couple of other questions — I asked you that 
very similar question last year around capital — the need for 
bus replacement. Has your foundation grant formula taken into 
consideration bus replacement on its new allocation of funds? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There’s no change in that regard. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Did I not hear you on your previous answers 
say that there were now changes to capital for purchasing a bus? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — For the purposes of Scenic Valley, we 
recognize that they have certain fixed costs, and capital 
obviously was one of them. We didn’t change the way we 
calculate capital, but for the purposes of Scenic Valley, we 
recognized that there were certain fixed costs, which include 
capital. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for the clarification, Madam 
Minister. Madam Minister, last year I believe you indicated that 
about 54,000 . . . 54 million, sorry, was allocated in the area of 
transportation. Is that a similar figure for this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. In total recognized expenditure 
recognition, we recognize 894,019,774. And for the purposes of 
transportation, there are three categories: 55.9 million; 4.8 
million for special education transportation; and other 
transportation, 7.8 million. 
 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, one of the other concerns that was raised as a result of 
your changes last year — and you indicated that you hadn’t had 
a great response — this is coming from one of the school 
divisions, who’ve indicated that the requirement to keep almost, 
I guess a daily stat, in that students were only going to be 
recognized as being transported if indeed they were on the bus 
that particular day. 
 
And the concern was raised to me was whether or not there 
would be an illness, or whether or not a student was away for a 
week due to a field trip, and that they would not . . . the school 
division in fact then would have to keep records to indicate the 
number of days that were recognized. Was that a concern, or 
was that an incorrect interpretation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I understand that we had some 
overzealous secretary-treasurers who may have not understood 
exactly what we were indicating. What we were trying to get at 
was — how many days do you expect to transport students in 
your school year and we’d like some indication of that. It is not, 
is Johnny on the bus 185 days and you’ll only get paid for 185 
days, or is Sally on the bus 160 days and you’ll only get paid 
160 days. The question is — how many days in the school year 
does your bus travel the roads of Saskatchewan? 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m glad to hear 
that that was resolved. 
 
The other concern that was described was there are situations 
where someone begins to ride a bus in the fall and they’ll ride 
for a couple of months because of a rural location, they’ll move 
into an urban community for the winter months and then they’re 
back out on the summer months — does that affect the amount 
of grant that that school division will receive for those months 
when the student is not being transported? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You only get to count once a year. So 
the time of year when the count is being done if there are 
children on the bus, they’re counted. If those children aren’t on 
the bus at that particular time of year, they’re not counted. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, if we could turn to a couple of other things time 
permitting. One of the ones that you and I have had some 
discussion with, and I’ve raised the issue here in the House, is 
around the small schools factor. 
 
And we have taken a look at the existing regulations around the 
small schools factor and the recognition and the changes that 
you made last year and there are still concerns from 
communities, Madam Minister. And I want to describe the 
situation again so that you would understand it even though I 
believe I’ve indicated this before. And I hope that I’m not being 
repetitive, Madam Minister. 
 
The concern is still from the community of Yorkton and of 
course Theodore, Madam Minister, where Theodore was a K to 
12 school and still is until June 30. And then the board of 
education has made or has decided that they will discontinue 
offering grades 10, 11, and 12 in the community of Theodore 

and those students will be transferred . . . transported to the city 
of Yorkton. 
 
Madam Minister, the concern of the Theodore local board of 
education, the people in the community of Theodore is 
regarding the allocation of grant monies to the Yorkton School 
Division for specifically the secondary grades 10, 11, and 12. 
Your formula recognizes that the school that is the closest and 
the second closest will be the two schools that will come into 
play as far as determining the amount of grant that’s allocated 
by way of the small schools factor. 
 
I have a concern with that and I’ve expressed that to you, and 
the people of Saskatchewan in those communities also have a 
concern. While I can see it being it a suitable formula if you are 
comparing apples to apples — and we’ve used that over-used 
term before — if I’m comparing a kindergarten to grade 12 
school in one community to two other communities that have 
kindergarten to grade 12 schools, your formula and your 
regulations make perfect sense because I will be comparing a 
school of like grades to another school of like grades. 
 
Madam Minister, the problem though is when we start to 
compare a school like Theodore which is kindergarten to grade 
12, and now we’re comparing it to a school, Springside, which 
is a K to 6 school. And you’re saying that because there’s a 
school that has some grades in it — not grade 10, 11 and 12 — 
the distance between Theodore and Springside means that there 
is no grant allocations for the 10’s, 11’s and 12’s from 
Theodore. 
 
Same scenario for our second closest school, I believe, for the 
community of Theodore — and I might be corrected as far as 
the schools — is the community of Sheho, which is now a K to 
8 or K to 9 school. And you’re also using that school for 
calculating the grant for the 10’s, 11’s and 12’s in Theodore. 
 
So as a result, we’re looking at the community of Theodore, 
grades 10, 11 and 12, and we’re saying your grant will be 
determined by the two nearest schools that aren’t even offering 
grade 10, 11 and 12. And as a result the community of 
Theodore, very specifically, the local board is saying this is 
bizarre. We have a formula that is saying that you won’t receive 
any monies for having 10’s, 11’s and 12’s in your school 
because their enrolment in each of those grades is below 20, 
because we’re going to compare you to Sheho and Springside, 
and those communities don’t have grades 10, 11 and 12. 
 
Does it not make more sense to compare apples to apples and 
indeed look at the nearest school that contains the grade 
configuration. Your small schools factor is broken up into three 
categories. Very specifically it talks about the elementary 
grades, middle grades, and the secondary. 
 
So when we have . . . I guess if you were comparing a K to 8 
school to a K to 9 school there might be a little bit of overlap 
there and it might be a little difficult to indeed compare that. 
But if we’re talking about secondary grades . . . and as you’ve 
indicated in this House many times, Madam Minister, that 
schools will continue to close; they’ve closed over the last 
number of years and there will be grade discontinuance. 
 
However, I don’t think we’re making it fair to the board of 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

education who’s done its job. And I’m not sure when 
Springside was a K to 12 school or when Sheho was a K to 12 
school but I’m sure sometimes in its history it was. A board of 
education now is looking at that very school and saying, well 
we’ve made the distance factor further; we’ve ensured that there 
isn’t a secondary school every eight miles. 
 
And you’ve said that yourself, Madam Minister, that we 
shouldn’t be looking at that because older children can travel 
further. I agree with you on that instance; we should try to 
ensure that our younger children are closer together. But now 
you’re indicating that 10, 11s and 12s, the grant calculation is 
going to be determined by a building. It’s not going to be 
determined by the proximity of grades of a similar nature. You 
want it to be described by buildings. 
 
This is a problem not only in Theodore, Madam Minister. I’ve 
received a number of calls from schools again, K to 12 schools. 
Because they’re fearful that their senior grades, 10, 11 and 12 
— you are going to be comparing them to other schools. And as 
the enrolments decline somewhat, even if they’re still going to 
be very viable schools where the enrolments are 14 or 15 in 
each of grade 10, 11 and 12, still a very viable school, but now 
the grant that is being allocated to the school division is reduced 
significantly because the next school closest . . .  
 
I’m going to give you one more example, Madam Minister. 
You’re familiar I’m sure because you’ve received letters from 
this community . . . and that community is the community of 
Sturgis regarding an elementary school and a high school in the 
same town. The concern there, of course, is they would like to 
keep the elementary school open because it offers them a good 
school, good quality education. Likewise, a couple of blocks 
down, there is a high school. 
 
Now, by your grant calculation, because the enrolment in the 
elementary has dropped below 20, they are being assessed as 
the closest school, the composite school or the high school that 
is two blocks away, that is grades 6 or 7 to 12. As a result, 
people and the board of education look at your regulations and 
say, why do we want to keep the elementary school? We are 
being penalized for keeping that school open because it’s being 
compared to the other building that’s in the same community. 
 
And they’ve indicated by letter — I’ve talked with the board of 
education — they have a letter that describes that their two 
closest schools for the elementary school is the high school and 
the school in Preeceville. Both of those schools, Madam 
Minister, are within the minimum kilometres that you describe. 
As a result their grant is zero. 
 
And there’s a concern, because I think what you’re going to see 
happen is, school divisions are going to look at that and say, if 
we’re going to receive maximum grant, then we have to even 
close some of the smaller schools — the K to 6 schools that you 
say should be kept open and I agree should be kept open. I think 
we have to take a look at that grant formula and we have to 
determine what is best for the people of Saskatchewan. I await 
your response. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, just from a response, I can’t 
imagine that you’d have people keeping two half-empty 
buildings open. My assumption is that the good people of 

crystal springs school division would probably move all of 
those students into one school. 
 
And then they would have the benefit of the minimum of the 
small school factor because I understand Preeceville is not that 
far away from Sturgis. So I presume that the school board will 
act with some frugality and they may look at merging those two 
schools into one. 
 
That’s happening in communities across the province where 
you may have a kindergarten to 6 and then a grade 7 to 12 and 
they’re moving students from one school to the other and 
having one school. So I assume that’s what’ll happen in Sturgis. 
 
What the member should know is that our government did 
make a decision to change the small schools factor last year and 
this was to benefit small, rural schools across the province. And 
in fact, some of the rates moved from $850 per student to 1,000 
and from $450 a student to $1,000 per student. And we also 
increased the numbers of students in the grade that would be 
recognized from 10 to 15. So that was an extremely important 
thing to do as well. 
 
The old formula that we inherited did not recognize the small 
school factor, in terms of comparing other schools by distance, 
by road. They just had it recognized as the crow flies, and that 
doesn’t necessarily work in the province of Saskatchewan. So 
this recognition increased funding to small schools in the 
province to $18 million from $8 million. So we think that this 
was a real benefit to small, rural schools in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now you raised the . . . And I would make this point. That for 
the first time in over 23 years there will be, I’m told, only four 
schools closed in the province of Saskatchewan in 1998. The 
last time we had that few numbers of schools was in 1975 when 
three schools were closed and prior to that, 1970 when three 
schools closed. 
 
So I really do think that our government’s commitment to rural 
education and small rural schools in this province has meant 
that, in this year in particular, we have very few schools closing 
in the province of Saskatchewan, particularly when we’ve seen 
other years, in the ’80s, when your predecessors were in power: 
19 schools closed in ’83; 20 in ’84-85; 13 schools, and so on 
and so forth; 1990, 20 schools closed. So I would say we’ve got 
a real commitment to small schools in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In terms of your other observation I think I said this to you at 
the time, that in order to look at how we determine to close a 
school, I think that’s something we need to look at. When you 
mentioned it to me it was rather late in the day in terms of 
changing how we determine the small schools factor in the 
province. But it’s certainly something that I’m prepared to look 
at for next year because I think you do make a point that’s 
worthy of consideration. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I don’t know what the statistics are for this year in 
terms of school closures and grade discontinuance; you’ve only 
indicated that there are four schools closing. I would suspect 
that there are some schools though that will have grade 
discontinuance. And the concern that I’m bringing forward, 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

 

Madam Minister, is the concern at Theodore. 
 
While you’ve indicated that schools in Sturgis for instance . . . 
that the Crystal Lakes School Division will be as efficient as 
possible, I’m sure they will . . . but the regulations that currently 
exist are going to be looked at by school divisions and saying, 
are we losing out on grant monies because of the kinds of 
regulations that are in place? Not because whether or not the 
program is being delivered, it’s going to be whether or not we 
are able to change to meet the regulations. 
 
And I don’t think we want to get into that situation. I think we 
want to give the board of education the ability to make the 
decision based on what is best for the students in Sturgis, 
Saskatchewan — not what’s best and whether or not they can 
get numbers. 
 
And when you’re suggesting that schools . . . And I’m glad to 
hear that you’ve indicated that to compare a school that is K to 
6 — about whether or not it should receive X number of dollars 
as a small schools factor — when you compare it to another 
school just in the same community and it’s 7 to 12, doesn’t 
make any sense at all. And you’ve indicated that your 
department is willing to look at that. 
 
I’d suggest, Madam Minister, that when you’ve indicated that 
there were $18 million that were allocated — I mean that’s a 
significant amount of money — and I think what we have to do 
is look at that entire allocation as to whether or not it’s being 
distributed fairly. Because maybe the situation should be that 
the pot of 18 million doesn’t change, but that you give the 
communities the ability to be equal. 
 
Because right at the moment the way it’s being disbursed, we 
have school divisions that I think are going to be in conflict 
with one another. Because they’re going to be suggesting to a 
neighbouring school division, if there’s a small school on the 
side of the boundary, to close that school because it will affect 
their grant. 
 
Madam Minister, I think we will continue the discussions after 
the recess. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1457 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1457 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1457 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1457 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1457 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1457 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1457 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1457 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1457 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1458 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1458 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1458 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1458 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1473 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1478 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Hospital Crisis in Saskatchewan 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1458 
 Health Care Services and Facilities in Saskatchewan 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1458 
 Sanctions for Nuclear Testing 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1459 
 Job Prospects in Regina Area 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1459 
 Melville Citizen Honoured 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1459 
 Graduate Congratulations 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1459 
 Northern Hockey League 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1459 
 Count Von Imhoff’s Legacy 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1460 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Closure of Plains Health Centre 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1460 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1460 
 More Nurses for Rural Health Districts 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1461 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1461 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1461 
 Meadow Lake Pulp Mill 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1461 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1461 
 Resources for Acute Health Care 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1462 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1462 
 Nurses Required to Update Training 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1464 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1464 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Canadian Light Source Synchrotron Project in Saskatoon 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1464 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1465 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1465 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 214  The Recall of Members Act, 1998 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1466 
 
 



 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1466 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 57 — The Education Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1466 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1468 
 Bill No. 43 — The Queen’s Bench Revision Act/Loi portant révision de la Loi sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1469 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1470 
PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 Plains Health Care Centre Closure 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1469 
  Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................................1469 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1470 
 Bill No. 55 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1471 
 Bill No. 54 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1471 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1471 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1474 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 12  The University of Saskatchewan Foundation Repeal Act 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1474 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1474 
 Bill No. 41 — The Teachers’ Dental Plan Amendment Act, 1998 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1475 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1476 
 Bill No. 42 — The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Amendment Act, 1998 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1477 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1477 
 Bill No. 53 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 1998 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1477 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1477 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 12  The University of Saskatchewan Foundation Repeal Act 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1478 
 Bill No. 41 — The Teachers’ Dental Plan Amendment Act, 1998 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1478 
 Bill No. 42 — The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Amendment Act, 1998 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1478 
 Bill No. 53 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 1998 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1478 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Education — Vote 5 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1478 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
 
 


