





























































Hansard: May 26, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1405 
 May 26, 1998 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 6 — Hospital Waiting-lists 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was rather 
interrupted in my presentation just before the recess, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So I think I have to repeat it so that some of 
the people over there will be able to understand it the second 
time around. 
 
We often hear people talk about the amount of money which 
this government is spending on health care. Well our budget 
was 1.72 billion — not million but billion. That’s a lot of 
money, and it forms about 40 per cent of the budget of this 
government. And so what we have with regards to it is that they 
cannot say that we do not put our emphasis on the health 
budget. We do, and we do care about health care. 
 
Not like the federal Liberals who cut health services by $7 
billion — one, two, three, four, five, six, seven. I was hoping 
that you would be able to understand it. And what I’m asking 
the members opposite if they would just take some time to talk 
to their federal cousins and ask them to put some more money 
into the health care. 
 
But will they? No. What they do is they go around the province 
spreading fear, misinformation, and ideas where nobody else 
could dream of them — but they can. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am 
ashamed of what those people are doing as far as health care is 
concerned. Their senior Liberal guru, Kent, who was there 
when medicare was invented — the Liberals, do you believe 
that — he was there when medicare . . . and he soundly 
condemned the federal government for these drastic cuts which 
are occurring to medicare. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the problem also exists then that other 
people . . . where they used to get 50 cents on the dollar for the 
health care in Canada, they now give Saskatchewan 13 cents on 
the dollar. Absolute shame. 
 
And so what’s going to happen with Tory governments in 
Alberta and in Ontario? They will give up on the medicare 
system, they will give up on universality, and they will ruin the 
medicare in Canada. And our friends over there do nothing 
except complain and try to break up the medicare system in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I have news for them, Mr. Deputy Speaker — that will 
never, never happen. We will not allow two-tier medicare to 
come into this province; we will not let private medicare come 
into this province. 
 
A Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal, as we found out when their 
so-called leader managed to get the top Liberal from Ottawa to 
come to Saskatchewan and reinforce that. Did you people ask 
them what was going on in the health care system? I bet you not 
one word was at issue, one question asked about the cuts, the 
drastic cuts that those people over there made to medicare. They 
supported it. And then they talk about the health system in 
Saskatchewan — the best system in the world. 

Before, I also talked a little bit about the Liberal rallies which 
have been hailed around the province in the last four weeks. 
And they came up with some brilliant ideas why the Plains 
should stay open. Did they talk about care? No, they didn’t. Did 
they talk about the emergency procedures? Did they talk about 
waiting-lists? They never talked about any of those things. 
 
You know what they talked about? They talked about 
accessibility. It’s so hard to find those two hospitals . . . it isn’t. 
And then they had the gall to say that it took 20 minutes to go 
from the Plains hospital to the General Hospital. Well the hon. 
member from Estevan and myself went in our unit yesterday, 
we went and we travelled from the Plains to the General, and it 
took us all of five minutes to get there — five minutes. That’s 
all. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not one . . . 
 
Mr. Wall: — No. Two, three, four, five. So that the members 
opposite will understand what we mean by five minutes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another reason why the Plains should stay 
open is because it has parking facilities — parking! What part 
does parking play in the treatment of health? What does it play 
— what does the parking cost? What is involved in health that 
we have to worry about the parking? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not understand why that is such a 
great problem. And when the General is completed and the 
places are all said and done, there will be ample parking at the 
General — more than ample parking, Mr. Speaker. 
  
They say that the General Hospital is a . . . or the Plains hospital 
is a state-of-the-art building, and I will grant that to them. It’s 
state-of-the-art, but it does have a few, just a few, shortcomings. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has the problem of asbestos. At these 
rallies, we are told that the building could be filled with people 
and they could go in there with this new method and spray on 
the asbestos and nothing would occur. We have word from 
experts which state that this is impossible. Now where they get 
their information from is beyond me. Again, we have 
misinformation being spread all across this province to scare, 
especially, our seniors. That’s what it is . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You don’t worry about my arm, the hon. 
member from Wood River, or wherever you’re from. 
 
They also claimed — they told us that there wouldn’t be a cut in 
beds — and we agreed with them. And we agreed that after the 
Plains closes in October 1998 that there will be 675 beds in the 
Regina Health District — 675. How many, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? See, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I realize they have a little 
difficulty going past five, but I’ll try to get it through — 675 
beds. 
 
And what is the average use? What is the average daily use? Do 
you know what the average daily use is? Six hundred and eight. 
You can’t stand it. Six hundred and eight. There are beds left 
over then, if they can understand this modern math: 675 minus 
608 leaves us with a remainder. Of course there are going to be 
days when some of the sections will be pushed for space; 
there’s no getting around it. 
 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

But if we were to finance so that every person who needed and 
wanted elective surgery on the spot, we could not afford it. 
Nobody could. You see? The member over there has no idea, 
nothing. So that there will be no shortage of beds, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Another issue . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — To request leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I would 
like to thank the hon. member for Swift Current for generously 
yielding the floor, allowing me to introduce a very important 
group in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
This is the St. Timothy’s 49th Scouts. There are 19 people here 
today. The leaders are Jack Zess and Bev Smelt. And with them 
is Len Prokopetz and Judy Innis. It will be my pleasure to meet 
with this group and share a soft drink with them in about five 
minutes. I very much look forward to questions. 
 
This group comes year after year. And I’m always astounded; 
they come up with fresh questions, and they take a keen interest 
in the whole parliamentary process. I ask all hon. members to 
join me in welcoming the St. Timothy’s 49th. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
personally welcome the Scouts and the Cubs . . . if it’s Cubs? 
It’s got to be Scouts. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I remind the . . . 
Order. I remind the hon. member that if he wishes to introduce 
guests he needs leave also. So I would ask the member to 
resume debate on the motion. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 6 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve heard a 
little bit about what’s going on in the Swift Current Health 
District. As I speak, even tonight, they’re having a public 
meeting with regards to a needs assessment. Now this really 
makes sense. You know what they’re doing with it is that they 
are asking the public, what do they think that they need in the 
health care system in Swift Current. Now that’s a good plan. 
 
They don’t go and fearmonger. They don’t give 
misinformation. They’re asking the people, what do you think 
we should have? Should we do some improvements on the 
hospital? Should we hire more nurses? Should we get front-line 
help other than nurses? Should we look after the people who 
look after the maintenance and so forth? These are the things 
that they’re discussing, and they’re discussing it with the public. 

And Swift Current is noted for the cooperation of the people. 
Earlier on this year, they had a meeting, a public meeting of . . . 
what can we do to attract doctors to this place? Well at that time 
there was a Tory member who was there for some reason or 
another, acting as the Health critic for the Tories. And 
three-quarters of the way through the meeting, he got up and he 
tried some scare tactics too. He says, what will happen if you 
don’t attract these doctors? Well I’ll tell you what will happen, 
he said. He said, you’ll lose your hospital. Well the people 
didn’t buy that, and they won’t buy that. And they are working 
cooperatively to attract doctors to Swift Current. 
 
Just the other day, my family doctor’s clinic hired another one. 
He’s full staffed again. Hooray! And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
district hired — and I can never pronounce this word right — 
two . . . the people who give the anesthetic . . . anesthetists — 
two of them. Two of them! Two of them! And so they are 
looking after the needs of the Swift Current Health District. 
 
And so what happened in the paper? They had a general 
meeting, and the hon. member from Wood River took it upon 
himself to suddenly say, beds will be cut. Beds will be cut to 
80, and Swift Current will lose its status as a regional hospital. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the next . . . no, the same edition, Drew 
Lockhart, CEO (chief executive officer) of the Swift Current 
Health District Health Board, and Esther Wall, — no relation, 
wish she was — chairman of the Swift Current District Health 
Board, stated that the information given by the member from 
Wood River was false and misleading. That was the words that 
they used: it was false — false and misleading. And they say 
they are not fearmongering; what is that except fearmongering? 
 
An Hon. Member: — They are shameless. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Exactly. No honour. Do the things what they will 
have to do and they will find out that they will be exactly where 
they should be — out in the pasture. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion is with regards to waiting lists. 
Okay. Saskatchewan residents wait about the same amount for 
surgery as do other Canadians. That doesn’t mean to say that 
it’s right. It doesn’t mean to say that we’re better. It’s just that 
we do. 
 
And with regards to that, Saskatchewan Health monitors that 
very carefully. The number of surgical procedures has remained 
fairly stable since 1991 to ’97. Day surgery though is used more 
and more. It’s less invasive. The people don’t have to stay in 
the hospital that long . . . and so that we can make better 
utilization of the equipment and the hospital beds that we do 
have. 
 
Demand for some procedures has increased substantially in 
recent years. Just to give you some examples — cataracts. And 
we have a great doctor in Swift Current who performs these, but 
in the province it has increased by 81 per cent — 81 per cent. 
What if it would have stayed the same? What kind of a 
waiting-list would we have then? I don’t think that the opposite 
members think about that. They just want to go out and say, 
there is a waiting-list which is so long and we are doing nothing 
about it. Nothing could be further from the truth. We are doing 
everything which we humanly can to make sure that the 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

waiting-list will be cut down, and if not cut down, it at least it 
won’t expand. 
 
Hip and knee replacements. Some of the older members over 
there maybe are in need of it. I know I am. I’m in need of a 
knee replacement — some time soon, I don’t know, but I know 
that I can wait for it because I can still walk around and that is 
what they will look at. It is not urgent that I get my knee 
replaced, but I will when the time comes and they will do it. 
 
Of course, other surgical procedures have seen a decline. For 
instance, tonsillectomies. Again there’s a change in the health 
procedures and so forth — they’ve decreased by 44 per cent. 
And so we have all of this going on throughout this whole part 
. . .  
 
Now the average waiting time for surgery in Regina is longer 
than it is in Saskatoon. And sometimes you’ll hear this 
comparison. Well there are valid reasons for it. For one thing, 
Saskatoon has a high number of doctors compared to Regina. 
Okay, they have the salaried positions by the College of 
Medicine who operate through the University of Saskatchewan 
and so forth. And so that is one of the reasons why they have 
these. They have more specialists. 
 
Changes in how the waiting-lists are reported — the doctors 
determine what the waiting-list is. If they don’t submit the name 
of a patient who is waiting for a surgical procedure, it doesn’t 
get recorded. It’s as simple as that. If of course they enter the 
name on the waiting-list then it forms part and parcel of it. 
 
But this is what happens. The lengthy waits, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for procedures are usually, are almost exclusively, for 
elective cases — elective. There are different ways of 
classifying surgical procedures. The emergency surgical 
procedures are life-saving measures and must be done as soon 
as possible. And the statistics show that this is done within 1 to 
48 hours. That procedure is done. It’s emergency; it’s done. We 
don’t have to scare the people out there by saying that, if you’ve 
got an emergency surgical procedure that is necessary, that 
you’re going to wait two months. It’s going to be done in time 
to save that life. Mr. Deputy Speaker. The other one is that 
urgent procedures are usually performed within a few days if 
possible. Okay, that’s urgent — okay. 
 
And then we come to the elective. Now there are long waits for 
electives. There’s no getting around it. They are longer than I 
would like to see them. They are longer probably than most of 
the members on this side would like to see them. They are not 
quite as long as the other members would like to see them 
because if they were longer then they could really scream from 
their seats and do nothing about it. 
 
And so this is what happens with regards to these. The 
department, in order to combat this — the long waiting-lists and 
so forth, Mr. Deputy Speaker — has established a waiting-list 
management committee which will develop common 
prioritization categories and various performance measures in 
order to strengthen the ability of the districts and the 
Department of Health to identify waiting-list components. And 
this is coming. This is being done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve taken quite a bit of the time. I know that I do 

not like the long waiting-lists any more than anybody else, and 
I’m sure also that the members opposite do not. What are we 
going to do about it? We are doing everything which we 
possibly can at this time. I just mentioned a couple of them, but 
again the hon. member from Arm River was in a fog 
somewhere and was not bothering to listen. I have repeated 
myself too many times already tonight and so I am going to sit 
down. 
 
Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — She didn’t hear you over the din, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to participate in this 
debate. I think that any time that health care is debated in this 
Assembly it is by definition a debate of the utmost gravity, a 
debate that demands the attention of all of the members of the 
Assembly, no matter what side they may choose for the motions 
that come before us. 
 
Health care — because it is so important in the minds, in the 
affairs, and in the lives of the people of Saskatchewan — is 
always something that we need to treat with great seriousness 
so that when the Liberal party puts forward a motion, as they 
have done in this case, exhorting the government to make 
greater efforts to deal with a particular problem in the health 
care system, I think it behoves us to take these issues seriously. 
It is something that is of great interest to the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s a matter of life and death for some of the 
people of Saskatchewan, and understandably so. 
 
The system of health care that we have in Saskatchewan is 
something that has evolved over the course of the last 30-some 
years, and has evolved into what I think is a first-class system 
of health care, and a system of health care that is the . . . that is 
the envy of many jurisdictions in the world. There are many 
places in the world that wish that they could have the kind of 
health care system that we have and the kind of support that it 
provides for our people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this vein, I was interested to read in the 
Star-Phoenix a few weeks ago an article that was entitled, 
“Canada’s Identity Crisis.” And the subhead was that Joe and 
Jane Citizen now place health care above all other unique 
aspects of the country. 
 
And the article went on to explain that an elite group of federal 
bureaucrats which were instructed by the Privy Council office 
in Ottawa to study the forces driving economic and social 
change had, among other things, done some research into 
Canadians’ attitudes to symbols that to them represented the 
country. And they found that Canadian society has become so 
fragmented that the country’s medicare system and the rugged 
beauty of the land itself are now its most powerful national 
symbols. And their research showed that the Queen, the 
Mounties, and once central institutions such as the CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) no longer provide 
Canadians with a common sense of identity. 
 
Their report argued that Canadians, once galvanized by dreams 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

of a national railway or a just society, have had their collective 
identity weakened in recent years. And they point to factors 
such as globalization, immigration, youth unemployment, the 
growing gap between rich and poor as all having played some 
role in widening the fault lines of Canadian society. 
 
And they found that of all their polling, that only two of 
twenty-three national symbols resonated with all segments of 
the population — and that’s medicare and our national 
environment. Not the Mountie, not the Queen, not bilingualism, 
not the flag, but it’s medicare and a natural environment. 
 
And I was interested to read that, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s 
an appropriate lesson that we learn from that about the 
importance that health care and the medicare system have to 
Canadians, and, as I stated earlier, it has to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I appreciate the . . . even if I don’t appreciate the specific 
wording of the motion that’s before us, I do appreciate the fact 
that the Liberal Party would put forward a motion that gives all 
of us, whether we’re on the government side or on the 
opposition side, an opportunity to put our views on the record 
when it comes to the administration of health care in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada. I think it’s always important for 
us to do that. People of Saskatchewan want their politicians, 
want their elected representatives, to be very clear about what it 
is that those people have to say about their health care system. 
 
And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that people also want to hear 
more than simply criticisms about the health care system that 
we have. It’s fine for the Liberals to put forward a motion 
which is critical of the government because supposedly the 
waiting-lists are too long, but I think the people of 
Saskatchewan also want to know more than that. 
 
They also want to know what concrete actions the Liberal Party, 
or for that matter the Tory Party, would take if they were in a 
position to do something about it. That is to say, they don’t 
simply want problems raised; they also want to know what 
kinds of solutions people bring forward so that they might be 
able to judge as to who it is that they want to administer their 
health care system. And I think that’s an important question, 
Mr. Speaker, that we should pay a bit of attention to. 
 
Again I’m not surprised that people of Saskatchewan or Canada 
would hold their medicare system or their health care system in 
such a high regard so as to be a unifying symbol of the country, 
and is to be so important that it takes precedence over 
everything else in this country. 
 
When you look at the principles that support our system, when 
health care or our medicare system was put into place, we took 
the position that to have hospital care initially, later to have 
access to a doctor, should be a matter of a right and not a 
privilege; that all Canadians should enjoy that right and all 
people in Saskatchewan should enjoy that right; that it’s not 
something reserved for any select group that was able to pay for 
it. And those concepts are found in the principles that form part 
of our medicare system. 
 
And it’s very important, I think, when we talk about our health 
care system to just do a review of what those principles are. 

And it’s helpful for the public and those at home to give some 
thought to those principles so that the next time that someone 
comes along and says look, there’s a problem with our health 
care system and the government ought to do something . . . 
 
And I might say that the government is always very sensitive 
about problems with the health care system. And the 
government takes its responsibility seriously in terms of 
wanting to make improvements to the health care system so that 
health care system will serve the needs of people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But it’s good for the public to be familiar with the principles of 
our health care system so that in addition to simply listening to 
the criticisms that people make of our system, the public also 
has some understanding of what kinds of questions it wants to 
ask those who make the criticism. 
 
Where do you stand on the important principles that are part of 
the system that we have today? Because it’s one thing to 
criticize; it’s another to have a coherent, cohesive, 
understandable, and supportable stand when it comes to these 
principles of our health care system — principles such as 
universality, that it’s available everywhere. I don’t think there’s 
any argument with that, but again there are different systems 
where universality may well be implicated. 
 
And I think we saw some of that in a debate that we had in this 
Chamber back in the 1980s. It was in 1987 that the government 
of Grant Devine, the Tory government, moved to eliminate the 
children’s dental program as we knew it. The government of 
Grant Devine fired some hundreds, I believe, of dental nurses 
who were employed by the Department of Health to provide 
dental care for people throughout Saskatchewan, especially for 
school children throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
This was a wonderful program, especially for rural 
Saskatchewan, because it meant that rural children especially 
had access to a certain level of dental care that otherwise they 
would find difficulty in accessing. Dental services being what 
they are, it’s difficult to find dental practices in many of our 
small towns — even though there were dental nurses available 
to examine children, to do some treatments for children, to 
provide the kind of dental education that children value and 
need, and also to do the appropriate referrals to dentists when 
and if required. 
 
And the Devine government did away with those dental nurses. 
But in the process it didn’t find anything to replace it. They said 
that they would replace it with dentists going out to these 
communities, and that the children who once had access to a 
dental nurse in the small communities that they lived in would 
now be able to gain access to dentists. 
 
And I don’t know if any of you remember it from those days. 
There was a great deal of debate about the provincial 
government, the Devine Tory administration, saying oh, help is 
on the way; we know there’s a dentist headed for such and such 
a town. And weeks later no one had seen the dentists. And there 
was great sport in this Chamber if I remember it. 
 
Did the dentist get lost? Did the dentist drive to the wrong 
town? Where was the dentist? I think the point being that in that 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

particular case and on that principle that Tory government — 
that Tory government — moved very decisively, very 
demonstrably to reduce accessibility for people in the system. 
So that universality was no longer as strong a principle now as 
it was then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So people should be asking those who would criticize the public 
administration of our health care system as to where it is that 
they stand on important principles — important principles such 
as universality — do you believe that you can provide services 
throughout Saskatchewan? 
 
I must admit that prior to recent years that there has been 
problems in providing some of the services that we would like 
to see in rural Saskatchewan; that we weren’t able to provide a 
host of — it’s called paraprofessional services — the 
chiropractic services, and other services, physical therapy 
services, to some small towns because it just didn’t work for 
those kinds of services to be located there. But now with 
changes to and reform in our health care system, we are better 
positioned to be able to provide those services throughout rural 
Saskatchewan, and that way we’ve been able to improve 
universality.  
 
Yet this is a measure and a step that has been criticized, and 
criticized thoroughly, by the members opposite. They take the 
approach, it’s far more important to simply have buildings — 
whether they’re utilized or not — hospital buildings in these 
towns, whether they provide services or not as being irrelevant. 
But we take the position that it’s services that provide the 
universality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is also questions about accessibility — can you afford it? 
New Democrats, the public will know, have always taken a 
position that again — and this is the fundamental principle 
underlying medicare; first hospitalization and then medicare — 
that money should not be a deterrent to utilization of the health 
care system. You should not have to depend on payment to 
some private medical system or your own payment to a doctor 
in order to be able to access the services. 
 
That should be accessible to any and all people in 
Saskatchewan regardless of their economic circumstances. We 
are treated equally, we are seen as equal, we all have the same 
accessibility to health care services. That’s the position that we 
take. 
 
But it’s probably a good thing for the public, before they 
become too caught up in criticisms of the health care system, to 
be asking those who make the criticisms as to where they stand 
on that particular fundamental principle of medicare. Where do 
they stand on that? And I see some of the members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, being a little uncomfortable in their seats. But that 
is a very, very good question to be asking the members of the 
opposition, because as near as I can determine, they take a 
fundamentally different position to that principle of medicare. 
 
They take the position and have stated this over time . . . and 
depending on the political circumstances of the minute, they 
might be willing to fudge a little bit on that, Mr. Speaker. But 
make no mistake about it, they take a fundamentally, and some 
of us would say a radically, different approach to the question 
of accessibility. 

Because you see, Mr. Speaker, they take the position that if you 
have the money — if you have the money, that is to say, if you 
have more money than the next person — you should be 
entitled to better accessibility to the health care system. So in 
their belief for this system they would say that money matters. 
 
Money should matter. It should matter that health care . . . that a 
certain level of services . . . to be enjoyed by all. Well that some 
people should be able to get better services because they have 
more money, that is their belief. That’s their belief. That’s the 
position they take when they say that we want private clinics; so 
that if you had the money . . . I think the member from Arm 
River stated in the House one day that, well if you’ve got 
money, then you should be able to get better health care 
services than anyone else. 
 
You should be able to go to some private clinic that’s set up to 
deal with certain surgical procedures, and you should be able to 
get that service much faster, much more efficiently than you 
could in the public system. That’s their position. They take the 
position that if you’ve got the money you should be able to get 
faster, better, quicker service. That’s the position they take. 
 
That is not the position that we take. We take the position that 
no matter what your financial circumstances are, we’re all 
entitled to the same access to the health care system — same 
access. No special considerations because you’re rich, and most 
importantly, no special considerations because you’re poor. 
 
So that when members opposite criticize this government about 
the administration of health care, the public may be wanting to 
ask those parties where it is that they stand on that important 
aspect of health care, where they stand on that principle of 
health care.  
 
And it may well be . . . and I would not be surprised if some of 
the public said, we like what it is that they have to advocate. 
But I’d be willing to wager that the great majority of the public 
doesn’t see it your way and that they might be somewhat, I 
don’t want to say hoodwinked, but in the absence of clear 
comments by yourselves — or when you do you try to hide 
behind equivocation — that the public might be somewhat 
confused. 
 
And I invite the public that if they’re concerned about the health 
care system and they listen to an opposition politician, to ask 
that opposition politician clearly where they stand on that 
important principle. Because I tell you from the comments that 
we’ve gotten in this Assembly and the comments that we see 
from their party literature, they seem to be taking a radically 
different approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe in a publicly funded and publicly 
administered health care system. We do not believe that there 
should be a public system and then an ancillary system — a 
so-called private system where if you have more money you are 
somehow able to get better services — and that there is a 
separate administration for that. 
 
I might point out too, Mr. Speaker, that the system that we 
have, being publicly funded and publicly administered, is a far 
more efficient system, far more efficient system when it comes 
to delivery of this important service than a privately funded 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

system would be and a privately managed system would be. 
One doesn’t need to go very far from Saskatchewan — in fact a 
few hundred kilometres south, to the United States — to gain an 
appreciation of that statement. 
 
And now the Tory Party and their members can say whatever 
they want, whatever they want about competition, private 
enterprise, all those kinds of things, as being great and the thing 
that produces all the benefits for society. I tell you, when it 
comes to the delivery of health care services, competition has 
not proven to be a very effective way of reducing the costs of 
that system. It just hasn’t been. 
 
It also hasn’t been a very effective way of making sure that 
there’s universality in the system, that the system is provided 
everywhere. It’s also not a very good way of ensuring 
accessibility; that is to say, no matter what your economic 
circumstances are, you have access to the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they will take a radically different approach than 
we will on that. We stand behind our support for a publicly 
funded and publicly administered system. 
 
We also believe that medicare and health care should be 
comprehensive; that is to say, that all of the services that we can 
provide should be provided through this public system. And I 
acknowledge that there are some services that aren’t seen to be 
an integral part of the system. Perhaps they’re an ancillary 
service to the system, that aren’t fully funded by the system. I 
think chiropractic care is one, for example. 
 
Sometimes there are services that are outside the system that are 
brought into the system, such as the latest example being the 
chelation therapy, which was outside the system and now is part 
of the system, although I understand it’s not fully funded. But it 
may be a matter of time before it proves itself and it is brought 
into the system. 
 
Drugs, prescription drugs, were at one time very much a part of 
the system. But I think because of financial considerations and 
the government able to target support effectively for those that 
need prescription drugs but can’t afford it, we’ve seen less 
comprehensiveness in that area. I think it’s fair to say that and I 
admit that. 
 
But oh no, Mr. Speaker, we have I think an enviable system, 
one of the best systems in the world. And I’m pleased to see 
that on a daily basis the Liberals and the Tories exhorting us on 
to have an even better system. And we try to respond to that. 
 
I think that once you get beyond the harangues of question 
period, I think that people will see and understand that we have 
over time moved to improve the system and that we will 
continue to do that. Because we see that as our responsibility, 
that we have a public system, and we are the public managers of 
that very public system. And when there are problems with that 
system, we see it as our brief, we see it as our responsibility to 
improve that and to make for a better, stronger system, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I know that there are members opposite who don’t like to 
hear this and who are talking from their seats about, you know, 
that it’s almost like some wishful thinking that if only things 

never change, that somehow we’d have a better system; that if 
we could all just kind of go back into the past. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, frankly I think we have a better 
health care system now than we had yesterday. And I don’t 
think the members quite understand that or appreciate that — 
that health care is a better system now than it has been. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the rightness and the . . . well the support 
that Canadians show for our health care system and a publicly 
funded, publicly administered medicare system, that Canadians 
are right to feel that way because they know — even what 
statistics they don’t know — but they know that they have a 
better system than the major comparison point we have, which 
is the United States, our neighbour to the south. 
 
But Canadians know this — we have a better health care system 
than they do in the United States. That whatever advantages the 
United States provides for many of its citizens — and it’s a very 
wealthy country with many resources and it provides very many 
advantages — that whatever advantages the United States 
provides for its citizens, a health care system is not one of them 
in comparison to Canada; it simply is not one of them. 
 
Canadians know this — that whatever troubles we’ve had with 
our system, whatever problems there might be with our system, 
we are still better to have the system we have than the system 
that they have in the United States. And I think that there’re all 
kinds of statistics that will bear this out — statistics about infant 
mortality rates being higher in the United States than they are in 
Canada — and the infant mortality is seen as a reflection of 
better access to the health care system for pregnant mothers, 
expectant mothers, and therefore being able to get the right kind 
of care. 
 
Well the member for Shellbrook Torch River says don’t look at 
him when I’m talking about expectant mothers. And I really 
wasn’t, Mr. Speaker, but studies show that infant mortality rates 
are higher in the United States and that one of the reasons may 
well be the lack of timely services being available or seem to be 
available for expectant families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Less emphasis on public health in some of the American states, 
therefore less effort by the community at large to aggressively 
contact expectant mothers in the hopes that if they’re not aware 
of services and, you know, many preventative services, that 
they will avail themselves of it. We do a far better job of that in 
Canada. 
 
And there’s other comparison statistics as well such as 
longevity — how long it is that people live. We find that those 
statistics indicate that Canadians live on the average somewhat 
longer than their neighbours in the United States, and you 
wonder how it could be, given the tough winters we have up 
here, Mr. Speaker compared to what they have down in Florida 
or California, but apparently we live longer than our neighbours 
in the United States. 
 
And some attribute that to our health care system, that our 
health care system encourages people to gain access to the 
system in a more timely fashion, to treat problems in a more 
timely way, and therefore not allow health problems to become 
critical medical problems. And that’s why we have better 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

longevity rates. 
 
But the other telling statistic about the American/Canadian 
approach is that although ours is a publicly funded system and 
publicly administered system, and theirs is a privately paid, 
essentially privately paid and privately administered system, it’s 
far more expensive in the United States — far more expensive. 
 
I know that members opposite always take the approach in, you 
know, oh if we had private medicare and people could pay 
whatever they wanted for the services they wanted, and 
therefore we could reduce our tax dollars, and so on. But when 
you take the money that people pay into taxes to support the 
health care system, and compare it to what Americans pay, not 
in taxes, but pay as premiums for their privately funded health 
care systems, we find that on average Americans are paying far 
more than Canadians for health care services. 
 
And I would submit that by and large the health care services 
are better in Canada than they are in the United States — far 
better. 
 
Now that’s not to say that in the United States, being the system 
that they have, that if you have money and you’re a millionaire 
that you can get probably better services than you can in 
Canada. But the reality is too that there are many tens of 
millions of Americans who cannot afford privileged access to 
their health care system, and for them Canada would provide 
vastly, vastly improved health care services than they get in 
their own country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when it comes to money, the Americans pay far more and 
get far less than we do in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Speaking of Canada, it’s been our history that in Canada the 
right-wing parties, the Tory Parties — now the Saskatchewan 
Tory Party, from time to time the Liberal Party . . . In 
Saskatchewan it’s been the provincial Liberals, at odds 
seemingly with some of their federal cousins, but now the 
federal cousins are also acting consistently with the position of 
the provincial Liberals. Then in Canada the New Democratic 
Party — before the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) — championed a publicly funded, publicly 
administered health care system, whereas the other two parties 
have opposed that. 
 
And in Saskatchewan there probably are still people watching 
who will remember the introduction of medicare in the early 
’60s, extending the concept of accessibility to include access to 
doctors — let us say that you didn’t have to pay a doctor for a 
visit; the public would pay for that visit. That was opposed at 
that time by the Tories and by the Liberal Party. 
 
They fought it very strongly, very avidly. These were political 
parties that were tied up hand in glove with the, I think it was 
Keep Our Doctors committee — the alliance that was formed to 
oppose medicare and to maintain the status quo in 
Saskatchewan, and knows that was an alliance that included in 
its membership and amongst organizers, prominent Tories, 
prominent Liberals. 
 
And who can ever forget Ross Thatcher’s actions at the 
Legislative Assembly in the wake of one KOD (Keep Our 

Doctors committee) rally and Thatcher being a prominent 
Liberal. Who can forget the role of Staff Barootes, who went on 
to become a very well-known Tory Senator, and his organizing 
efforts to maintain the status quo which was a private health 
care in Saskatchewan. I don’t think that we can ever forget 
those things, or at least those of us that can remember it, that 
will ever forget. 
 
But that’s the history of Saskatchewan, that’s the history of 
health care politics in Saskatchewan. That where we stand — 
for a publicly funded, publicly administered system; they do 
not. And they have made it clear at times that they do not. 
 
And today when we tried to improve our health care system and 
to enhance services for the people of Saskatchewan, and in this 
case southern Saskatchewan, that they would take actions to 
maintain the status quo — not through a Keep Our Doctors 
committee, but now through an STP (Save the Plains) 
committee. Their commitment being more to having a building 
and having the bricks as opposed to seeing how it is that 
services can be improved for people in southern Saskatchewan. 
They are more interested in saving the building, Mr. Speaker, as 
to improving the system itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many challenges ahead in our health care 
system in Saskatchewan and in Canada. I have to recognize that 
financing will always be a problem, will always be a challenge 
in a publicly funded health care system because the funds for 
health and the funds that go to maintain the hospitals and pay 
for the nurses and to pay for doctors’ visits and the pay for the 
operations and to pay for all of those services that we get 
through the health care systems, those funds have to compete 
with other funds that are dedicated for highways and dedicated 
for social services, dedicated for education. 
 
So there is always this competition, if you like, for funding of 
the system with dollars going to other places. Also, reduction in 
the number of dollars because we think it’s important to give 
people relief through reducing their taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that will always be an issue for us. I might say that it’s an 
issue that is not being helped by what is a less than an honest 
approach by the Tory party, where they continue to make 
references . . . or criticize us for what they see as shortcomings 
in the system, but never once mentioning that the major 
constraint that we have in terms of allocating the public dollars 
towards health care is something called the public debt of 
Saskatchewan, where we’re still paying out — what is it? — 
$725 million this year. 
 
And we’re spending about $1.7 billion on health care, and 
we’re spending $725 million on servicing the public debt — 
that is to say interest on the public debt that was in the main 
rung up by the Tory administration during their period of 
profligacy in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. And I guess some honesty 
on their part, that we are presented with this particular challenge 
in Saskatchewan, would be helpful when it comes to an honest 
and informed public debate about health care and how it should 
be administered and where it is that the dollars are to come 
from to pay for improvements to that system. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party, I think, is being less 
than forthcoming. They refused to acknowledge that even 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1998 

though the Saskatchewan government in its competition for 
scarce resources has seen it as important to continue to fund the 
health care system, that we have increased the number of 
dollars going towards the health care system as opposed to 
education, highways, tax cuts, or any of the priorities that we 
have . . . That we’ve increased that, they fail to acknowledge 
and simply will not publicly admit that the federal Liberal 
government has cut funding for health care in a massive way. 
 
At one time, one-half of all health care expenditures in 
Saskatchewan in all the provinces of Canada were paid for by 
the federal government. That was one of the ways to ensure that 
the health care system was a universal system, that there was 
some common elements to that system throughout the country. 
And that has now been reduced from 50 cents to 13 cents on the 
dollar, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recognize that there will be many changes in the 
health care system: technology, pharmacology. It’s interesting 
to note that even though the Liberals maintain that the Plains 
hospital should be kept open, never do they mention that, for 
example, in the 1970s that there were 1,254 hospital beds in 
Regina to serve southern Saskatchewan and that by the end of 
the 1980s, into the early ’90s, the number of hospital beds had 
been reduced to — I think it was — 966 beds. Now those 
hospital beds are 675. And so there’s been a sharp reduction in 
the number of hospital beds, but that’s attributable to changes in 
technology and changes in pharmacology. 
 
I think I’ve made the point before in this Assembly that, for 
example, that I think it’s cataracts where 15 years ago that if 
you went for cataract surgery, because of the nature of the 
operation, you had to check in the night before the surgery for 
pre-op and you had your operation, and after the operation you 
would have to be in a hospital bed for about a week and have to 
be I think sandbagged or otherwise restrained so that you 
couldn’t have any head movement so as to not disturb the 
effects of the surgery. 
 
Now they do cataracts on the same day. It’s on an out-patient 
basis. You go in in the morning, you have your cataract surgery 
and you come home. 
 
Well all those kinds of technological changes, plus 
pharmacological changes — that’s say drugs being used to treat 
symptoms and being used to treat problems in a way that we 
were never able to do before — has meant that you don’t need 
hospital beds to the same extent as you did in the 1970s to serve 
the same population or to even serve more of a population. 
 
And this is at a time that the number of surgeries, because the 
technique is so much more efficient that you don’t need six 
hours for some sort of heart surgery that can now be done in a 
couple of hours, that you can also have far more surgeries being 
done in Saskatchewan than you did in the past. But again 
there’s fewer beds and that’s something that they don’t talk 
about in their comments that we have seen a sharp drop. 
 
And then at some point you have to ask yourself the question 
that if you had 1,200 hospital beds one day and now you have 
roughly half that number of hospital beds to meet the needs of 
the public, and in fact do it even more effectively than you’ve 
ever done in the past because you’re doing far more operations 

. . . And we might quibble about whether 675 is enough for 
Regina or whether it should be 685. 
 
But given this very clear trend, it really begs the question how 
they can stand on their position that we need to retain the three 
hospitals to accommodate the 675 beds where once we had 
three facilities to look after 1,200-some beds; that we still need 
to have three facilities to look after 675 beds. 
 
(2000) 
 
Now I know that the public is conditioned, because of the 
profligacy of the Tories during the ’80s, to take the position that 
governments are always wasteful, Mr. Speaker, but I could 
never be that wasteful, never be that wasteful about health care 
dollars; that I saw it as an important priority to put dollars into 
maintaining buildings as opposed to taking those dollars to 
improve services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There will be many challenges for us in the future and I look 
forward to the constructive criticisms and the constructive 
proposals from the parties opposite. But I dare say we won’t 
hear much of that. We’ll hear a lot of criticisms, but we won’t 
hear much about where it is that they stand or where it is that 
they propose to take the health care system. 
 
I have a pretty good idea but I’m in a privileged position 
because I’m here to listen to them on a daily basis. And we’re 
here to read the nuances of what it is that they publish in their 
party reports. We’re here to peruse very carefully what it is that 
their members say in party conventions. We’re here to pay 
particular attention to what it is their leaders are saying by way 
of explanation of their stands on important issues such as health 
care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I just wanted to let the public know that when it comes to 
this important matter of health care — and again I thank the 
Liberals for putting this motion forward because it gives all of 
us an opportunity to make our positions clear — that on this 
important matter the people of Saskatchewan will find that the 
NDP, their government, stands firmly for a publicly funded, 
publicly administered health care system, and that when 
problems are identified with that system, we will act to improve 
that system and to deal with those problems — as we have been 
doing, Mr. Speaker, now for many years. 
 
That we accept as our responsibility. That we see as our job. If 
there are problems with the system, we should improve it. 
 
It should be no surprise to anyone that Judy Junor, who has 
been a critic of our system — or not of our system but a critic of 
some of the speed with which we move, and some of the 
consequences of what it is that we’ve done — that she as a 
critic would nevertheless take the position that, I might criticize 
them because I might have some disagreements about how 
quickly they should have moved in this area or what they 
might’ve done in this area, nevertheless I support that party. 
And I support their approach because they, like I, stand for a 
publicly funded, publicly administered health care system — 
unlike, unlike those other two political parties. 
 
Because that is not always so clear in the one case — with the 
Liberals. And it’s very, very clear — and not acceptable to her 



May 26, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

and not acceptable to the majority of the people of 
Saskatchewan — when it comes to the Saskatchewan Tory 
Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, I want to let the public know on this motion that the issue 
isn’t that the government shouldn’t respond. If you’re saying 
that there’s a problem with waiting-lists, I think that you will 
find that the government will respond. Why will we respond? 
Not because it’s a political issue, because we see it as our 
responsibility to ensure that a publicly funded, publicly 
administered system deals appropriately with the health care 
needs of the people in Saskatchewan. We can and will take our 
responsibility seriously, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on in this vein for some time, but I see 
that the hour is getting on, and at this point, Mr. Speaker, I beg 
leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:06 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 6 — Hospital Waiting-lists 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1405 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1407 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1406 
 
 


