





























































Hansard: October 22, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2093 
 October 22, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present to open this sitting. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a petition today 
from the people of the Tisdale, Archerwill area. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately repair and pave the portion of Highway No. 
349. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide safe driving on what are 
becoming know as pothole roads; to enter into negotiations 
with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) for a long-term plan of rural 
road restitution reflecting future needs and to provide 
safety for all drivers as the new trucking regulation 
changes safety factors on these roads. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These folks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come from Glen Ewen, 
Carnduff, Oxbow, Northgate, Alameda, Frobisher, and I guess 
pretty much all through the communities in the south-east 
corner of the province of Saskatchewan. I’m happy to present 
them on their behalf, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
rise again on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan in 
presenting a petition. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by a lot of irate folks from 
the communities of Moosomin, Churchbridge, Langenburg, and 
Rocanville. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens that are fearful for what is going 
to happen to the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
from the communities of Bredenbury and Churchbridge. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I join 
with my colleagues in bringing forward a petition today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people that have signed the petition 
are from Churchbridge, Esterhazy, Spy Hill. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, yes, I also rise to 
present petitions from petitioners concerned about the 
impending closure of the Plains Health Centre with their 
request: 
 

That adequate funding be provided by the provincial 
government so that essential services provided at the Plains 
may be continued. 
 

Your petitioners come from Churchbridge, Marchwell, 
Langenburg, and Hyas. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join my colleagues 
on behalf of concerned citizens of this province with respect 
to the closure of the Plains Health Centre, who petition this 
Assembly: 
 

To enact legislation to prevent the closure and provide 
adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that 
essential services provided at the Plains may be continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, the petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And they come from Dubuc, Esterhazy, Bredenbury, 
Churchbridge, and MacNutt. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk:  According to order a petition regarding the 
relocation of Highway 40 to alleviate congestion at the 
entrance to North Battleford, presented on October 21, 1998, 
has been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) is found to be 
irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 



2094 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

According to order a petition regarding the twinning of 
Trans-Canada Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin 
in 1999, presented on October 21, 1998, has been reviewed, 
and pursuant to rule 12(7) is found to be irregular and 
therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 
praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to repair and pave the gravel portion of 
Highway 349; and 

 
Of citizens humbly praying for the government to regulate 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy so as to require them to 
provide electricity and natural gas at affordable rates for 
non-profit municipal recreation facilities. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 74 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of SaskEnergy: has there been any changes 
in the cost formula for putting natural gas lines into farms, 
small towns and parks? Is there a minimum or a maximum 
rate? Why do some people pay $500 while other people 
pay $5,200 for the same service? 

 
I so submit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Reprimand of Liberal MLA 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
yesterday’s paper we saw another glaring example of the 
differences between the Saskatchewan Party and the Liberal 
Party. 
 
The Liberal MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
North Battleford is facing disciplinary action from his leader for 
choosing to represent his constituents instead of simply towing 
the party line. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that does not happen in the Saskatchewan 
Party. In fact our party policy specifically calls for free votes in 
the legislature so that MLAs can always represent the views of 
their constituents. The Liberal leader criticizes his own member 
for seeking the views of his voters at a hastily called meeting. 
 
We found out about this session on Friday so the fact that the 
member was even able to put together a public meeting on such 
short notice is something that should be commended, not 
criticized. 
 
It seems that the Liberal leader is taking his lessons on cracking 
the whip from Jean Chrétien. It’s a good thing the 
Saskatchewan Liberal leader doesn’t have pepper spray. 
 

Canoe Lake to Pinehouse Road Improvements 
 

Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
member from North Battleford gave an eloquent statement 
about his canoe trip to the constituency of Athabasca this 
summer. He urged all members to follow his example. So why, 
Mr. Speaker, are the members opposite sitting here in this 
air-conditioned room instead of being out following his advice 
and being in the constituency of Athabasca? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that if the members opposite had the 
nerve to go, they would not have to take and do it by canoe but 
to travel on the road to Canoe Lake that is being . . . or in 
Pinehouse. It’s being improved by a $5 million road 
improvement. Or they could travel to Turner Lake where the 
road is being improved by $1.5 million worth of improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it is better for them to stay here in this 
Assembly rather than go out and meet the people and discuss 
some of the real issues of the area. 
 

Highway Contest 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As you 
know, we announced the worst highway in Saskatchewan 
contest yesterday and we are receiving many phone calls about 
that. I think we’ve even received some perhaps from the 
minister’s office. But I’d like to read a few of the comments 
into the record that we have received from some of the people 
that are calling. 
 
A person called in and said Highway No. 349 east of Naicam — 
the Department of Highways did work on the highway and now 
the highway is worse than ever. It’s just like driving on a 
washboard. We were talking about Saskatchewan has the worst 
highways in the world but this person nominated this particular 
stretch as the worst in the world. 
 
A trucker phoned in and said he drives all over Saskatchewan 
with his trucks and he has to repair them quite often because of 
it and he said all the highways in Saskatchewan are equally bad. 
 
Another person phoned in and said the highway was repaired 
but the department didn’t finish the job. They left a sharp drop 
off the edge of the highway. A truck loaded with anhydrous 
pulled over and went over the drop-off, tipping over. The 
anhydrous was spilled. The department cleaned up the mess, but 
they left a pile of contaminated soil sitting in the ditch. And 
now the highway is narrower than ever. 
 
Highway No. 56 to Katepwa Lake is so bad that most people 
wanting to travel to Katepwa Lake don’t even use the highway. 
 
And these kind of comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are coming 
in all day long and they’re equally for highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Breast Cancer Month 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What 
do the following women have in common? Olivia 
Newton-John; Canadian actress Barbara Hamilton; CBC 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2095 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) reporter Jeannette 
Mathey; former America first lady Betty Ford; Regina author 
Gail Bowen; Linda McCartney; Julia Child; Gloria Steinem; 
American Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor; my 
former constituency assistant; and 329 out of every 100,000 
Saskatchewan women during 1998? 
 
The answer is, each has been or will be diagnosed with breast 
cancer. Some, like Linda McCartney, have died. 
 
I mention this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because October has been 
declared Breast Cancer Month, the purpose of which is to 
increase awareness of this disease, and more importantly to 
promote the screening, education, and support programs which 
are available for all women in this province. 
 
All forms of cancer deserve our attention, our research dollars, 
and our best support programs. Breast cancer is unique though 
in that it is the most frequently diagnosed cancer among women 
in Saskatchewan, with 680 new cases estimated for 1998. 
 
As well, not so long ago it was almost an automatic death 
sentence. Even now, over 29,000 women in Canada will die 
from breast cancer. 
 
And for too long it’s been kept in the closet, not discussed 
openly for whatever the reasons. I’m happy to report that rapid 
progress is being made, that there is a literal explosion of 
knowledge about the causes and cure for breast cancer and . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, the member’s time has 
expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan’s Aboriginal People 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last week the 
Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development 
Canada released a report on the condition of Canada’s 
aboriginal people taking into account income, education, and 
life expectancy. 
 
It was reported that the standard of living for off-reserve natives 
was lower in Saskatchewan than any other province in Canada. 
Again, Saskatchewan has come dead last in a report on social 
indicators. 
 
Last year the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations also 
did a comprehensive study and reported that Saskatchewan has 
the largest percentage of aboriginal people in Canada, and 
furthermore that one-third of the working-age population will 
be aboriginal by the middle of the next century. 
 
Clearly one of the fundamental issues which must be addressed 
by our province is bringing our aboriginal people into the 
educational, economic, and work mainstream of this province. 
 
I ask this government and all members of the Assembly, where 
is the plan to accomplish that; where is the drive, the initiative, 
and the will to discuss this fundamental issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Home Hardware Opening in Swift Current 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is an 
ordinary good news statement with a difference. Ordinary 
because it’s about more economic development in Swift 
Current. Different because it . . . well, I’ll tell you how it’s 
different. 
 
The old Home Hardware store in Swift Current burned down on 
June 10. Last Monday the new store opened bigger and brighter 
and with eight additional employees. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the store is downtown on Central Avenue. This will contribute 
greatly to the activity in the city centre. 
 
This Saturday we will have the official grand opening. The 
Deputy Premier will be there. I will be there. The Leader of the 
Opposition has been invited, but I don’t think he’ll be there 
because of the Saskatchewan Party’s stated policy of rejecting 
good news. That’s the ordinary part. 
 
The difference — and because this is Saskatchewan we’re 
talking about, maybe it’s not so unusual after all — the 
difference is that one reason Home Hardware was so quick in 
getting back on its feet was the help it received from other 
businesses, even from its competitors. One business donated a 
building for a temporary home for the paint store. Their 
competition helped unload inventory after the fire. 
 
Growth, co-operation, success — just another normal day in 
Swift Current, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Successes in Cypress Hills Constituency 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I 
thought for a long time that I should get up and say something, 
in this part of the day, good about what’s going on in my 
constituency. 
 
And so I was thinking, you know, maybe what I should talk 
about would be the big sale that we had down there. Paul 
Meinert of course, as many of you have heard, had died and left 
the biggest estate that people have ever seen. 
 
But I thought, well that wouldn’t really be fair because that’s 
just across the line over in the next constituency and even 
though all my neighbours were there probably I should talk 
about something close to home. 
 
So I thought I’d talk about Eastend and their museum and the 
great success they’re having with that project and the fact that 
they’re going to soon have it off the ground and tourism will be 
flourishing. 
 
Then I thought, well maybe that’s not fair because over in 
Cypress Hills we’ve got so many tourists coming to the park in 
this last year that the biggest problem we’ve got now is we 
don’t know how to get rid of all the sewage. And so being such 
a great success over there, everybody would want to come and 
see it for themselves. 
 
Then I thought, well that’s not fair because Maple Creek got a 



2096 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

new council last year and as a town they’re flourishing so well 
that everybody probably would want to go over there and I 
should really talk about that. 
 
Well then I got to thinking, well that’s not fair because over in 
Leader they’ve just built an inland terminal and they’re doing 
so well over there that they built a new golf course. They’ve got 
so many people having so much fun and such a great time that 
they thought they’d have to have a little recreation. In the 
middle of that they put up a 600 sow-farrow-to-finish operation 
and believe me if I didn’t talk about that I’d be in trouble. 
 
So then I thought, well I’ve got to talk about Cabri because if I 
miss them, I’m in real trouble. And the reality is that they had a 
bumper crop. 
 
And then I thought, well Gull Lake had a trade fair that showed 
that entrepreneurism and small business is flourishing so well 
down there that I’d have to talk about that. So, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nutraceutical Firms Expanding in Saskatoon 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One of the 
advantages of living in Saskatchewan these days is that our 
vocabularies are being enriched as the economy expands and is 
diversified. 
 
Here’s a new one for some folks: nutraceutical — as in 
nutraceutical industry or nutraceutical product. According to the 
Webster’s, people as Health Canada, a nutraceutical is a product 
isolated or purified from foods and generally sold in medicinal 
form not usually associated with food and demonstrated to have 
a physiological benefit or provide protection against chronic 
disease. Ginkgo-biloba is a nutraceutical; so is echinacea, and 
borage. 
 
And presently in Saskatoon, this industry is comprised of 25 
companies selling upwards of $35 million annually in products. 
Consumption is growing by 25 per cent annually and it’s 
projected to increase in North America by between 50 and 100 
per cent. 
 
This new industry is being assisted and promoted by the 
Saskatchewan Nutraceutical Network, an organization just 
founded with the assistance of the Agri-Food Innovation Fund. 
It’s rapidly expanding and is further proof that Saskatoon and 
the ag-food innovation go hand in hand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Highway Contest 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the Minister of Highways. 
 
Madam Minister, we’ve gotten a lot of response already for our 

Worst Highway in Saskatchewan contest — a couple of dozen 
calls already this morning. And here are some of the early 
entries. 
 
No. 31 Highway from Macklin to Kerrobert; No. 20 north of 
Humboldt; No. 39 from Naicam to the 35 Junction; No. 56, 
Indian Head to Qu’Appelle Valley; No. 40, Battleford to Cut 
Knife; No. 8 north of Torquay. I could add No. 8 all along it. 
 
One trucker said all the highways are bad. Unfortunately, we 
had a couple of people phone in who didn’t want to leave their 
names. And I suspect they’re from the minister’s office. 
 
Madam Minister, why do we have such terrible highways in 
Saskatchewan? What plans do you have to fix these highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I’ve 
said, I take this position very, very strongly and I take a lot of 
concern about being the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
And we certainly do have a transportation strategy in place 
which we have said over and over and which I will again repeat 
because I think it’s worthy of repeating — $2.5 billion plan 
over 10 years to spend additional dollars on our highway 
system in this province. 
 
Not only on that piece, not only have we put additional money 
into the last two budgets, but we’ve also gone into the pieces in 
planning. And it takes important planning to set the priorities 
for this province, working with the communities, the RMs (rural 
municipalities), the stakeholders right across this province. 
 
And this morning as part of our transportation strategy, the 
commitment that we’ve made, I was just out on No. 1 east with 
a bulldozer announcing the 21.3 kilometre additional twinning 
project that’s happening on No. 1 east. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Minister, this contest is drawing interest from across 
Canada. This morning we had calls from Saturday Night 
magazine. We had another call from the National Post. And I 
know they’re calling your office too, Madam Minister. This 
story is going to appear in the Post’s very first issue next 
Monday and everyone across Canada is going to know that your 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government has given 
Saskatchewan the worse highways in the country. 
 
Madam Minister, a lot of people have also been calling in to 
radio stations to get the phone number, so I want to give it out 
once again. It’s 1-877-326-3652. In fact CJSL Estevan and 
CFSL Weyburn, your own local radio station, are now running 
a sort of parallel contest and they’re going to pass on all the 
entries to us. 
 
Madam Minister, given the tremendous response to our worse 
highway contest I want to give you a second chance. Will you 
be a judge in the contest and will you commit to fix the worst 
highway in Saskatchewan? 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2097 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I did 
have the opportunity to talk to the National Post. I’ve already 
had that interview and I was very pleased to be able to tell them 
about our plan. They were also very pleased to know about the 
biggest pothole that I told them about in this province, the 
pothole of the Tory debt — in which we still spend $2 million a 
day on interest — as they were taking off fuel taxes when they 
were still running deficit budgets which every person in this 
province has had to pay for, and which our families, our 
children, and so on have. 
 
If we had those kind of dollars to still be putting back into our 
highways we could very easily address the problem quicker and 
faster but we are addressing, we are addressing the concern. 
 
And they were very interested in the fact that we not only have 
more kilometres of highways and roads in our province, but that 
we’ve actually twinned more highways in our province per 
capita then any other place in Canada, that we are addressing 
the problems. 
 
We’re addressing the problem with dollars being spent. We’re 
addressing the problem with good planning. And we are hoping 
that we can get a federal partnership in addressing the severe 
problem that Saskatchewan is facing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Federal Assistance for Agriculture 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Agriculture 
or his designate. 
 
Mr. Minister, it took you until this week to realize and 
recognize there’s a crisis in the farm economy. Now we have to 
get the Liberal Agriculture minister in Ottawa to wake up. 
 
Lyle Vanclief was questioned yesterday by Garry Breitkreuz, 
Yorkton-Melville MP (Member of Parliament), about what he’s 
going to do to help farm families hurt by low grain prices and 
the subsidy wars. By his answer, he doesn’t really seem to 
acknowledge there’s a problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, now that we’ve finally got your attention to the 
problem in agriculture, what are you going to do to get the 
federal Liberals to wake up? Have you spoke to Lyle Vanclief 
since our emergency debate on Tuesday? What specific 
proposals have you made to help farmers in Saskatchewan, and 
what are you asking for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to be able to take this question today, because I 
think as the Minister of Agriculture has said here when we had 
the emergency debate here that when we debated the farm 
commodity crisis, that this is an extremely important issue to 
our government. And we were very pleased that actually the 
opposition then joined us in the call to the federal level. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture and Food had been emphasizing 
these points at the federal-provincial industry table. And there’s 

going to be a meeting now called on November 4, in which he 
will begin to discuss this terrible income situation in which that 
we’re facing in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, but it 
didn’t seem to be such an urgent problem on Monday afternoon 
when your House Leader tried to adjourn this House before we 
had a chance to debate the agriculture crisis. 
 
Madam Minister, your government doesn’t seem to have its 
message straight. On Tuesday in this House, after the 
Saskatchewan Party called for an emergency debate in 
agriculture, the Ag minister presented a motion calling for cash 
assistance from the federal government. At the exact same time, 
the Finance Minister was out in the rotunda during a scrum on 
his priorities for funding from Ottawa and he didn’t even 
mention agriculture. 
 
Madam Minister, what good is it to have you talking about cash 
assistance for farmers when your own Finance minister doesn’t 
see it as a priority and isn’t prepared to talk about it at the 
Finance minister’s conference? Who are the feds supposed to 
listen to — the Ag minister or the Finance minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 
interesting to say that we haven’t taken note of this when it was 
our motion that we debated here in the House on Tuesday. Now 
I think again we know that our Minister of Agriculture and our 
government has been calling upon the federal government on 
this issue at every step of the way. When our trucking industry 
and our agriculture industry, in which there was blocks going 
into the American border, it was our government again calling 
on the federal government to deal with this immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — When we look at what the federal 
government’s response it has been, is of great concern to us. 
That’s why this meeting again on November 4 is absolutely 
crucial in order to put our position forward. We see a federal 
government that took out subsidies like that when they could 
have taken them over six years. We know that we have to press 
the federal government. This is a serious concern to our 
government. Our government has done a lot of contribution and 
as we know that we’ve put more in per capita again than any 
other province into our agriculture sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Advertising 
 

Mr. Boyd: — My questions this afternoon are for the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, your government came to office 
promising to cut government advertising. Yet last year your 
advertising budget in government departments jumped by 78 
per cent. I guess there’s no 2 per cent cap when it comes to 
spreading NDP propaganda. 
 
Total NDP government advertising was nearly $23 million. 
What happened to your commitment to cut government 
advertising? How can you justify spending $23 million on NDP 



2098 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

government advertising when you have no money for other 
areas like highways or health care or agriculture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If the member opposite would look 
at the list of where the Crown corporations are headed and just 
check his memory as to what he advised on the issue of 
competition and opening up the borders to competition and 
deregulation — he said that we should open up the borders. 
 
Now if he looks at where the greatest increase in the last four 
years has been, it will be SaskTel — a doubling from 6 million 
to 12 million. Why is that? Obviously because of your 
arguments and your right-wing arguments, Mulroney and others 
who you’ve supported when he was prime minister and you 
would have gone to the convention to elect him when you were 
a Tory and still are a Tory, competition is what this is all about. 
 
Now if you expect SaskPower, which is now facing 
competition, and SaskEnergy to not advertise more next year 
and the year after as we open up for competition, all you’re 
doing is saying that you want the Crown corporations to lose 
business so that your privatization plan could come into place. 
That’s what you’re talking about. 
 
So the member opposite knows full well that SaskTel makes up 
half of all the government’s advertising . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, we understand that you have to 
advertise in a competitive environment but why does 
SaskPower have to spend $2.3 million on advertising? Who are 
they competing with? Only the NDP could have a monopoly 
and still figure they have to spend millions on advertising. 
 
Now with SaskTel, that’s certainly a different story. SaskTel 
sees its market share draining away like Liberal polling 
numbers. SaskTel spent $12 million in advertising last year. 
 
The question is, Mr. Minister, is the advertising working? What 
impact have these ads had for SaskTel? What is SaskTel’s 
market share, and how much of that market share have they lost 
over the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member opposite, because he’s 
driven by hard right-wing philosophy, is hoping against hope 
that SaskTel will fail. That’s what he’s hoping. 
 
But I want to advise him today that all of his hoping is not 
working because SaskTel and the employees and managers are 
doing an excellent job of keeping market share both in long 
distance and in cellular. They’re doing a very, very excellent 
job and part of that of course is increasing advertising which 
they have to do to keep business. 
 
The member opposite will understand that. As competition 
comes, as competition comes to the province, we’re going to 
advertise more. And that will be true of SaskEnergy which 
announced they’re now open to competition. And the fact of the 
matter is that we will have to advertise more in order to keep 
customers. It’s a simple formula. 
 
The reason the member opposite is so upset is because the 

Crowns are succeeding even with competition and he can’t 
stand that. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, SaskTel’s marketing is under 
attack, and who’s in charge of warding off that attack — the 
Premier’s old buddy Don Ching. Is he, is he an expert on 
telecommunications? No. Is he an expert on long distance 
marketing? No. Is he an expert in NDP politics? Yes. Do you 
think that’s how Sprint and AT&T choose their CEO (chief 
executive officer)? I really doubt it. 
 
And that’s why SaskTel’s market share is slipping away, Mr. 
Minister, isn’t it? Mr. Minister, you and Don Ching spent $12 
million of taxpayers’ money on SaskTel advertising last year. 
Taxpayers have a right to know if that advertising is being 
successful. 
 
If you were maintaining a high market share, you can bet Don 
Ching would be screaming it from the top of the SaskTel 
building. Are taxpayers getting good value for the $12 million 
that they’re spending on advertising, what is SaskTel’s market 
share? Is it slipping? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that SaskTel and the employees who work there, the 
men and women who make their living in the province and are 
very popular with the families and business people in the 
province, are doing an excellent job of keeping market share. 
And it’s my understanding that of the telcos in western Canada, 
Manitoba Tel, SaskTel, TELUS in Alberta, and BC TEL, 
SaskTel has kept the largest percentage of market share of any 
of the companies in western Canada, of any of the companies. 
 
Now you say that the men and women who run that corporation 
aren’t doing a good enough job, because you’re always 
attacking, because you’re always attacking members who are 
government employees. 
 
And he also says he would roll back the salaries of government 
employees, including Crown employees, if he got to be premier. 
Well thank goodness you’re never going to be premier and nor 
will that rump of a Tory Party ever govern this province again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Care for Dialysis Patient 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Liberal caucus 
recently spoke with Gwen Martens of Boissevain, Manitoba. 
Gwen told us that her sister, a resident of the Swift Current 
district, recently was forced to move to Saskatoon. After being 
diagnosed with cancer, both of her kidneys had to be removed. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, she requires dialysis which she 
cannot get anywhere in south-west Saskatchewan. Gwen’s 
sister had to leave her home and move halfway across the 
province because she couldn’t get the care she needed in her 
own region. 
 
Gwen says, and I quote: 
 

As wonderful a city as Saskatoon is, it’s not home and she 
and her husband would dearly love to move home to their 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2099 

family and friends in Swift Current. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, will the minister explain why this 
government cares so little that it’s forcing people to move in 
order to receive health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can say to the member, Mr. 
Speaker, is I’m not familiar with this case. 
 
I do know that the previous minister along with officials in the 
Department of Health have made arrangements for a number of 
procedures and services to be made available to citizens in 
various regions in the province of Saskatchewan. For instance, I 
understand that there is a renal dialysis machine in Tisdale and, 
I believe, Yorkton. 
 
Obviously as we make our way through the whole issue of 
health renewal, we will need to ensure that as much as possible 
that services are available to citizens in their regions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mrs. Martens went on 
to say that she’s been told it could be possible to get dialysis 
equipment in south-west Saskatchewan if there were enough 
patients to meet the department’s target for making the 
equipment available. 
 
She was also told that six patients are needed to fulfill the 
department’s target. Gwen says, and I quote: 
 

There will never be six patients when one by one they are 
forced to move to Regina or Saskatoon for treatment. 

 
She also says that in her Manitoba town of Morden with a 
population of only 5 or 6,000, they have four machines and two 
spares. And we spoke with the Morden hospital and confirmed 
that. 
 
Could the minister explain how they’ll ever meet this target if 
every patient requiring dialysis has to move to the city? Just 
how many people have you already forced to move because of 
your inability to care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I indicated 
earlier, we have made arrangements for renal dialysis machines 
to be available in some parts of the province. Obviously here 
has been identified an issue in the Swift Current region. 
 
What I can tell the member is that we will ensure that a 
committee is struck to see whether or not it’s possible to meet 
the needs of this particular citizen in the Swift Current area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Surgery Waiting Lists 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
recently a family of an eight-year-old girl from Carievale called 

my office about a problem that they have with their daughter. 
As I said, she’s eight years old and she needs a cystoscopy. And 
because of the poor planning of the closing of the Plains Health 
Centre, her specialist in Regina says she’s not able to get 
treatment. 
 
Now this little girl’s been in pain for over a year. There’s the 
worry about what the medications could do to her kidneys as 
well as the growing ineffectiveness of these kidneys. As well 
she is now having pain and problems going to school and being 
able to concentrate on her studies. 
 
Not until my office and myself got involved were we able to 
even get an operation or an appointment scheduled for this 
three-minute day surgery which is now scheduled for the 26th 
of this month. 
 
Madam Minister, could you maybe tell us what other problems 
we might be looking for, what other emergencies are going to 
be waiting to happen because of your lack and your government 
and your department’s inability to meet the needs of southern 
Saskatchewan, Madam Minister. And what are you doing to 
ensure that more of these things aren’t happening when you 
close the Plains Health Centre down? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I can tell the member, and I think 
I certainly made it clear when the Premier appointed me 
Minister of Health, is that there is some things that we need to 
address in this province. And one of the issues that we need to 
address is the whole issue of waiting lists and waiting times. 
 
At the time I indicated that we really don’t have a system for 
waiting lists in the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s really 
difficult to determine what kind of waiting lists we have. 
 
I believe that we will soon be able to indicate to the public what 
our intentions are with this regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Madam 
Minister, I don’t think that’s going to satisfy the people of 
Saskatchewan. Certainly it isn’t going to satisfy this family 
from Carievale. 
 
How are we to believe what you have to say? Yesterday in this 
House you told us that you had 200 nurses in place. You go 
outside in the hallway to the media and you say, well they’re 
virtually in place. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell this House today why you misled 
it yesterday, and how is anyone ever going to believe what you 
and your government have to say about health care in this 
province ever again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the 
House that yesterday I unintentionally advised this House that 
the positions that were created were all in place. I want to 
apologize to the House for giving this information, but I have to 



2100 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

also say to the members that it was unintentional. 
 
What I will say is this. That in the spring of 1998 the 
Government of Saskatchewan announced $9 million to fund 
new nursing positions in the province of Saskatchewan to 
alleviate some of the pressure that the nurses were feeling in our 
institutions. 
 
What I can say to the member, if he cares to listen as I give him 
the information, is that some of the positions have not been 
filled. What I can say is that 27.5 positions within the Regina 
Health District are scheduled to be filled in conjunction with the 
service consolidation of the two hospitals. 
 
What I can also say, as part of this business of putting new 
positions in, that we needed the approval of SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses). And there are positions in 
Yorkton that have not yet been filled because we just got 
approval from SUN for the way those positions are going to be 
filled. In addition there are some positions in Saskatoon that 
have not been filled because they’re highly specialized. 
 

Surgical Waiting Lists 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, my question today is to the Minister of Health. 
 
I received a call from Richard Howell of Maple Creek, Madam 
Minister. Richard has a fast deteriorating hip. He has one month 
left to walk according to one of his doctors, and painkillers no 
longer work for this gentleman. But he cannot get this operation 
because there is a quota on the number of operations of this 
kind that can be performed in Saskatchewan, so he’s told. 
 
Now Richard is a 59-year-old electrical contractor with a small 
farm and he needs to have this operation in order to make a 
living for his family. 
 
Madam Minister, can Richard get this operation in 
Saskatchewan or does he have to go to Calgary to get it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It has come to 
my attention recently that we, I believe, have the highest 
numbers based on the demographics, of hip and knee 
replacement operations in the country. As well, I believe we 
have the second highest numbers of cataract operations in the 
country based on demographics. 
 
As I said earlier to the member from Arm River, that we have 
identified the issue of waiting lists and waiting times as an issue 
that we need to address. And I hope to be able to say something 
on this subject shortly. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Madam Minister, this gentleman, Richard 
Howell, would be very happy to talk to you and have you 
explain to him, and his phone number is 662-2164, and 
anybody else that wants to talk. And he said he’d be quite 
happy to talk to anybody about this problem. Because living 
over in Maple Creek he has come to realize that an awful lot of 
operations can be performed over in Alberta, both in Medicine 
Hat and Calgary and Edmonton as well, that can’t be achieved 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 

He would like you to explain to him why people can get 
operations that are not considered necessarily emergency 
enough in Saskatchewan but are considered emergency enough 
for doctors to work after hours at 9 and 10, 11 and 12 o’clock at 
night to perform in Medicine Hat, and yet they can’t get those 
operations here. Would you explain that to him? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the whole issue of 
waiting lists and waiting times is not only a problem that is a 
problem in the province of Saskatchewan. This is a problem in 
other parts of Canada. 
 
I believe that Minister Allan Rock, the federal minister, has 
raised this issue publicly. And I understand that the various 
medical associations in the west are dealing with this issue. 
 
What I can assure the member is that we will make contact, my 
office will make contact with this particular gentleman to see if 
there’s any way that we can assist him in sorting out this 
problem for himself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Friends for Life Program 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question 
is for the Minister responsible for SaskPower. Mr. Minister, 
SaskPower used to have one good promotional campaign. It 
was called Friends for Life. It was launched in April of 1995 to 
raise awareness about teen suicide and to help prevent this 
terrible tragedy. It was supposed to be a five-year program 
however it was cancelled after just three years. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government announced this program with a 
great deal of fanfare just before the last election. Can you tell us 
why it was cancelled two years early? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I think what the 
question by the member raises the issue of inconsistency with 
that political party and caucus. Here you have earlier in 
question period her desk mate saying that SaskPower is 
spending way too much for advertising — way too much for 
advertising and we should be cutting back. Now you have his 
desk mate saying why aren’t you spending more? 
 
What I will say to the member opposite is that SaskPower is 
doing an excellent, excellent job of promoting safety, especially 
farm safety. And you will know that because they have a 
program that has been extremely popular in talking about farm 
safety, both during the busy time in spring during the seeding 
period and also in the fall during harvest time. So the member 
will know full well that tough choices have to be made when it 
comes to the spending of the few advertising dollars. 
 
But what I would ask you to do is to talk to your desk mate if 
you’re wanting more advertising for SaskPower and convince 
him to . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2101 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 755  The Crown Corporation 
Managers Salary Act 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I move 
first reading of a Bill, Bill No. 755, The Crown Corporation 
Managers Salary Act be now read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — With leave, later this afternoon. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE DEPUTY SPEAKER 
 

Parliamentary Language 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Ladies and gentlemen of the 
Assembly, before orders of the day, I have a statement that I 
would wish to make. Yesterday during question period, 
questionable language was used by the member from Arm 
River . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. 
 
At the time I was unsure whether I’d heard the member 
correctly. However, I have reviewed the verbatim record and 
will now rule on the matter. 
 
At the end of his fourth question, found on page 2067 of 
verbatim, the member from Arm River did use a profanity 
which was offensive and not befitting the decor of this Chamber 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. 
 
I would now ask the hon. member from Arm River to withdraw 
the word. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the House and I 
withdraw the remark. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

House Adjournment 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to rise again today 
after my brief introductory remarks on this topic yesterday to 
get to the text of the importance I feel about us staying in this 
House instead of adjourning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues yesterday talked about some of the 
many issues that this Assembly should be dealing with rather 
than heading out to the first hole of the last golf game of the 

season in this beautiful weather. And it seems to be incredible 
that members opposite seem to be more interested in getting 
outside in this wonderful day instead of . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Could I ask the 
government members to take their meetings behind the bar or 
outside. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we understand that a lot of them over 
there want to indeed go outside . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
thank you very much, but I don’t think we should encourage 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this point in time in this province’s history, 
serious issues are facing us. And it seems to be the very wrong 
sort of action for the members opposite to day after day after 
day try to leave this House without those issues being debated. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it also seems ludicrous that the only way the 
official opposition has . . . well the only tool and the only 
vehicle that we have is to try to encourage the government to 
stay and face these serious issues — to talk about the crisis in 
agriculture; to talk about the impact of the financial changes 
that are impacting across the world; to talk about what’s 
happening in health care; to talk about the issues that are facing 
our province — is to try to talk to this issue on its own. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, at the close of my remarks today, I want 
to remove this vehicle of having to talk and talk about this and 
to ask the government to get serious about presenting an 
opportunity for legitimate debate from both sides of the House 
on these issues. And I’ll be moving an amendment to the 
motion that will allow this to happen, Mr. Speaker, on the 
completion of my remarks. And for the benefit of the members 
opposite I will read what I have to suggest as a change. 
 
And the motion that I will move, seconded by the hon. member 
from Kelvington-Wadena reads as follows: 
 

That all words after the word “That” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefore: 
 
this Assembly remain in session until a date set by Mr. 
Speaker upon the request of the Official Opposition in 
order to debate important issues such as high taxation, 
crumbling highways, deteriorating health care, government 
mismanagement of Crown corporations and the serious 
downturn in the farm economy. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this motion or this amendment to the 
motion were passed, we would then have a framework under 
which we could sit and talk about the serious issues facing this 
province rather than running back outside in the nice weather 
and getting away from this Assembly where these issues should 
indeed be debated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there are a great many of my 
colleagues within the official opposition Saskatchewan Party 
who want to talk about this very serious issue that’s before us 
today. I am surprised that there are not people from the other 
sides of the Assembly who want to debate these issues as well. 
Because surely the issue about the farm crisis is as serious in 



2102 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

non-Saskatchewan Party constituencies as it is in ours. Surely 
the issue about deteriorating health care is an issue right across 
this province and not only in our constituencies. 
 
Surely the issue of government mismanagement of Crown 
corporations is an issue right across this province and not solely 
in our own. And surely, surely the tragedy faced about our 
crumbling highways is something that everybody faces. 
 
In fact there might be a real opportunity here for members 
opposite to nominate the worst highway in the province in our 
contest and be fortunate enough to have their wheel alignments 
happening at our expense instead of out of their own pockets. 
Because anybody who drives on these highways with any 
regularity is eventually going to need a wheel alignment, and 
probably more rather than fewer. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to at this time move the motion, 
seconded by my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That all words after the word “that” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefore: 
 
this Assembly remain in session until a date set by Mr. 
Speaker upon the request of the official opposition in order 
to debate important issues such as high taxation, crumbling 
highways, deteriorating health care, government 
mismanagement of Crown corporations, and the serious 
downturn in the farm economy. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m really honoured to be able to stand here today and to speak 
on this amendment. I’m delighted that my fellow constituent 
from the Melfort-Tisdale area has brought forward this motion 
to allow the people of Saskatchewan to have a voice in the 
legislature. 
 
When I was told, or when the news came last weekend that the 
legislature was going to be called back, I had an elderly 
gentleman call my office and say, it’s great that we’re going 
back to work . . . that you’re going back to work in Regina 
because there’s so many things that you have to talk about. And 
I tried to explain to him that quite likely the government was 
going to just talk about one issue; they wanted to talk about 
back-to-work legislation, not for MLAs but for SaskPower 
workers, and then he would probably want to close the 
Assembly down again. 
 
And he said, well I can’t understand that; I thought it was 
important to get into the House, to get into Regina and talk 
about all the things that are happening in this province. And I 
explained to him that in Saskatchewan usually the legislature 
just sits once a year. In the spring the Premier will decide what 
day he’s going to call session and we get presented with a 
number of Bills over a matter of a month or two, and during 
that time we have a little bit of chance to discuss it with groups 
that have input into this Bill. And then as quickly as possible, 
these Bills are debated and we’re supposed to be going back out 
again. 

This gentleman couldn’t quite understand why we wouldn’t be 
in here a lot more often because this is the only way that the 
government can see what’s happening right across the province. 
There’s a large number of constituencies that are not 
represented by government members — and there will of course 
be more after the next election — but they want to make sure 
that everybody’s voice is heard in this province. There’s people 
in the Kelvington-Wadena area and the Cannington area and the 
Moosomin area have a voice in what’s happening in this 
government as well. 
 
But I explained that probably we would be having to adjourn as 
quickly as the Premier could get this to happen. So when we 
had an opportunity to discuss adjournment and to discuss this 
amendment that my colleague has brought forward, I was just 
. . . I’m delighted. 
 
I just wanted to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the good 
people of Kelvington-Wadena first of all did tell me how they 
wanted me to vote on the legislation on Monday. And unlike 
the members of the Liberal Party, I’m not only encouraged but 
I’m obligated to vote the way my constituents say because 
that’s what the Sask Party does. 
 
We believe that the members in this party are there to represent 
their constituents and we are a voice piece for those people and 
that’s why we are here in Regina. It’s kind of the unique thing 
about democracy. We represent the people who elect us; we 
don’t represent a party as such. And so I’m delighted to be a 
member of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, speaking about the amendment, I 
believe that I can’t in good conscience go home to my 
constituents without talking about some of the many concerns 
that people have brought to me over the last few months. 
 
One of the most important ones and the ones that affect the 
largest number of people in my area is that of agriculture. 
 
And I know that it was discussed in the House on Tuesday. It 
was a motion that was brought forward, first of all . . . our 
discussion that the Saskatchewan Party wanted to bring 
forward. And then the Minister of Agriculture decided it was a 
good idea and he also put forward a news release and talked 
about an emergency debate. As he said, it didn’t really matter 
who brought it forward as long as it was discussed. And it’s 
interesting to see that it’s being discussed in Ottawa right now. 
 
But does anybody really know what’s happening unless you’re 
sitting out there on the farm and looking at the fact that your 
bottom line has gone down 40 per cent in the last year? We’re 
not talking about the gross amount of money you have; we’re 
talking about 40 per cent from your bottom line. 
 
And then we see things like a 12 per cent increase in 
SaskEnergy going to be affecting people at the beginning of 
next month and that again comes right off the bottom line. 
 
I hear the members from across the House talking about how 
wonderful the economy is doing. Sure there are some great 
things happening, but there are also a large number of people in 
this province who are really, truly suffering right now and we 
can’t ignore those people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2103 

members saying who, and I guess if they’re saying who that 
means they don’t have one farm family in their area. 
 
Because those people have been hit with some very tough times 
— nothing that was a cause of their management, nothing that 
can be blamed on their management, nothing that can be 
blamed on what they are doing. It’s the crisis — prices that 
have gone from $6 in the last few years to $2 for wheat. We 
have barley that’s selling at 68 cents a bushel. That isn’t the 
kind of prices that make people want to smile when they go to 
bed at night. 
 
And then we have things like the hog prices. I had one of the 
colleagues yesterday talking about hog prices and I think that 
many of the hog producers in this area can tell you that they’re 
losing anywhere from $10 a hog to $40 a hog. 
 
(1430) 
 
And that again we have a government that is encouraging hog 
production —Saskatchewan has lots of reason to do that; we 
have one of the best places in the world to raise hogs — but at 
the same time we are finding the government is only thinking 
it’s the large producers that can raise hogs. 
 
Right now we have the number of producers in this province 
has fallen dramatically. The number of hogs that we’re selling 
is about the same, or a little lower actually, but the number of 
producers has fallen dramatically. And that’s because the only 
people that can get backing, financial backing, are the large 
producers. We see government grants given to large producers 
but we don’t see anything for a small farmer to encourage them 
to stay in their community or stay in that business. 
 
I had a man who does have a hog barn. He’s not one of the 
larger producers but he has about 400 sows, and he took 9 hogs 
in the other day, and out of that he took home a cheque of $483 
— for 9 hogs. That was 1200 pounds of meat, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and for $483. That’s not the type of thing that puts the 
. . . pays for the feed and it doesn’t pay for the fuel that they 
need for tractors, and it doesn’t do anything to encourage them 
to stay on the farm. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that this amendment is something 
that members are saying, why are you talking about this just to 
filibuster? Well we’re not filibustering. We’re trying to make 
sure that the government and yourself understands the 
importance of us being here today, and being here this week, 
and however long it takes till you recognize that there is a crisis 
out there, and there are other things to be talking about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the other calls that 
I’ve been getting a lot on — and I think probably the 
government members especially one department got a lot a calls 
on — in the last year is the area of education. I’m sure that the 
Minister of Education knows the name of the town Englefeld 
quite well, because Englefeld is now the home of the first 
Protestant separate school division in Saskatchewan. 
 
This school division came about not because they’ve set out 
four years ago to start their own school division; it came about 

because the government, through the wisdom of cutbacks to 
education, forced the school board to decide that they had to 
close some schools. 
 
The Englefeld School is not a very large school but it represents 
its . . . The children in this town have parents working in a 
number of the small industries around there. And the industry 
people knew that without a school it’s very, very difficult to 
keep the people in the town, and it’s difficult to attract good 
workers into their town and to get them to stay. People will live 
in a larger centre and drive out to the industry but that doesn’t 
keep small-town Saskatchewan going. 
 
So what the people of Englefeld did was draw a line in the sand 
and say that’s it. We’re going to fight until we find a way to 
keep this school going. The school did close for a year, but this 
year, after a one-year closure, we have the school reopened. 
They put in 680 hours of unpaid labour to redo the school. They 
painted it and cleaned it up and fixed it up and put new 
cupboards in it. And they’re working as a community to make 
sure that this school can operate and can provide the education 
that their children want and need. 
 
And it’s not second-best education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 
very good education. They’re providing . . . they have every one 
of the amenities that the other schools have and they have it 
right at home. And that’s what the people of Englefeld are 
asking for, a chance to keep their community going. 
 
And when they couldn’t get help from government they do 
what Saskatchewan people do — they take it into their own 
hands and make sure it happens. I think it was a very tough 
thing for them to do because when communities have to decide, 
make decisions like that, it actually drives a stake between 
small communities. Kids that were going to school in Watson 
before had to decide which school do I go to. 
 
That’s not the type of thing that enhances community spirit 
because people have to decide. They have to pick which one of 
these areas they are going to be supporting, and I think it’s a 
tough decision. It’s the kind of thing that can bring a lot of hurt 
into the province or into an area. And there are families that 
actually are having tough feelings within themselves when 
members had to decide which school they were going to go to. 
And I put this blame directly at the feet of this government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, before we can go home, before we can go 
back to the worlds that we represent, I think it’s important that 
we talk about the health care issue that’s facing the province — 
not just my constituency, but the whole province. 
 
And I’m sure as MLAs we’re all getting very many phone calls 
about things like the waiting lists. I have a gentleman that 
phoned my office last week and he was told that he has an 
operation that is not considered an emergency operation — it’s 
called elective — and so he can expect to wait for about a year 
to 14 months. 
 
The only thing is they are telling him that if his condition 
worsens he could be actually in danger. He has to look after 
himself. He practically has to be on bed rest for a full year, but 
his condition is considered elective. 
 



2104 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

Again, if something happens in the meantime and it becomes an 
emergency, they’ll take him in immediately. That’s not the type 
of thing that you can consider good health care. 
 
I went into one of my nursing homes last week and the nurses in 
that area called me over and said, June, I don’t know if you’ve 
been into this nursing home very often, but we have many 
patients in here that require a lot of very hard lifting . . . heavy 
lifting now. There’s very few patients in this home that aren’t 
level 4 patients and they require a lot of physical help. 
 
But we are so understaffed that we spend all our time running 
from one patient to another and we don’t have the time to spend 
with them to let them know that we care about them as people, 
to listen to the tales they want to tell, to ask them how they’re 
really doing, and to make them feel like human beings. 
 
I think that this is another serious thing this government is 
doing to the people of this province. We feel like we’re just a 
number on a list, and the older people in our province who 
really deserve the respect and the time and the care that we 
should give them, aren’t getting it. They are forced into a home 
because they can’t stay in their own home; families can’t look 
after them. So they sit in a nursing home. 
 
And the nurses in there care very much about them but they’re 
very overworked and there’s nothing that they can do besides 
run from one bed to another. I think this is one issue that this 
government could be discussing. We hear about the large 
expense of the health care system in Saskatchewan, but we have 
to ask, is this money being spent wisely? And is it really going 
to the people who need it — the older people who are sitting 
there, just wanting company or wanting somebody to listen to 
them. 
 
I think when we talk about wellness, this government’s issue of 
wellness, listening to people and making sure that their mental 
health is looked after is part of wellness. And that’s not 
happening if the nursing staff doesn’t have time to actually 
spend time with the people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, before we can adjourn, I think we should 
also discuss highways. My colleagues have been discussing the 
worst highway in Saskatchewan, and I think anybody who 
knows my area will know that three out of the nine that were 
nominated today were in my constituency. I feel a little picked 
on and I guess my constituents should feel that way. But we 
really do have some terrible roads. 
 
And I can tell you, the ambulance driver in Porcupine Plain is 
telling me that he is now taking grid roads to the hospital 
because the highways are so rough that his patients are feeling 
like they’re going to be worse before they get to the hospital 
than they were before they got in the ambulance. That’s not 
saying much about the highway system in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, also yesterday, I tried to bring up with, 
discuss with the Minister of Social Services, the fact that there 
is problems in the SAIL program — Saskatchewan Aids to 
Independent Living program — where young people that need 
different medical supplies can get them unless they’re under 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) no-fault insurance, 
and then it has to be gotten through that program. 

That may be a good idea, but there’s a cap on that program and 
young people who are injured could spend a lot of their money 
on just things that they need, medical supplies that they need to 
survive in their life, and there will be nothing extra for what 
they need to actually make their life worth living, to give them a 
quality of life. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, economic development is probably . . . it 
is the basis of everything we do because without prosperity, 
without businesses and people having some money in their 
pockets, this province is never going to get to where it should 
be in this world. 
 
I have a gentleman that called me out to his farm on the 
weekend. A very proud man who showed me around his place 
and talked about the bees that he has and the honey that he sells 
and transports right across Canada and actually across the 
world. He talked about the pounds of honey that he could get 
from each hive. 
 
And then he showed us the tree farm that he’d established 10 
years ago, and he was selling the products right across Canada. 
And he showed us the fabricating shop that he was making 
some of the equipment that otherwise would have been brought 
in from the States. And he’s very proud of this. 
 
But his problem was the fact that his road was in such terrible 
shape that the trucking firms that actually have to pick up the 
products couldn’t get to his place, especially in the summertime 
. . . in the spring when the water is running and the . . . actually 
running right across the road in two or three different places. 
And it makes it so tough for customers to get out there that he is 
losing sales. 
 
And I think what he was trying to tell us is that he isn’t asking 
for subsidies for his farm. He’s not asking for the government 
to give him a handout of any type. What he’s asking for is the 
government to do the job and to keep the infrastructure that he 
cannot build and support by himself, keep it going so that he 
can do his job and bring economic development to this area. 
 
The government has a responsibility for highways and health 
care and education, and that’s got to be their priority. With the 
cutbacks to the RMs, the RM council isn’t able to provide the 
road that he needs, and what’s happening is he’s losing a lot of 
business, which in turn means the whole province is losing 
business. 
 
My constituency has a large number of farm equipment 
manufacturers and they’re laying people off. And these people 
are saying, what is the government talking about when they say 
there’s great economic times in this province; we have increases 
in our utility rates, we have increases every time we turn 
around, and I don’t have a job any more. And it’s not their fault. 
 
The government has to recognize that there are problems that 
they can be dealing with . . . that is their issue. And they should 
be looking after the three or four things that should be 
government priorities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also wanted to talk about the gambling 
problem. And I think maybe my constituency hit the news again 
a month or so ago when one of the people who were using the 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2105 

VLT (video lottery terminal) machines became overly frustrated 
and got rid of a VLT machine in a very unorthodox way. 
 
But I think it proved that there is a lot of frustration out there. 
And it’s one of the issues that this government, even though 
they are themselves hooked on gambling, are not providing the 
leadership or what we actually need, and that is studying the 
social, economic impact of gambling. 
 
This province is spending . . . the people in this province are 
spending $412 an adult on gambling, and yet the government 
refuses to do the study that is needed to find out what actually 
the impact of this is on the province. 
 
We have a Labour department that has spent $350,000 studying 
stress in the family. It’s an important issue because definitely 
there is stress in every family. With both parents working, we 
find that most of the people’s lives are spent right now working 
and feeding their children, having meals, doing what they have 
to do in the house and going to bed. There’s no life left. 
 
I think that any family could tell you that what they need is 
more money in their pockets so that there can be an opportunity 
to have a way of life, and we don’t need a study to tell us that. I 
think that the $350,000 could be spent in ways that would 
actually allow people to keep money in their pocket. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the adjournment issue is something that 
can be discussed after we look at the Social Services programs 
in this province. The numbers of people on social services have 
increased by 25 per cent since the year 1991 and we have to ask 
why. 
 
I think the people in this province have to look at this very 
important part of government. It’s the third highest spending 
department in Saskatchewan, and none of us want to say that 
it’s not important. It is. It would be politically incorrect, it 
would be something that nobody would say we can’t be 
spending money on social services, but we have to ask why 
people are on there? And again are we spending our money in 
the very best way possible? 
 
We have in Social Services there . . . I’m sure each of us as 
MLAs have had calls from the foster families, we’ve had calls 
from child workers, from community homes. We have to be 
concerned about the number of child deaths there are in this 
province. We have to be concerned about the high level of 
poverty in this province, and we have to address it in a way that 
it will be beneficial and that we can actually get people off 
social services and give them an opportunity to get into the real 
workforce and make a difference. Everybody knows that the 
best social program is a good job, and that’s what we’re asking 
this government to provide. 
 
We have issues revolving around our Aboriginal citizens, with a 
growing disparity between non-Aboriginal and Aboriginal 
people. And I am one of the people that has . . . I consider 
myself fortunate to have reserves in my area. I’ve dealt with 
them. I’ve been out and talked to them, and they do . . . we’ve 
had an opportunity to discuss history and culture and it’s a very 
important part of our province. 
 
But we have to ask where we’re headed to. Is there really any 

opportunity to make sure that all these people are working 
together in one . . . to make sure that we’re all headed for the 
same shore? Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal parents want the 
same thing for their children. They want to make sure that 
children have a future and that we have an opportunity to be 
going to the same shore together. We want all of our children to 
have a better life than we’ve had, and whether we’re Aboriginal 
or non-Aboriginal, there is the same goals there. 
 
I think that right now we have a problem that we discuss 
racism, we discuss the fact that there is discrimination. And 
that’s happening on both sides whether it’s Aboriginal or 
non-Aboriginal, it’s a very important problem that has to be 
discussed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the adjournment issue can only be dealt 
with after we talk about rural Saskatchewan. Rural 
Saskatchewan is a way of life that everyone of us here 
appreciates because that’s where we’re coming from. We know 
that the government policy since 1991 has eroded the way of 
life that we appreciate in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
When you close down a hospital, what really happens is it 
means our older people move to a bigger centre where the 
hospitals are. When there’s cutbacks to schools we have young 
families moving to bigger centres so they can be sure that they 
can be close to their children if that’s where they’re going to be 
educated. 
 
When we have cutbacks to agriculture, we find that they cannot 
maintain the way of life they’ve always wanted. The reason 
why they’re staying on the farm is that they have to recognize 
that although agriculture is the backbone of the economy, it’s 
not seen that way. And we have people that are suffering. We 
have people saying, even though I want to be out here, I can’t 
be here any more because agriculture is not looked at the way it 
should be. 
 
We have cutbacks to RMs and then they can’t provide the 
essential services we need in the small towns and in our RMs. 
And I think that it’s something that we should all be discussing 
before we agree to go home here today or in the next week or 
two and find out that we should be doing something for all the 
people of this province. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do appreciate the opportunity to 
bring up some of the concerns that the people of my 
constituency have raised with me. And I’m sure that my 
colleagues will be here this afternoon to bring up more of these 
issues. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we’ve had the government attempt to close 
down debate, and that’s been a rather interesting exercise. And 
so I think it’s important that we discuss what the government’s 
trying to do when they want to adjourn the House and go home. 
 
Very often as we walk up and down the streets and talk to the 
people in our communities they ask us, well what are you 
doing? Aren’t you in Regina? Where are you? Why aren’t you 
there? And all those sorts of things. The answer we usually 



2106 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

have to give is that we sit in Regina and we don’t get to start 
until the Premier decides that he wants us there. 
 
And they kind of look rather quizzically as if, well aren’t there 
things to do? Aren’t there things to debate? Are there not 
problems that need to be discussed? Does the government not 
need to be held accountable for what it’s doing? Do you not 
have any ideas that you want to present to government? And the 
answer to most of those things is yes. 
 
But as we know, the way the place works, we can’t get here 
until the Premier calls it. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were called here on Monday to 
deal with a back-to-work issue. And even though we all think 
that we should be here in fall sessions, this happened to be one 
of those situations that that was not a reason that should have 
brought us here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There was no way that 
back-to-work legislation should have occurred. It should not 
have occurred. It should not have had to happen. It had to 
happen because of mismanagement. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, most of us have been in the labour 
force at one time or another; and we know very well when 
we’re in the labour force how we look at other people and what 
they’re being paid and what they do and what their 
responsibilities are and how they got to be where they are, 
especially those people in management. And that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is one of the things that brought us here that Monday. 
 
It was the fact that when SaskPower workers looked at what 
management was getting, and the kind of raises they were 
getting, it seemed to be totally out of line with what they were 
getting. There was a 2, 2, and 2 agreement that was there. And I 
think by and large we support that especially when we look at 
what’s been happening with the agricultural scene. And we’ll 
say more about that agriculture scene in a while, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But here you have Sask workers looking at management and 
saying, well we’re supposed to be held to 2, 2, and 2 and theirs 
seems to be wide open — wide open. No one’s quite sure how 
much they got but we know it’s a whole lot more than 2, 2, and 
2. That obviously didn’t just raise the eyebrows of our power 
workers, it raised their ire. And so it should have for two 
reasons: if 2, 2, and 2 is good enough to keep the people going 
up the poles alive, it should be good enough to keep those 
people making decisions alive. 
 
And I think speaking in that vein, one of our Sask Party MLAs 
made a good statement a while back, something he had received 
. . . information he had received from a SaskPower worker. And 
that is when a SaskPower person goes up a pole and makes a 
mistake, what happens? He’s finished, end of story. When Sask 
management people make a mistake, what happens? They get 
the kind of severance packages we’ve been talking about — the 
Jack Messer type of severance packages. 
 
Well there’s a big difference, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the kinds of 
things that happen there. A difference very definitely in the 
wage settlements that have been offered to the workers, the 
people who do the work, the people who risk their lives. And I 
think when we had that storm just a couple of days ago and the 

workers went out and made sure power was in place, it showed 
where their hearts and minds were. They felt it was important to 
keep the lights on all over Saskatchewan. So that’s one part. 
 
But there’s another part, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 
retired SaskPower workers in my constituency and I meet with 
them from time to time. And some of them are quite outspoken. 
And one of the concerns they have raised to me on numbers of 
occasions is how come are those people in management — not 
people that have come through the ranks who understand how 
the system works, who understand the work that is being done, 
the difficult things of going out when it’s 40 below or a 
snowstorm like we had and keep the power on — why are those 
people who have a lifetime of experience and understanding, 
why do they not happen to get those top jobs? Why does it 
happen to be people who are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, campaign 
managers? 
 
There’s a big difference, Mr. Speaker, between making sure that 
you’ve got NDP signs strewn all over the lawns of our cities. 
That’s not the kind of people that we have a lot of faith in and 
say, okay so you can put a sign up on a few lawns throughout 
the city, now suddenly we’re going to put you in charge of light 
and power throughout the province. I don’t think that exudes a 
whole lot of assurance and confidence from the public. And 
they don’t. And our SaskPower workers are bitter because of 
that. I’ve had that personally from retired SaskPower workers. 
They don’t think that’s the way the system ought to be run and I 
agree with that. 
 
It’s those two kinds of critical reasons that brought us here on 
Monday. Reasons that shouldn’t have happened; reasons this 
government needed to take responsibility for. Now yes, power 
needed to stay on. No doubt about that. And so the legislation 
that was brought in after the mismanagement was legislation 
that had to be brought into force and we supported that. In this 
country where we have 40-below weather, and that could very 
easily happen in 30 to 40 days from now, we can’t have the 
power go off. Power going off to hospitals, senior citizen 
centres, homes, farms, dairies — we can’t allow that sort of 
thing to happen. So in view of what had happened to date, that 
legislation was necessary. It shouldn’t have come to that but it 
was necessary. 
 
So we came here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for one day. And then 
there was an adjournment motion. The NDP wanted to depart. 
And I think we’ll have to change their name to the nearly 
departed party. They nearly departed. They almost got away. 
 
But fortunately the Sask Party was there to say no. There are 
certain issues that have to be brought to your attention. There 
are issues that you need to be aware of, much as you would like 
to be nearly departed. But you need to understand this. 
 
There are things happening in this province, but no they 
couldn’t see anything in this province that needed a fall session, 
a fall sitting. There was nothing going on in this province in the 
mind of the NDP government that should force us to stay here 
and discuss and look at solutions and possibilities and problems 
and all those sorts of things. 
 
So Tuesday morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Sask Party said, 
we’re going to go ahead and try and carry this on. There is a 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2107 

crisis in Saskatchewan. The fact is there are many of them. But 
there is one that happens to have hit very hard and will be 
hitting much harder for the next year, because it won’t go away 
in a day or two, and its effects may be long-term enough that 
they’ll be around for decades unfortunately. And that is the 
situation in agriculture. 
 
So we said, we’re going to try for an emergency debate on 
agriculture rather than adjourn and go home, watch the nearly 
departed party leave. We’re going to discuss agriculture; we’re 
going to discuss the things that happened in agriculture — the 
difficulties that farms are facing; what’s happened to the cost of 
inputs; what’s happened to the price of the product and the 
effect that the offloading of this NDP government has had on 
the farm families. We’re going to discuss that. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, lo and behold, about an hour or so 
after that the Agriculture minister says, well my goodness, there 
is a crisis in Saskatchewan. It is in agriculture. I want an 
emergency debate as well. 
 
Well we had the emergency debate and we discussed the 
difficulties in agriculture. And the solutions for those are not 
easy. They’re not easy. I’m sure if they were easy we would 
have had it fixed by the time Tuesday came to an end. 
 
But in order to deal with agriculture in an effective way, we 
need to have the federal government onside, and onside 
strongly. Because what affects agriculture is not something that 
can be fixed just within one province. Agriculture is a national 
problem and the problems that are in agriculture are of the 
national nature. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re of an international nature 
because of the trade that’s been going on, because of the 
subsidies that are there from the United States government, the 
subsidies that are there from European governments, the price 
that our farmers are getting for their product, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, has basically gone right through the floor. 
 
And so we do need the federal government to come onside, to 
come onside first of all to fight for our farmers, to fight for our 
farmers on an international level, on an international field to 
make sure that those prices that our farmers get are prices that 
are reasonable, are prices that can maintain their operations. 
Because truly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are few things in our 
country more important than agriculture, because when the food 
is not on our table we will soon realize what our priorities are. 
 
And with the way agriculture has gone in the last little while it’s 
going to be very difficult for farmers to start next spring and 
say, I think we’ll plant another crop and I think we’ll raise some 
more grain. They can’t do it for free and yet that’s very close to 
what they’re being expected to do. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we didn’t allow the nearly departed 
party to go home on Monday. We kept them here for Tuesday 
and we had the agricultural debate and we did pass a motion to 
request the federal government to come onside and fight for 
farmers across Canada, farmers in Saskatchewan, farmers in my 
constituency of Rosthern. We needed that. We did that. 
 
We also need the federal government to come onside and work 

out for programs and plans in co-operation with farmers so that 
farmers are all on a level playing field as we know farmers in 
Ontario aren’t. They can go ahead and sell their grain in 
manners that we can’t. 
 
Truly amazing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If you would have 
someone who has had a shoe store in Ontario and he was 
allowed to sell his shoes to anyone he wished in the province, 
we’d say that’s fine. Though if you happened to have a shoe 
store in Saskatchewan, we will limit to who you can sell your 
shoes to. We would say that’s utterly ludicrous. 
 
And yet that’s the way the agricultural scene works in Canada. 
It works in such a way that in some provinces you have abilities 
to sell to certain markets. Those markets are closed to you when 
you happen to live in Saskatchewan. And these things need to 
be addressed. 
 
(1500) 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we kept the government here for 
Tuesday against their will. I guess figuratively speaking we 
could say we dragged them kicking and screaming back in the 
House for Wednesday, except on Wednesday they had nothing 
to say. And today they’ve had nothing to say, and I’m sure 
they’ll have less to say tomorrow, and I doubt they’ll have very 
much to say next week. 
 
The government side of the House will be very quiet next week, 
as it is today, and as it will be tomorrow because they have 
nothing to say on these issues. They do not wish to speak on 
those issues. So the official opposition, the Saskatchewan Party, 
will make sure we bring these things to government’s attention. 
 
Where are those people? Where are the people who are 
listening? You must ask yourself, where are your MLAs, if they 
happen to belong to the nearly departed party. Why are they not 
speaking up on these issues? 
 
Well anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that adjournment motion 
should not have been carried through; it hasn’t been; and we are 
continuing to bring to the government and to their attention the 
problems that exist in our province. 
 
And I’d like to address a few of those as they are seen from my 
constituency. And I guess I have to start off with highways. It’s 
a common theme that runs throughout every constituency. The 
highways in this province, Mr. Speaker, are bad. It’s 
unfortunate, but we in Saskatchewan have a reputation for bad 
highways and that reputation has been built during the time of 
this government. The NDP government has given us that 
reputation. 
 
We used to have highways that were adequate, average; they 
are now bad. They are terrible. They are the worst. In fact, as is 
already stated in Monday’s paper, we’ll see some national 
papers will be carrying articles on how bad the highways in 
Saskatchewan are. And again part of that is just a lack of . . . 
strange management, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Strange things 
happen not just in the Land of the Midnight Sun, but in the land 
of bad highways. 
 
About two years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I supported the 



2108 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

government’s budget. I did that for two reasons: one of those 
was that there happened to be a project of a highway twinning 
— a section of twinning — of Highway No. 12 that goes past 
Martensville. A very important stretch of highway because of 
all the accidents and hardships that have been caused on that 
stretch. 
 
So I supported the budget because of that twinning project and 
my constituents have been supportive of me for that. I haven’t 
had one person phone up and say, how dare you support the 
government on a budget issue such as that. But it’s because 
there were certain things in there that were key to my 
constituency. 
 
So the highway is nearly completed. And then funny things 
happen. It’s opened before it’s done. The minister comes 
around, gets into a car and has a parade on Highway 12. The 
highway is opened up for traffic, but the lights at the key new 
intersections aren’t on. There are light standards there but the 
lights aren’t on. And fact is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to show how 
serious that was, there actually were some fairly critical 
accidents that took place in the first days of Highway No. 12 
that twin section being open because the lights weren’t on. 
 
And it’s very much indicative of this government — there may 
be somebody home but the lights just don’t seem to be on. And 
I think the fix on Highway 12 at Martensville, much needed, 
was sort of indicative of that. The lights quite weren’t on. 
 
They’re on now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we’re thankful for 
that. 
 
Highway 11: when the twinning took place, it was another 
important twinning that took place there. There’s a intersection 
that comes from the Warman Road/Wanuskewin Road that 
links up with Highway 11. Well I’m not sure who in the 
Highways department created that first access curve, but the 
access curve was almost at 90 degrees. 
 
There was no need for it. There’s a whole lot of essentially 
waste land, land that’s not being used where they could have 
put a nice gentle curve to access Highway 11 for those people 
who wanted to go north. But instead they had a very sharp 
corner — a very sharp corner — and at the start on the far side 
of the short sharp corner, they had light standards, they had 
highway signs. These were broken off at about one every two 
days because people didn’t expect such a ridiculously sharp 
corner on a highway. 
 
So the Department of Highways took the first idea to cure this 
and they moved the light standards and all the signs to the near 
side of the intersection, so when you hit the ditch on the other 
side at least you wouldn’t take down any highway signs. Well it 
saved the highway signs but it was a bad intersection to start off 
with and that didn’t cure the problems. 
 
People still kept hitting the ditch not being aware of the 
intersection. Numbers of people missed that intersection and 
then would go on toward a stop sign and then have to enter 
Highway 11, not through a nice smooth curve where they could 
go ahead and merge with the traffic, but just drive right into it. 
 
At that intersection, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were two lives 

lost since that twinning took place. And I am convinced it’s 
because that curve was such a ridiculous curve. 
 
The last two times that we’ve had estimates in the House, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’ve brought up that question about that 
particular intersection. And I received the blankest of looks 
from the Minister of Highways at that time, like what could be 
the problem? What intersection are you talking about? Totally 
seemed to be unaware of what was going on. However, after 
that serious accident that I just referred to, Department of 
Highways has now rebuilt that curve and done it the way they 
should have done it in the first place. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whose head rolled in 
Department of Highways for that fiasco. The cost will have 
been definitely in the hundreds of thousands of dollars for the 
correction, as well as the accidents that took place. Someone 
should have taken some responsibility for that. And it wasn’t as 
if the Department of Highways wasn’t aware of it because the 
very first estimate that was taken, that was brought to their 
attention. But it’s taken them all that time to correct it. 
 
Those are serious problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is why 
we cannot adjourn this House. Those problems need to be 
brought to the attention of this government. They need to be 
aware of what’s going on. 
 
Highway 312, highway running east and west from Wakaw 
basically through to the intersection at Hepburn, has a good 
stretch, a good stretch, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the Laird 
corner to that Hepburn intersection. That’s a good piece of 
highway, with the one exception is that the dirt that they’ve got 
underneath the highway — the moles like it. And the moles are 
climbing under the highway digging out the dirt and we end up 
with potholes because of moles. Amazing that we’re making 
highway out of fine topsoil. But that’s what’s been happening. 
 
But the other stretch from the Laird corner through to Wakaw, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, has had some repair done on it but 
generally the repair falls apart very shortly. It’s not because the 
workers there aren’t doing a good job. They’re doing the best 
job with what’s being given to them to work with. But that road 
just isn’t of the quality that repairs last a long time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was a Devine road. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And the . . . It would have been a divine road 
if the NDP would fix it. The NDP didn’t fix it. The fact is, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the NDP took gravel from the west side of the 
river. They spent a million dollars making an ice road across the 
Saskatchewan north river to get the gravel beside Highway 312 
to finish it off. 
 
And the NDP government didn’t do a thing with it. That pile of 
gravel’s sitting there. The NDP government are the ones that 
spent that money. They made the ice road. They spent the 
million dollars and there we have a pile of gravel doing 
absolutely no good. 
 
Can’t finish a good highway, can’t finish a highway that’s 
needed, can’t finish a highway that’s being used. They can 
spend a million dollars, dump a pile of gravel in the middle of 
nowheres and say, we’ve done our job, done our job. So either 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2109 

they go ahead and they go ahead and have potholes in highways 
or they dump a pile of gravel. The least they could do — the 
least, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these people could do — is take 
away the sign saying you can’t remove unauthorized material. 
I’m sure some of the local citizenry would take pails of gravel 
and fill up some of the potholes themselves — would fill up 
some of the potholes themselves. It’s a disaster. They’re not 
finishing the highway. They spent over a million dollars on a 
half a fix that doesn’t even start to . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I can assure you that the noise 
that we just had in here isn’t anywhere near the noise in a 
vehicle driving down Highway 312. This was well insulated 
compared to what you hear there. With pieces falling off, gravel 
flying up, and you probably saw that there was a bit of 
television program, news report out there, where the reeve of 
the RM and myself stood beside the highway and with our toes 
we could just pick up pieces and start peeling the whole thing 
off. It’s a disaster. 
 
And what makes that highway more critical, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that there’s more and more traffic coming down 
there hauling our grain. There’s a high throughput elevator been 
put up near Saskatoon and there’s more grain coming through 
from the Wakaw area, from the east side of the south 
Saskatchewan across that particular bridge, using Highway 312. 
And that’s gone to increase with this high throughput elevator 
that’s there. And so highways is a main issue. 
 
And we need obviously federal help in this area. I know the 
NDP government says well, we need some federal help. But 
anyway, we do need that federal help. But the interesting thing 
is from time to time we have the Prime Minister in our province 
— thankfully without any pepper steak, water guns or baseball 
bats, we’ve kept him out of that area. But when he is here, and 
our Premier talks to him, have any of us ever heard him address 
publicly — publicly — Mr. Prime Minister, we need money for 
this. 
 
It may have been done behind closed doors with the Minister of 
Highways — behind closed doors where this Minister of 
Highways has no value. We want to hear that publicly. We want 
our Premier to take a public stance on this and tell the Prime 
Minister, you need to take some of that money you’re sending 
out to the Maritimes and putting it over here. 
 
So we need that. We need our Premier to speak up and get the 
Prime Minister on side. It’s not happening. On what issues — 
on what issues — did our Premier take the Prime Minister to 
task and say Saskatchewan needs some help. Was it on 
highways? No. Was it on health care, publicly? No. Was it on 
gun control? No. On nothing. A few warm and fuzzies and then 
maybe they crawled off in a quiet room some place in the dark 
of night and discussed highways with the minister. That’s 
possible. But who knows. Who knows? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many things that we need to 
discuss before we adjourn the House and I would suggest one of 
them that hasn’t been mentioned so far, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
this government’s stance on gun control. 
 

It has been weak and it’s been another one of those situations 
where they’ve been dragged kicking and screaming into the 
debate. They didn’t want to say a word on it. Well finally 
they’ve been dragged into it weakly. That’s w-e-a-k. Because 
they haven’t been saying something every seven days. But the 
other one’s been feeble, feeble. 
 
So okay finally when the other provinces said, we’re going to 
go ahead and take the federal government to task, and we’ll take 
this to court, and we’ll see if we can declare that this piece of 
legislation that the feds have come up with is illegal. Well yes, 
johnny-come-lately, we sent our minister; and he had an idea. 
But it wasn’t very strong. It wasn’t very strong. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we need to discuss that more. That’s why we 
cannot adjourn. Hasn’t been discussed at all so far. 
 
Because if you will check, our Saskatchewan presence in those 
debates, in our courts that just took place in which there was a 
split decision of three and two, our Saskatchewan position was 
the weakest of all — the weakest of all. It was sort of as if, well 
we have constituents out here in the province who are 
concerned about this, so somehow we have to have an image 
that we’re actually against this gun legislation. We have to have 
that image. 
 
So they played the image but have they played the 
effectiveness? No. We want someone out there, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that when we send them out there to debate that are 
people who understand the issue, who know what the issue is 
about, who are enthusiastic about the issue. 
 
You cannot have people out there who say, well I might be 
caught having to enforce this gun control. And therefore for that 
particular reason, I’m going to soft-pedal my position. So in 
case I have to go ahead and be part of the enforcement, it won’t 
be so hard on me. 
 
(1515) 
 
That’s not adequate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not nearly 
adequate. The federal government has dealt with that 
legislation. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure you’re aware of 
the demonstration that took place on Parliament Hill — 
10,000-plus people; 10,000-plus people. That’s after the 
legislation had been passed. It shows you the strength of the 
concern, and the strength of the concern in Saskatchewan is as 
strong as it is in any province — and probably stronger. 
 
And where are we on that issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where are 
we? Yes, our present Justice minister came out awhile back and 
said, well probably, probably maybe the gun owner shouldn’t 
just register their guns right now. Good advice; good advice. 
However, not nearly enough action, not nearly enough action. 
Because at some point we need to make sure that those firearms 
never need to be registered. 
 
And some of the arguments that the Prime Minister puts 
forward are ludicrous — utterly ludicrous. Utterly ludicrous. 
When he says, well we register cars don’t we? As if we register 
guns, things will be safe. 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would be something like saying, if 
we could ensure that every car in Saskatchewan has a licence 



2110 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

plate on it, then when they go through a red light nothing bad 
will happen. To my knowledge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a licence 
plate on a car has never brought us to a situation where an 
accident didn’t happen. A licence plate has never been the cause 
of an accident not occurring. And the same thing’s going to 
happen in the firearm thing. 
 
And I see the member from a good gun section back there, from 
Swift Current, looking with a furrowed brow . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order, order. I just wish 
to remind the hon. member for Rosthern that the motion that we 
are debating here is truly a wide-ranging motion. I’ve read it 
carefully and can find . . . I’ve yet to find a tie-in with gun 
control to the motion before the Assembly, and urge the hon. 
member for Rosthern to return to the motion. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The motion 
to adjourn as it is, basically sends us all home. So the nearly 
departed party can go, and I guess we have to leave then too. 
But we don’t want that to happen because there are issues that 
are important to the people of Saskatchewan. And that’s why 
we’re here, to bring to the government’s attention what those 
issues are. 
 
And I’ve mentioned one today already. That’s highways. And 
there are many more that I intend to deal with today. And my 
partners over here in the Saskatchewan Party have mentioned 
other ones as well, things that their constituents are concerned 
about. And we need to raise these with the government. And 
that it is why it is so critical, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 
cannot adjourn the House. We must stay here. We must have 
the people on the government side hear what those issues are. 
They don’t seem to know what they are. We need to bring those 
to their attention. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just mention a few things about gun 
control; brings me to the area of justice. Very much also a 
Saskatchewan issue and the guns thing is underneath that. We 
in Saskatchewan have, one way or another, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, managed to get ourselves a record. We’ve made a 
record, unfortunately, because many records aren’t good. 
Records for break-in; record for car thefts — that’s happened in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m appalled by that because we’ve grown up in this 
particular province saying we’re a province of people helping 
people. We are a province of neighbourliness. We’re a province 
where if anything we’d like to leave our doors unlocked so a 
neighbour can walk in and use the phone if he needs it. 
 
It’s the kind of thing that many of us in rural and maybe even in 
urban Saskatchewan grew up in, where there weren’t locks on 
doors. And now what we hear is you’ve got to lock your doors, 
you’ve got to bar your windows, you have to do all these things. 
What has happened? 
 
Somewhere this government seems to have messed up and 
created that kind of environment. And what’s interesting is that 
our two key people in the NDP government, the Premier and 
the Deputy Premier, represent constituencies that are the leaders 
in crime, not only in Saskatchewan but across Canada. 
 

And then the one thing that doesn’t amaze us then, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that they don’t live there. I would imagine their 
homes would probably look quite out of place in the 
constituencies that they represent. So what has happened in our 
province that we have those high rates? 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we need to discuss with this 
government some of the issues that involve crime. And youth 
crime, adult crime, many of those things go together in this 
case. So my discussion doesn’t isolate one or the other. I think 
regardless of age but particularly with youth, we need to look at 
rehabilitation. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we rehabilitate a young 
person that has started down a life of crime and we can turn him 
away from that, we have saved that person from their own 
private pain for the rest of their lives. We have saved their 
families from that pain for the rest of their lives. And we have 
saved society the pain and the cost for the rest of the lives of 
those individuals. So our rehabilitation programs are not as 
successful as they should be, not as successful as the people of 
this province want them to be. And that is why we need to stay 
here in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and not adjourn the 
House, and bring these ideas to the attention of the government. 
 
We need to, also may ensure that for those people who commit 
crimes there are consequences. Now in our day and age some 
people call consequences; some use a different word, they may 
use the word that this is just punishment. It matters not. At the 
end of the day consequences and punishment are very much the 
same sort of thing. But there need to be consequences, the kinds 
of consequences that will make people say, I don’t want to 
commit that crime or I sure don’t want to do it twice. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to stay in this House and discuss 
some of the ways that this government could carry out some of 
those programs; ways that aren’t happening to the satisfaction 
of our constituents, of any of the constituents of those of us who 
are members of this House. 
 
What’s unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that members of 
our communities . . . we are creating community patrols. My 
community is one of those, my community is one of those. The 
cost of policing has become so high that it has become a major 
part of the tax structure of many of our small towns, and there 
are not enough police hours in a day to be around town 24 hours 
a day. We know that; we can’t afford that. 
 
And so what’s had to happen in many of our communities 
across this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are there are 
community patrols set up — good community patrols because 
they are set up through our RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) with their training and a link to them. So these people 
do not become vigilantes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They do not 
drive around the town with a rifle stuck under their seats, but 
they’re out there watching and checking what’s happening. And 
when they see something questionable happening, with their 
communication systems they are provided with, they can 
quickly contact the police who come there and take care of that. 
 
But what has this NDP government brought us to, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that our people in our province have to take to the 
streets themselves to keep their streets safe. I’m proud of those 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2111 

communities and those citizens who are taking that initiative. I 
think it speaks of some of that neighbourliness and some of that 
concern that I talked about earlier on. But it shouldn’t have to 
happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker; it shouldn’t have to happen. 
 
Let me say a word or two about some of our hunting issues. 
When we look at some of those issues that are involved around 
hunting. We’ve noticed that in parts of our province our game 
numbers have been drastically depleted. 
 
Now any time game numbers are depleted there are always 
numerous factors that play into that. There are natural factors 
that play into that; there are management factors that play into 
that; and then there are human factors that play into that. 
 
There are those who say, well we should just back off and leave 
nature alone. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can’t do that any 
more in Saskatchewan. We could do that if we all moved out of 
the province, put a 10-foot fence around it and said okay, no 
more farming, no more oil, no more potash, no more power. 
We’ll just get out and turn it back to the animals. 
 
Well, within time it may find its own balance. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you and I are here. We’re all here. And we’ve changed 
the environment in this province. And so for that particular 
reason, we always will need good game management. 
 
But why are these numbers in some of the game populations 
fluctuating so drastically? It’s because some of our management 
techniques are not as good as they should be. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, just to give a personal example from this 
fall. I was out hunting Moose in northern Saskatchewan. An 
individual came by without a licence, without a red cap on, 
without a blaze jacket on, in camouflage, in rifle season, 
walking around the bush. A very dangerous practice. 
 
And yet we were there for six days, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
we never saw one game management person out there checking 
us out. Where were they? Were they told to stay away so you 
don’t find people in camouflage clothes out there hunting. 
 
We need some better management techniques in many forms. 
We need to take better care of the game that we’ve got. And 
we’re not doing that, but we need to do that. 
 
Okay, I want to say a word or two about agriculture. Mine is an 
agricultural community; very intense agriculture. Because we 
grow, probably just about every crop that’s grown in 
Saskatchewan, we grow in my constituency, and we grow it 
very well. Partly because we’re fortunate of having a climate 
situation that we very seldom have the worst crop failures that 
occur in the province. 
 
We grow those crops; we grow them well. We have very 
intense livestock operations. We have cattle feedlots. We have 
some of the biggest dairies in the province. We have a lot of 
bird and hog operations. 
 
Most of those, Mr. Deputy Speaker, most of those are suffering 
this fall. And that is why we cannot adjourn, because there are 
other issues in farming that need to be dealt with. 
 

A few short years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government in 
its financial strategies, decided to offload to farmers. Now they 
didn’t come over and make a statement from the Minister of 
Agriculture and say, farm friends I’m going to do it to you. But 
they did it. They did it by changing our educational grants from 
a 60-40 to a 40-60. 
 
But the taxpayer out there now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has to pay 
for 60 per cent of education instead of 40, pay it from his 
property tax. And for some of our RMs that gets to be very, 
very high because of the way the structures for education work. 
 
That tax burden, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has been put onto the 
backs of the farmers, and it’s not a variable one. It’s not one 
they can have options on. Every spring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
our agriculture communities can sit down and they can say, 
what crops am I going to grow, what are the forecasts, what will 
I do with my inputs? Fertilizers are high, maybe I’ll try for a 
crop like oats that doesn’t require the same number of inputs, 
and work through that kind of thinking to try and get a margin 
there they can keep themselves alive. 
 
Yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what happens with this offloading to 
the rural community through that tax structure is that every 
single year that tax burden is there. It is something that there 
isn’t a single farmer can do anything about. He can’t negotiate 
it; he can’t opt out of it; he can’t say, well I’ll pay 150 per cent 
next year, 50 per cent this year because I have a lot of 
summerfallow. Those options aren’t open to him. He has to pay 
them every year. 
 
And right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time of year there 
are farmers all across this province who are worried about how 
they’re going to go ahead and pay their taxes. Because if they 
don’t pay their taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their name goes on a 
tax enforcement list in a local newspaper. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you and I overspend on our plastic 
and we’re up to 2,000 or 5,000 or $10,000 on our credit card, 
there is no public disclosure given. But when a person in our 
rural communities can’t pay the tax on his farmland, it’s 
published, and every person can see this person can’t make his 
taxes on his farm. 
 
And it’s a thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that destroys the 
self-respect of our rural community. Not that it isn’t a necessary 
action that RMs have to take; it is. But there’s a cost there that 
they have no choice, and it’s a cost that has risen drastically, 
and it’s a cost that this government put there by their offloading 
through education. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about agriculture, there are 
other things that we have to discuss. And that’s why we can’t 
go home; that’s why we can’t adjourn this House. 
 
Big changes in agriculture and I think we’re all aware of that. 
We’ve gone from systems throughout this province where most 
people either had a lot of summerfallow, or stuck a couple of 
diskers behind a tractor, went around the field once or twice, 
and said that’s farming. It’s become very sophisticated, very 
sophisticated. 



2112 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

Look at our seeding equipment that’s out there, our spraying 
equipment; things that work on GPS (global positioning 
systems) where they know exactly where their inputs need to 
be, where their crops are coming from, what part of the field is 
rich in what nutrients, what the weed situation is in different 
parts of the field. Very sophisticated. 
 
And some might say, well if it’s that sophisticated and all this 
sophistication costs money — and yes, Mr. Speaker, it costs a 
fortune — then why not just drop the sophistication. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the margins in farming are so small that the only way 
that there is survival out there is to use all that sophistication 
and hope to eke out a small enough margin to keep the family 
on the farm. 
 
One of those things is hauling. And the increased distances that 
have to be hauled create a strain on our roads, they create a 
strain on the fuel bills, and on the new machinery that farmers 
need to haul that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to discuss with this particular 
government not just rail-line closures, but closures of elevators 
and their second cousins, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Wheat Pool 
is closing dozens and dozens and dozens of elevators across this 
land. It’s having a major effect on our farm community. We 
need to discuss that with this particular government. 
 
And it will be one of those places where, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
as we stay here and as we don’t adjourn and as we continue to 
discuss that, hopefully we can bring that to the attention of their 
elevator friends and say something needs to be done here. This 
is too quick, this is too fast. Maybe there need to be some 
options that need to be put out there. 
 
Short-lines need to be worked through. We need to look at the 
things that are hindering short-lines. We know what those are. 
We’ve brought it to the attention of this government many 
times. And they’re still not listening. 
 
Things that ensure that a farm group can get together, use that 
short-line track, put the equipment on there that they want to 
have on there, and go ahead and pay the kinds of wages and 
salaries that the farm community is used to paying. Not paying 
a union wage that comes out of Ontario for a rail-line operator 
because he’s hauling three, four, or ten railway cars behind a 
converted semi-trailer tractor. Those things need to be 
discussed. That is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we cannot adjourn 
this House. 
 
And the spinoffs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from our agricultural 
community, and the downside that’s there are great. Spinoffs, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that start probably at the door of those 
people that are selling the inputs — the fertilizer dealers, the 
chemistry people who sell the chemicals, and the equipment 
dealers. 
 
But the spinoffs from there move very quickly down main street 
of our communities. We’re going to see very shortly that the 
clothing shops in our small towns, the car dealerships in our 
towns, the tire shops in our towns, are going to be suffering. 
They’re going to be suffering because the money isn’t there. 
And what’s out there was going to have to last longer. And with 
that we’re going to end up with layoffs, smaller margins in our 

particular communities. Very difficult for our rural 
communities to carry through on this. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s going to carry on very quickly 
because when you live in a community as I do which is close to 
two cities, Prince Albert and Saskatoon, 30-minute drive from 
one, 35-minute drive from the other, many people from our area 
go to those cities to do a whole lot of shopping. Those cities are 
going to be feeling the impact as of today and they’re going to 
keep on feeling that impact. And the impact is going to get 
more and more difficult as farmers find out that the price for 
their product isn’t changing. 
 
Not only is the price of grain going down, and I think they 
expected that a while back, but as you’re well aware, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the price of hogs just dropped and has dropped 
drastically to a fraction, a small fraction of what it used to be. 
 
And so we have these people that have hog operations who 
become enthusiastic because of the government’s statements, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on increasing the size of their operations, 
now find themselves in an operation that’s actually losing 
money. 
 
Let me look at education for awhile, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an 
area in this province that I think we’ve always taken some pride 
in. We’ve taken pride in the quality of education and I think 
there has been a quality in education in this province. And I 
think that reputation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, probably has been 
with us for almost a hundred years. 
 
It probably started in a small country school where people said, 
when we go ahead and send 20, 30, 40 kids to a one-room 
classroom and expect that teacher to go ahead and instruct in 8, 
9, and 10 grades at one time, that’s a pretty awesome job. And 
those particular teachers got some respect and the people 
learned to read and learned to write and learned to do their 
arithmetic. 
 
And yet that’s all changing. And yet the funding of this 
government and the way they take care of education just 
doesn’t happen to be there. 
 
Capital funding, there is no commitment. Hepburn School — an 
interesting school — they want to just get their school building 
set aside as a heritage site because it’s a beautiful, old, dark 
brown brick building. And yet the floors in the portables that 
they have, actually people have stepped through the floors and 
they’ve had to go up underneath, put some planks underneath, 
prop it up with some cindercrete blocks to keep the people from 
falling through the floor. 
 
Those are classrooms, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those are not 
storage areas that are out there. This is where students are 
walking and they’re stepping through the floor. Those kinds of 
schools, that’s not where our kids should be going, to schools 
that are that poor. 
 
In the town of Martensville, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a growing 
community. Number of students keep going up. Their school is 
so full at this particular point that the staff room has been taken 
over by the students and it’s become a classroom. 
 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2113 

And so what they do is, the staff goes to the library and sits 
among a bunch of textbooks, between a Walt Disney video and 
a Samuel Clemens text, and eat their lunch. Why? Because their 
staff room has been taken over by students. The thing is full to 
the windowsills, literally. And when they look to this 
government for some leadership, it’s not there. 
 
They have money for strange things. The Premier bought a new 
plane. He flies around the province. And the students in 
Hepburn have a classroom where they step through the floors, 
and the staff people in Martensville have lost their staff room 
because of the abundance of students in that particular school. 
 
I need to say one or two things about health, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. In my community we have the Gabriel Springs Health 
District, and we’ve been fortunate in that we haven’t had the 
hospital closures that some areas have had. We have, in my 
community, our hospital; we still have it; we hope to keep it. 
 
But there are people in my community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that are concerned that this government is going to allow our 
community and its health region to be gobbled up by the cities, 
because the cities have been looking at that already. We need 
some assurance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that I probably get 
brought to my attention as much as anything else in my 
constituency are the waiting lists. I just had an individual phone 
me up a couple of days ago, very irate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
over the fact that his mother needs an eye operation and she’s 
going to have to wait eight months — eight months for that eye 
operation. 
 
In the meantime, she can no longer read the newspapers that she 
likes to read. She can no longer pick up the newspaper and read 
what’s happening in her hometown, the people that she’s lived 
with. She’s in a seniors’ centre at this particular time. Those 
sort of waiting lists shouldn’t happen. 
 
We’ve had people from all parties on this side of the House, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this week bring up concerns in our health 
systems, and I think those need to be taken care of. We cannot 
adjourn at this time. 
 
And so for that reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I cannot support 
this motion to adjourn. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise also in 
opposition to this motion. As you know, we have taken the 
position for some time that there ought to be a fall session of the 
legislature. 
 
Now certainly . . . Although it pains me to say it, I think that the 
members of the Saskatchewan Party have placed before this 
House many of the issues which demand the attention of 
legislators. And I will be dealing with those as well from our 
perspective in a moment. 
 
But I would like to say that it has also been our position, and the 
position of most of the provinces of Canada, that the standard 
practice of provincial legislatures ought to be to have a fall 
session at which time government Bills are introduced and then 
adjourned for debate over to the spring session. 

And I submit that that practice would greatly increase and 
enhance the quality of debate. Because what that would mean is 
that the members of the legislature, and the public at large, have 
a chance to review legislation over a period of a few months. 
Input can be gathered, stakeholders can be consulted, the 
general public has a time to react, so that when the debate 
proper starts in the spring we are all much better equipped to 
provide our comments. 
 
Instead, of course, what has happened, I’ve been somewhat 
distressed in the two sessions I have now attended that 
important pieces of government legislation tend not even to 
appear until the dying days of the session. And the early period 
of the session seems to be spent largely debating housekeeping 
measures, amendments designed to correct typographical errors, 
amendments to translate Bills into French, but any 
consequential and controversial legislation seems to appear on 
the order paper at the last minute. 
 
This has not been the practice of some other legislators. And I 
submit that democracy would be better served if as well as 
introducing the SaskPower legislation, if the government had 
presented its legislative package as other provinces do and then 
adjourned to the spring session, all members, both government 
and opposition, would have a chance to properly review it. And 
what is more important, the general public, those most affected 
by pieces of legislation, would have a chance to give their input. 
 
Beyond that though, I find myself in agreement with other 
members of this House who have said that there are some 
extremely pressing issues that ought to be addressed. We know 
that following a barely balanced budget this spring, that 
unfortunately what happened was the Saskatchewan economy 
has suffered a downturn. 
 
We know that agricultural diversification was based in very 
large measure on the Asian market which is now looking very 
weak. We know that the initial price of wheat and other grains 
has been almost cut in half. We know that in the next two years 
there will be dramatic changes to agricultural transportation and 
it is doubly tragic that those changes are apparently now going 
to take place at a time when commodity prices are at cyclical 
lows. 
 
And I think it is unfortunate — and I say this not as a partisan 
comment — I think it is unfortunate that the government in the 
only other matter it placed before this House suggested that 
Ottawa should come up with some money for our farmers. Well 
I happen to agree with that. I happen to agree with that, but I 
was disappointed that the government didn’t say anything about 
what the province can do to rescue our basic producers, our 
primary producers, our farmers. Surely it is something that both 
levels of government ought to be addressing. 
 
Well in the Public Accounts recently filed we see that 
non-renewable resource revenue fell by $126 million; oil, 
natural gas, and uranium revenue fell by 230 million. Welfare 
rolls increased by over a hundred million. 
 
(1545) 
 
We see that in order to balance the budget we needed 350 
million from Liquor and Gaming. We see that Agriculture 



2114 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

spending actually declined by 122 million; and Economic 
Development expenditures were cut by 41 million; 
Environment and Resources also cut. 
 
Well it seems to me if we are looking at the engine of our 
economy, the engine of our economy will come from two 
departments — Economic Development and Agriculture. And 
those are precisely the departments that are being downscaled. 
 
So we balanced the budget this past year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
by cutting back on precisely those areas which might have laid 
or which would have laid the foundation for sustainable growth 
and sustainable government and also for the government 
infrastructure that we all need and want. 
 
My colleagues and I have talked a lot about health especially, 
and health expenditures. And we have been extremely 
concerned about the decline in health services. And I was 
pleased that the new Minister of Health conceded when she was 
sworn in, that there has been an erosion of confidence in our 
health system. 
 
But the point that I would like to make is that I think we all 
recognize that unless the issue of economic development and 
taxation and agriculture is addressed, unless we have a healthy 
economy, we simply will not be able to finance the health, the 
education, the roads that we all agree in this House are key. 
 
So in that sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker, economic development is 
the first priority, because without economic development there 
will not be proper health care. Without economic development 
there will not be quality roads. And without economic 
development our education funding will continue to lag far 
behind that of other provinces. 
 
Well I said earlier this afternoon that we know from population 
projections that by early in the next century, one-half of our 
school-aged population will be Aboriginal. A third of our total 
population will be Aboriginal by the middle of the next century. 
These figures are not thrown out to cause alarm, and they are 
not bad things. They can be a benefit. They can be an asset. 
Certainly they are a challenge, and certainly it underlines for all 
of us in this House and in this province, the great need to bring 
our Aboriginal people into the economic mainstream of the 
province. 
 
Because if they are in the economic mainstream of our 
province, their per cent of the population is certainly not a 
problem and should not be. It should be seen as an asset and a 
benefit. But they must be able to participate fully in the good 
things of this province and we must address the issue of the low 
participation in the workforce, the high unemployment at 
present, the lower education level. Those things must be 
addressed. And I don’t see, I don’t see the government laying 
out a plan for what can be done. 
 
Now when this government took office they were admittedly 
faced with a financial crisis. They balanced the budget. And I 
think most of the people in this province give some credit for 
the fact that a situation was dealt with and addressed, just as I 
think most fair-minded Canadians are grateful to Paul Martin 
that we have the first balanced budget on the federal level for 
nearly 30 years. 

Because I submit that ultimately, that ultimately there can’t be 
any debate between left and right or Liberals or Conservatives 
or anybody else as to whether or not the government has to 
balance the books. Surely all members of this House and all 
thinking people concede that that’s the first point. So it’s been 
done, and let’s give credit where credit’s due. 
 
But where do we go from there? Where do we go from there? 
Where is the vision? Where is the plan to take Saskatchewan 
into the new century knowing some of the challenges we are 
facing with the end of the Crow rate, with the end of the 
country elevator, with the end of the branch line? 
 
Where is the plan to say that we are going to provide economic 
opportunities for our young people so that they can live and 
work and have families — and yes, I’ll even say it — and pay 
taxes in Saskatchewan, because that’s good too, because in that 
way we will be able to afford the infrastructure and the services 
that we all agree are needed. 
 
Well we also know that there is a tremendous challenge in 
terms of taxation. Now some people would say it is a cheap way 
to buy votes to promise to lower taxes, but we also know that it 
is no longer sustainable for a province or even a nation to have 
a taxation level which is seriously out of step with its 
neighbours. 
 
Part of living in the global economy is that ever since the Berlin 
Wall came down, government has no mechanism for holding 
people against their will. And we know that it is educated 
people, it is the business person, it is the farmers who are going 
to invest to create jobs, create economic development, 
especially in the area of agricultural diversification. 
 
We know that at present Saskatchewan is a net importer of 
bread. We know that we import margarine and canola oil. We 
know that we import breakfast cereals. And we know that that’s 
a situation that must change . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes 
and even the end of the Crow can become a benefit for us, as it 
becomes now uneconomic to ship our unprocessed products out 
for processing elsewhere. Let us export the processed products 
and not the unprocessed grains. 
 
That is the industrial future of this province and that’s what we 
have to address on a broad global market. We can’t be looking 
up today and oh, Asia is the future and then find out the next 
day that oh, Asia’s not looking so good now so that’s the end of 
the plan. There’s a large world out there and we can compete in 
it and we can have as strong and good a future as any other part 
of our country. 
 
Well I was reading recently that one of the definitions of a 
Canadian is that we have a national inferiority complex. Living 
next door to the Americans, the most go-getting people in the 
world, we tend to think that we are perhaps a little bit slow, a 
little bit reticent, not quite as on the bit as our neighbours. Well 
if that is true, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then we in Saskatchewan 
are an inferiority complex within an inferiority complex, in that 
we too have to capture that idea that we are just as good, just as 
smart, just as hard-working, just as innovative, as Albertans and 
Manitobans. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the recent 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2115 

statistics coming out do not support that in the way that I would 
wish. We’re the only province that lost jobs in the last year. We 
lost population in the last year — we did increase marginally 
but that was less than the increase of births over deaths — but 
we actually lost people last year. More people left than came. 
 
This is a matter that ought to distress us. And we know who is 
leaving. Who is leaving is the young, the educated, the 
well-skilled, the trained — precisely the people we need to fuel 
economic development in this province. 
 
Well we also know that our road situation is a serious issue and 
the government has told us that they are budgeting $250 million 
a year for each of the next 10 years. But we’re not spending 
that. We’re spending about a quarter what Alberta is on roads. 
And while we spend about a quarter of what Alberta does on 
roads, we complain about the federal government. 
 
So let us look at what we have to do over our road system, 
particularly given that unfortunately we know that grains are 
going to be moving onto the roads from our rail system. That’s 
not something I’m happy about but it’s something we all know 
is coming. So instead of crying about it, let’s deal with the 
situation. 
 
Our Crown corporations, our Crown corporations — what has 
to be done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we have to get back to the 
idea of our Crowns serving the people of Saskatchewan at fair 
price. 
 
There are many people now concerned about the management 
of our Crowns and wondering about the agenda and the 
purpose. Do they exist for risky foreign adventures? Do they 
exist as a cash cow for the government? Do they exist as a soft 
landing for former campaign managers? Or do they exist to 
serve the people of Saskatchewan? Are we going to use our 
Crown corporations to get involved in adventures in countries 
few of us have even heard of before and where rules can change 
on the spin of a dime, or are we going to worry about how we 
keep them viable and economic and providing a high level of 
service to the people of Saskatchewan, which is after all why 
they were established in the first place? 
 
I regret to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that last week I moved a 
motion in the Crown Corporations Committee that the Crown 
corporations should not be used for political patronage nor 
should they be subject to political interference. Quite frankly, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I’d had any embarrassment about 
moving that motion, it was that it seems to me rather 
self-evident and perhaps a motherhood motion. However, to my 
surprise, government members voted it down as . . . each and 
everyone of them voted against it. 
 
So apparently it wasn’t as self-evident, and trite, and 
motherhood a resolution as I had initially thought because it 
turned out, in fact, to be a very controversial motion and a 
motion which the government could not support. I simply 
assumed it was a motion which would very quickly and without 
debate have support of all members. But it turns out that taking 
patronage and political interference out of the Crowns was 
something that ran contrary to government policy. 
 
Well, I think that has to be reviewed. Because I think events of 

this week and what has brought us back to the legislature raised 
questions about the management of our Crowns. While I 
personally took the view that you can’t have service 
interruptions to something as basic as power as our winter is 
coming, nonetheless, I think there is still some lingering doubts 
on the part of many members of this House, including myself, 
as to whether it really had to come to back-to-work legislation 
or whether, with better efforts and better management, this 
could have been resolved short of a special session of the 
legislature and back-to-work legislation. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I agree that the challenges before 
this province are very, very large and I also agree that it is 
upsetting when we look at some of the recent statistics coming 
out of the other provinces and find that we are simply not 
keeping pace, not only with Alberta, but Manitoba as well. And 
yes, in job creation many of our friends in the Maritimes are 
doing better than us. And God bless them. I don’t begrudge it to 
them. But it seems to me, it seems to me that we are not 
second-rate compared to New Brunswick or Manitoba. It seems 
to me if they can do it, we can do it. We are as smart as them; 
we’re as blessed as them; we have as much natural resources as 
them. 
 
(1600) 
 
So if it’s possible for them to grow and develop and provide 
opportunities for our young people, I refuse to accept that that 
can’t be done for Saskatchewan and that’s not possible for us 
and that we have to, we have to accept the role of being the 
poor relations; we have to accept accommodation in the 
caboose. 
 
But I say as a relatively new member, that I have not been 
excited about the legislation that we have seen in the last two 
sessions. As I say, it has been mundane housekeeping. I see 
little in it that is innovative, little in it that suggests vision or 
drive or something new to latch on to; some reason to tell our 
young people, hey this province has a future; we have 
leadership that has a plan to take up into the new millennium, 
and we have a plan and a vision for moving this province ahead. 
 
That’s what is needed. And we have to give that to our people, 
especially to our young people, if we are going to hold and 
develop and move forward. 
 
Now I think that this session would have been a good time to 
present that plan as to how we’re going to move Aboriginal 
peoples into the economic mainstream, how we are going to 
have agricultural diversification and value added, how we are 
going to deal with the changes to grain transportation. 
 
And we could have had really super debates on these key issues 
and I think maybe, to a certain extent, we could have even gone 
past partisanship. Because I respectfully submit that all 
members in this House are in basic agreement that this is where 
we ought to be moving. 
 
Well I made some reference to myself being a junior member, 
and so I do not wish to end without offering my personal 
congratulations to the member for Saskatoon Eastview. It is 
always pleasant to welcome a new member. And I say, I guess 
in one sense, particularly so for myself, because she now takes 



2116 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

over the role of being the rookie and I’m pleased to be able to 
vacate that role, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sophomore. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Okay, the member for Kindersley says I am 
now a sophomore. I’ll look that word up after the House 
adjourns. 
 
But there are serious issues; there are serious challenges. I 
regret that they are not being discussed this fall. I also regret 
that we do not follow the practice of other legislatures in this 
country where the government lays out its legislative package in 
the fall and then adjourns so the members and the public as a 
whole can review that package and come back at the spring 
session ready, prepared to intelligently and comprehensively 
discuss the issues; instead of, as I say, wait until we’re on into 
late May, early June, and all of a sudden significant pieces of 
legislation hit the order paper. That is not, to my way of 
thinking, the correct procedure. 
 
So I rise in opposition to this motion. And I encourage the 
government, I encourage the government to place before us 
challenging and innovative pieces of legislation to deal with the 
current issues of this province. 
 
And if the government refuses to do so, I know that both 
opposition parties have and will provide more pieces of 
legislation from private members’ Bills that demand our 
attention and are serious matters of public debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
join this debate in opposition to the adjournment motion for all 
the reasons that my colleague and friend from North Battleford 
has so eloquently expressed, and as has been expressed by other 
members on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have Bills on the order Table. Many of 
them have already been mentioned and presented and brought 
to the attention of this House. But there are others that were 
overlooked. There are Bills that are dealing with the quality of 
life for the people of this great province of ours, for the entire 
province. 
 
We need to discuss the serious situation of poverty in our 
province. We need to discuss very seriously our education 
needs for all our young people — the underprivileged — not 
only for those who are able to financially pursue future 
education but also those that have a will and the perseverance to 
continue but, unfortunately because of the their situations, are 
unable to. 
 
Agriculture is certainly first and foremost. I was told in a Public 
Accounts meeting that agriculture was number one; in the 
government’s view, the number one industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Yet at no time was there any discussion with 
respect to what plans, what economic development plans, or 
where in the economic development plans of this province did 
agriculture fit. What was this province going to do for those 
people that are now facing, facing some very dire 
circumstances. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve alluded to this in a presentation 
earlier in the House, and I want to refer once again to what the 
Minister of Agriculture said. What we need in this province is 
population; we need to add to our population. And yes, people 
come to this great province and hope to make a living. But then 
when they are faced with having to pay additional costs, taxes 
that are imposed upon them, taxes that they were not aware of 
previously prior to coming to this province, but have settled, 
have purchased land, and have established, tried to become 
established, and now when they want to conform to the 
requirements, to the licensing requirements associated with 
their operations, they’re suddenly told that they need to pay a 
horrendous amount of money in taxes before they are able to 
continue. 
 
That is not the way to encourage economic development. That 
is not the way to encourage our farming communities and 
people who strive at producing the food — not only for this 
province, but for the world. 
 
The additional legislation that sits on the order table and begs to 
be debated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council amendment for duration of this Assembly. 
Those are things that need to be talked about. And my colleague 
and friend from North Battleford had alluded to and had 
mentioned and indicated the urgency and the need for fall 
sessions, not unlike other provinces, and the purposes and the 
good, sound reasons for it. It makes sense to have an 
opportunity to review legislation over a period of time and then 
debate it with knowledge, with the ability to either oppose, 
defend, amend, make it better. And we can make some of this 
legislation better if we work together — not if we’re 
consistently at odds, and not if the NDP government only wants 
it their way and no other way. 
 
The surface rights acquisition and compensation amendment, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, again something . . . a legislation that 
needs to be addressed with respect to people who are involved 
with surface rights and that are affected by economic 
development, that are affected by industries that affect the 
quality of the land. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Protection of Children Involved in 
Prostitution Act, this legislation is something that should not 
and cannot be overlooked. Why are we avoiding debate on 
those very important types of legislation? 
 
The Child Protection Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this has come 
before the House and lays on the order Table with the 
government refusing to want to bring it forward to have some 
discussions about it, and to determine whether or not that type 
of legislation is needed. But it is desperately needed, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998 as it relates to 
capital market activities restrictions; The Highway Fatality 
Marker Act. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have adequate legislation 
that demands the time for a fall sitting of the legislature in order 
that these important issues and this legislation may be debated. 
 
We have talked about highways. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the most 
distressing issue as well, most distressing issue is our health 
care system. There’s no question about it. We’ve spoken about 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2117 

it. We’ve brought to the government’s attention that there are 
bed crises in our health care system. 
 
There are waiting lists, there are phenomenal waiting lists — 
not only in Regina but in Saskatoon and throughout the 
province. We have people that call and tell us that they’re 
waiting for elective surgery. And there’re distressed because 
their quality of life cannot be improved because they have to 
wait 18 or 20 months for some minor elective surgeries for their 
legs, for their hips, in order that their quality of life may be 
improved. And then be told that well perhaps in your case we’ll 
put you on an emergency list and that means only a six- to 
eight-month wait. 
 
That’s unacceptable in this province of ours. We have people 
who are waiting for very serious medical processes who are told 
you have to wait six to eight months. 
 
I’m not a medical practitioner, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I know 
that there have been examples of where people have not had 
certain symptoms detected or certain symptoms have been 
allowed to go undetected that have ultimately led to some 
serious, serious, and sad consequences. 
 
That is not what the people of this great province of 
Saskatchewan deserve. That’s not what the people who helped 
build this province and continue to support this province, that’s 
not what they deserve. 
 
We had a million people 40 years ago, we still have a million 
people. and people continue to leave. Those that believe in the 
province that built it, remain. We should have a commitment to 
look after those people. We owe them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
This government owes them. But they refuse to do anything to 
alleviate their suffering and their pain. 
 
I support the opposition to adjourning this House until these 
very serious issues continue. We brought forward at the first 
session of this legislature, we brought forward to the 
government the need for fall sittings and we continue to 
demand that there be serious consideration for including fall 
sittings during the legislative sessions. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with 
great pleasure that I get up and also disappointment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to talk today on the adjournment motion when 
the members opposite don’t seem to want to take part in any of 
the discussions that are going on, whether it’s from agriculture, 
to health care, to education, to highways, whatever it is. It’s 
disappointing to see them not want to take part. 
 
I’d like to start, Mr. Deputy Speaker, today talking about health 
care. And I think that’s one of the many reasons we have to stay 
in this House an extra period of time this fall and address some 
of the concerns that our constituents have out there. And I’d 
like to talk to start with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about my 
constituency and the people, the health care provided to that 
area. 
 

Our East Central Health District, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you 
might well know, was served by the member for Yorkton as 
minister of Health in the past, and what we ended up coming 
out of that with was a deficit in the East Central Health District 
of over $13 million; another $3 million this year. 
 
(1615) 
 
And I think the member for Yorkton, if that’s the kind of 
attention he pays to his own constituency, I can just imagine the 
attention that he paid to the rest of the province. He has put us 
in a position under the East Central Health District’s health care 
of being in debt for many, many years and the only way that 
they’re going to control that deficit and get it under control — 
the $3 million a year that we’re at now — is to cut services. 
They have no choice. 
 
The health board has no other options; they don’t seem to be 
getting any extra funding from the government to address this 
problem, so more cuts have to be on the way. They have no 
alternative. 
 
And where are these cuts going to be? Are we going to lose 
specialists? We have some really good ones out in the Yorkton 
area. Are we going to lose more nurses, some of the ones that 
they say that have just been hired? Are we going to close more 
beds, close more wings in the Yorkton hospital and other 
hospitals out in our area? 
 
And quite often when we’re up in question period and we’re 
asking questions of the Health minister and other ministers, 
they blame either the health boards for making these decisions, 
or they blame the school boards or whatever board it may be 
when it’s not convenient to accept the responsibility for things 
that they have decided but underfunded or made rules that these 
people can’t live with within the budgets that they’ve had. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I was elected . . . when the NDP was 
elected, we had a hospital in Langenburg. In fact they were 
raising money to build a new hospital in Langenburg. And the 
government seemed, when they were running for power, to 
condone this, in fact almost promote it. One of the first moves 
they made along with the other 51 hospitals they closed, was to 
close the Langenburg hospital. They’ve taken and had people 
laid off in our Esterhazy hospital. They’ve had cutbacks there. 
Service to my whole area has been decreased under this NDP 
government’s power since 1991. 
 
Now a number of these small hospitals, I believe, probably had 
to be closed; we couldn’t afford hospitals all over this province. 
But when it comes to the hospital like the Plains Health Centre 
that probably, and I’ve heard this on many occasions, could 
have been and should have been one of the best hospitals in this 
province. When people that have been there and also have been 
in other hospitals in the two big cities have compared them, and 
there’s fine hospitals in both Saskatoon and Regina — the 
General and the Pasqua here, and in Saskatoon — they still 
seem to come out saying, when you add everything into it, the 
care they received there, the treatment they’ve got from nurses, 
the care they’ve got from nurses, the care they’ve got from 
nurses, the care they’ve got from doctors, the access to the 
Plains Health Centre — it is without a doubt a state of the art 
facility. 



2118 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

And what does this government see fit to do by catering to an 
inner-city population to keep the General open? They see fit to 
close the Plains Health Centre which not only served the city of 
Regina but served all of southern Saskatchewan from west to 
east, the east-central side of the province, where we could get 
from any corner, any spot, in that area quicker than we could 
get to any main hospital in this province. 
 
Now what we have left is we have to come in, whether it’s in 
high-traffic time, rush hour . . . number one, we have to find the 
General Hospital; number two, we have to find parking at the 
General; and number three, we have to hope when we come out 
of the General that our car is still in one piece. 
 
So the intelligence to this decision just keeps going down, 
down, and down. And it really it resembles the political 
patronage that this government has become so famous for. To 
cater to a few, they’ve made the many pay the price. 
 
It was one of the worst decisions that this government has made 
since it’s came to power, and it affects many of their own sitting 
MLAs. And I would believe if the election is called next spring 
or next fall or in the year 2000, whenever, that it is going to hurt 
these MLAs on the NDP side. 
 
I think it’ll hurt them drastically. It will join with all the other 
things that this government has done to hurt rural Saskatchewan 
and I would hope the people in those constituencies make them 
pay the price at the polls. 
 
Another thing that they’ve done I believe that was one of the 
poorer decisions this government has made and a reason that we 
can’t adjourn at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the closing 
of Whitespruce just outside of Yorkton. 
 
This was a facility for young people that was next to none. It 
was just an excellent spot to treat young people because, should 
they get the urge to leave and felt they didn’t want to be there 
no more, it was not easy to leave Whitespruce. 
 
What did we do? We moved it to the Premier’s constituency. 
Another example of a patronage spot catering to the people in 
his constituency but forgetting the usefulness and the good job 
Whitespruce was doing in our area and for the whole province. 
 
I’d like to move, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to education, which is 
another big thing hitting our . . . every area of this province, but 
especially rural Saskatchewan. In my constituency, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’ve lost schools in MacNutt, Esterhazy. I have small 
towns like Spy Hill, Tantallon, Calder, Bredenbury, Saltcoats 
fighting for the survival of their school. And we can blame it on 
the numbers dropping, but I think that numbers dropping we 
can also blame on policies that this government has made and is 
making with no concern for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
They say the quality of education — and I think I’ve heard this 
from the Minister of Education from time to time — the quality 
of education provided in these small schools cannot compete 
with the quality in larger centres. Well I disagree. 
 
We have our grade 10, 11, and 12’s go from our small 
communities of Bredenbury and Saltcoats into the Regional 
School in Yorkton. And a number of times we’ve had some of 

the top students graduate out of grade 12 at the Regional and 
they’ve got their lower grade schooling in these small schools. 
So I disagree that they’re not getting the same calibre of 
schools. 
 
I’d like to move on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think one of the 
main reasons that we have to stay in here and debate is 
agriculture. And I find it amazing — it was totally amazing that 
on Tuesday morning, hours after the NDP House Leader 
wanted to adjourn this House, we put out a press release asking 
for an emergency debate on the problems in agriculture, the 
crisis in agriculture. Within an hour of the Minister of 
Agriculture seeing the release, he came out with one of his own. 
In fact he came out so quick it pretty near resembled ours to a 
T, except he forgot to mention that the provincial government 
was also responsible for part of our problems. 
 
I found that amazing that it took something like that for the 
minister to realize there was a problem, but also realize that he 
was going to be under a lot of pressure if we got our debate 
without him being part of it, so he called for the debate. 
 
Well it really doesn’t matter. Because we at least, all parties — 
the third party, the official opposition, and the government 
members — got to speak on this important issue. 
 
Some of the things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the reasons why 
we cannot adjourn this House at this time or today or maybe 
tomorrow or maybe next week, because of the urgency of the 
problem, is we go into agriculture, and some of our problems 
are the high costs that our farmers have to put up with now. 
 
Whether it’s the dollar we pay off a bushel of grain for freight 
and handling; whether it’s our high fertilizer costs that 
skyrocketed a couple of years ago when grain prices took a bit 
of a rise and then turned around and dropped; whether it’s our 
chemical prices that have also increased; whether it’s high 
taxes, a good part and parcel caused by this government; 
whether it’s municipal taxes because of the downloading of this 
government, or the downloading of the federal government for 
that part because they certainly are every bit as responsible if 
not more, than the provincial government. 
 
What comes into play is our fuel costs, which a good part of are 
taxes; our licensing of vehicles; machinery costs. And our 
Canadian dollar is low right now and it’s another thing that’s 
helping break our farmers because we cannot compete with the 
Canadian dollar as low as it is if you get in a position where you 
have to buy new machinery. 
 
Crown leases. Here’s an example of where the provincial 
government could really address some of the issues provincially 
to help some of the farmers out that have Crown leases. After 
they raised the costs of Crown leases 25 per cent this spring, 
being and using the excuse that, well we’re great guys, we 
should have raised it 33; we only raised it 25. 
 
And the Minister of Agriculture said this went up because of a 
formula. Well I would say it’s either time to change the formula 
or, now that prices have gone down, use that same formula to 
address the problems that increased it in the first place. One of 
the things that you could help our farmers with. 
 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2119 

I find it amazing too that in the past decades in this province 
we’ve been through premiers that — and I could name some of 
them, Ross Thatcher comes to mind; Grant Devine is belittled 
on that side every day we turn around — but who are the 
farmers in this province; the premiers in this province that 
hollered for farmers in the past and made a mark. 
 
They might have made mistakes in many issues and many 
decisions they made, but the one thing I respected every one of 
those people for is they remembered where rural Saskatchewan 
was, they remembered how important agriculture was, they 
remembered the part that agriculture plays in the economy in 
this province — that it creates probably 45 out of every 100 
jobs. It’s the backbone of the economy in this province. 
 
And those premiers representing the government of the day 
sometimes were very unpopular in Ottawa, but hollered loud 
and hard for the people of this province. And it didn’t just help 
the farmers, it helped business, it helped people living in the 
city that worked off agriculture and may not even have realized 
it. 
 
What do we have at the present time with this NDP government 
and their Premier, our Premier? We don’t hear a word 
 
The other day was the first time we heard the Agriculture 
minister address the problem. But other than the SaskPower 
issue that we dealt with on Monday, we have not seen the 
Premier talking at all about the crisis we have in agriculture. 
 
Now we know the Premier is very good friends with the Prime 
Minister, Jean. Why doesn’t he call in some of his dues he has 
with the Prime Minister, tell him we need help in agriculture. I 
noticed last fall when we weren’t going to have a session but 
the unity issue came up, a great important issue in the Premier’s 
mind, we had a week sitting in this legislature. 
 
But when it comes to important issues to the people of 
Saskatchewan, far more important than the unity issue, we 
aren’t even going to have a session until he’s forced into it to 
legislate back the SaskPower workers. We should have a 
session every fall to deal with current issues, as the members on 
. . . as my colleagues have said, as the members of the third 
party have just said. 
 
Why don’t we have a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
member for Lloydminster says sure, why would we want to 
have a fall sitting. I mean why would the government want to 
answer for some of things they’re doing. Why don’t we just 
come in for a couple of weeks in March, congratulate the NDP 
members on what a great job they’re doing, and go home. I 
mean why are we being paid? 
 
And that’s probably another good question, is why are the 
members on the government side so quiet now when we’re 
discussing some of these important issues. Either they don’t 
care about their constituents or they’ve been told by that same 
Premier, you will sit in your seat, you will not take part in this 
debate, you will not represent your constituents, you cannot 
vote by what your constituents want, you are to sit there and 
listen. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we are doing here is hoping 

you are listening. Go back to your constituents and say, you 
know at least the Saskatchewan Party members are sticking up 
for you, my constituents — because that’s why we’re here. 
 
As the Saskatchewan Party, we’re not only sticking up for our 
eight constituencies, we’re sticking up for farmers in 58 
constituencies in this province, or at least the constituencies that 
have a rural area and farming community. Someone has to do it, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have saw wheat prices drop in this 
province. We’re down to just over $2. We saw barley prices on 
the Wheat Board now drop down to oh, 70 cents or under. Oat 
prices are low. Pea prices have dropped. 
 
Hogs right now, which this government by the way has chosen 
to really promote in this province, double the output in the last 
year, year and a half, without realizing that the hog market goes 
up and down. We saw hog producers out there right now losing 
20 to $40. And losing their shirt, I might add. Many of the 
smaller producers probably can’t hang on to spring without 
help. 
 
Cattle producers are not getting rich. The Indian 
Head-Milestone MLA says they aren’t doing that bad. Well I 
don’t know, I think he’d better go home and check with his 
farmers. I don’t think they’re doing any better than mine or 
anywhere else in this province. 
 
Elk farmers, they’re even seeing the pinch. I believe velvet 
prices have dropped about 50 per cent. 
 
So the world may come to an end in Saskatchewan if we don’t 
help agriculture pick up. It certainly might. I would suggest to 
the member for Indian Head-Milestone that the world is going 
to come to the end for him next spring when the election’s 
called because it’ll probably be the last time you’ll be sitting in 
this legislature as an elected member. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe another of the reasons . . . some 
more of the reasons that we cannot let this House adjourn at this 
time are to do with the Crowns. And this week we started off 
like that, legislating SaskPower workers back to work. And the 
legislation included the 2, 2, and 2, and we supported that 
legislation. I think we felt that it was very important that the 
SaskPower people go back to work and prepare power supplies 
for this winter. We cannot afford to have power outages. 
 
I do find it amazing though that some of the same members 
over on that side that were heckling us here a little while ago for 
things like that, were also the same ones hollering for the union 
people to get 7, 7, 7 when they were in opposition — those 
same people. Funny how the pendulum turns, isn’t it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I will never be in opposition. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — The member for Lloydminster has just 
made a very true statement. She will never be in opposition. 
Because after the next election when your party is in opposition 
— you’re one of the reasons they are in opposition — you 
won’t be here. You will not be re-elected. 



2120 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the reasons we cannot adjourn at 
this time, and should be discussed, is the high cost of our 
Crown utility rates going up, going up, going up. We never see 
the costs going down — the prices paid for our telephone for an 
example. And telephone today in question period was 
interesting, because the Deputy Premier accused us of doing 
what . . . to do nothing but have competition come in. Well I 
don’t know, I think competition is healthy, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
And I think long-distance rates are a good example of that. 
 
Long-distance rates before there were competition kept going 
up and up. Since competition has come in, our long-distance 
rates have dropped dramatically. And the funny part is SaskTel 
realized that when the prices dropped, the people of 
Saskatchewan used long distance more so that the income from 
long distance didn’t drop. Isn’t it funny how competition, that 
dirty word in the NDP’s book, is actually a good thing for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Maybe the other Crowns should have 
a sample of that. 
 
SaskPower I believe is a prime example of what we . . . why we 
need competition. The rates in SaskPower have done nothing 
since ’91 but go up. And we know why. Because of the 
mismanagement we’ve had in SaskPower, and then rewarding 
that mismanagement with big handouts, severance packages for 
people like Jack Messer, Christensen, Kram — who by the way 
probably took the fall for others that should have took it, 
ministers included. SaskEnergy rates — we just had another 
one with our beloved and efficient 45-day review. And as many 
as in some meetings one person showed up. 
 
I mean it’s a foregone conclusion. The people of this province 
know how valuable and how much input they have. They have 
absolutely no input so they don’t bother coming out anymore. 
 
SaskEnergy rates have gone up and up and up, and last summer 
when SaskEnergy, our gas prices went down, we were promised 
that they would go down. And guess what happened? They did 
not go down and within months we’re being told we’re having 
another increase. 
 
Licence plates, licences, everything keeps climbing under this 
government and yet competition is a dirty word. And yet the 
one instant we saw of competition with SaskTel and long 
distance has probably dropped our costs in half. 
 
Part of that problem, I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and another 
reason why we shouldn’t be adjourning and we should be 
discussing these things, is the patronage appointments that this 
government has become so famous for. And I believe it was the 
member for North Battleford, just moments ago, talked about 
the Crown corporations meetings where he moved a motion to 
do away with patronage appointments. And our party supported 
and agrees 100 per cent with that. 
 
But as they have done all through the Channel Lake debate, 
they voted anything down that came close to resembling putting 
the people on the spot that should have been put on the spot and 
taken to task for responsibilities that they have had and have not 
accepted. They used that majority to deflect the heat that should 
have gone on them and didn’t end up where it should have been 
and it ended up being really a farce. And we knew that would 
happen when we called for an independent, judicial inquiry. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe my colleague from Rosthern 
touched on this before, but it is an important issue why we can’t 
adjourn and it’s gun registration. And I know you mentioned 
before, maybe it wasn’t relevant to the debate we’re in right 
now but I believe it is. 
 
Because a week ago, two weeks ago, the Premier — who has let 
on that he is supporting Alberta and B.C. (British Columbia) 
and Manitoba and the other provinces — came out and said, 
well the ruling three to two said no, they wouldn’t go for the 
stopping of the gun registration, maybe gun owners should out 
and register. 
 
Well I think the backlash to that and the holler from gun 
owners, a few days later the Minister of Justice said, come out, 
well just a minute, maybe we shouldn’t register right away. And 
I think this government is sending mixed messages. Either 
you’re behind the gun owners in this province and will support 
them all the way, or you’re not. 
 
And I think you’re confusing these people. They thought to start 
with you were supporting them and now they aren’t really sure. 
And the gun registration being one of the most idiotic pieces of 
legislation that we’ve seen in this country. 
 
Some of the things I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know if 
we go back over the history of this NDP governments when 
they came to power in 1991 — and I’m only touching on a few 
I know — but we know there was 52 hospitals closed. Now one 
of the best hospitals in this province, which makes 53 or more, 
we’re losing that. 
 
A good program for an example we had in rural Saskatchewan 
was the RUD (rural underground distribution) program. Your 
government saw fit to do away with that. And I would imagine 
because it actually catered to rural Saskatchewan, even though 
it created jobs, it was a very worthwhile program, but those jobs 
weren’t I guess in your constituencies here in the city so we did 
away with it. 
 
We saw things like the NST loss of $16 million in SaskTel; 
we’ve saw the Guyana losses of $2 million — or maybe more. I 
don’t think we’ve ever seen the end or have got anywheres near 
to what we lost there; there may be more. Channel Lake — 5.2 
million, and maybe more gas trading losses that aren’t being 
counted in that. 
 
What we are doing with all the things that your government is 
doing is chasing, once again, our young people out of 
Saskatchewan. And you know really our population is not 
around a million people. It’s actually 2 million. And how I 
come up with that number is that we have a million living at 
home and we have a million living in all the other provinces of 
this country. 
 
A good example of that is our Saskatchewan Roughriders. One 
of the reasons they’re so popular all over this country is because 
there’s Saskatchewanites are in every city, everywhere, 
wherever they go. 
 
Can you imagine if we could have kept . . . did not have a CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) or an NDP 
government in this province ever, and we had all . . . And 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2121 

they’d probably be here because they’d have jobs, the economy 
would be flowing, everything would be for sure twice as good 
as it is now, had we not had a CCF and an NDP government 
most of the time. 
 
Look at Alberta. The reason and the one reason that Alberta is 
doing so well is because they have never had a socialist 
government — plain and simple. We could even expand Taylor 
field if we had 2 million people in Saskatchewan because all the 
fans the Roughriders have would be right here at home. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another of the reasons that we cannot let 
this House shut down and we certainly could not on Monday 
when the House Leader wanted to shut it down before we had 
our agriculture debate is that many people think that when 
agriculture is in trouble it’s just the farmers. Well that’s a myth 
and I’m sure you know that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I know 
many members on that side quietly realize that agriculture, 
when it’s doing good, affects business but when it’s doing 
poorly also affects business. It affects jobs, it affects our young 
people, it affects our whole economy. 
 
I also find it amazing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when my 
colleague from Cannington come out with this contest he has 
for highways and even we didn’t realize it would catch on so 
quick — which by the way should be a total embarrassment for 
this government and the Minister of Highways — the member 
for Weyburn was very vocal trying to deflect some of the heat 
that was going over there about it. 
 
She should be the most embarrassed one in this province 
because two years ago that government came out and said, we’ll 
put all this money into highways and in the first two years I 
believe you’re 70 to 80 million short of your own predictions 
and that 70 to $80 million would have went a long way. 
 
So it’s going to be interesting to see how our contest goes and 
the funny part is some of the calls and many of the calls are 
coming from your constituents. So I think you know that the 
problem is all over this province. 
 
One thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I’m talking of highways 
and I find amazing, is that in my constituency, especially in the 
towns of Langenburg and the town of Kamsack, the highway 
runs right through those towns. And yet when they went to 
repave the Highway 16 this summer from the Manitoba border 
to Langenburg — and it certainly needs it through Langenburg 
— we’re told that no, the funding quit on the edge of town and 
the town of Langenburg would pick the tab up all by 
themselves. 
 
The town of Kamsack, exactly the same thing. Both towns are 
in the same position. The town of Langenburg, probably 95 to 
96 per cent of traffic is through-traffic, never even stops in 
Langenburg — they don’t get one cent of benefit from the 
people going through — and yet the taxpayers of Langenburg 
are being asked to fund the two kilometres of paving renewal 
through that town when it should be the responsibility of every 
taxpayer in this province. Same thing in Kamsack. 
 
It’s another one of the unfair policies that this government has 
and when we asked the Minister of Highways to address it she 
said no, that’s policy, that’s the way it’s going to be. Well she 

didn’t impress the people in those two communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do find it amazing, and I think I touched 
on this before, but as I look across I see MLAs that represent a 
good number of rural ridings. I look at the member for 
Lloydminster who made comments here before. That member 
represents many farmers and I’d like to see how that member 
goes home after this week when they’ve looked to see if she has 
been voicing their concerns in here and has been totally quiet. I 
would like to see how she explains to them that their 
representation is sticking up for them. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Northeast, who happens to be a 
farmer, has not said one word about the agriculture problems 
out there, and the need for our federal government and our 
provincial government to act on the crisis we have out there. 
The member for Swift Current has been very vocal from the 
back but when it comes to standing in his place and saying I 
agree, I support putting pressure on the federal government and 
on our own Agriculture minister, he could put a lot of pressure 
on our Agriculture minister because he sits on that side. But 
what do we hear from him? We hear about the same amount 
from that member from Swift Current as when they closed the 
care home in Swift Current — nothing. Not one word. He’s 
always quickly to blow his horn about the things he feels are 
good in that area. He forgets about the many things that have 
happened under this government. 
 
I also see the Minister of Highways, the member for Weyburn, 
who also represents many farmers, not saying a word really, 
sticking up for her farmers. The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone, the Environment minister has made some 
comments but not when his mic was on. I believe the federal 
Minister of Agriculture is going to have a tremendously hard 
time hearing how lobbying like that when you’re mic’s not on, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Our Ag minister, for that matter. After we had the debate the 
other day, we’ve not heard one word out of him saying that he’s 
going to go down there and lobby Ottawa, ask Mr. Vanclief . . . 
Really what is he going to ask? We’re not sure. For sure he’s 
going to tell him it’s all his problem and the province of 
Saskatchewan is not going to stick behind their farmers. They 
haven’t since they were elected in ’91 and they certainly aren’t 
going to stick up for them now from what we’ve seen. 
 
I would also like to mention the Minister of Municipal 
Government. I would hate to forget her because here’s a lady 
that was a reeve of an RM who knows the issues. I know she 
does. She represents many farmers out there and has been 
amazingly quiet on the issue this week when we’re asking all 
parties to support, to lobby the federal government, to find a 
way to help out the farmers out of the mess we’re in and the 
low costs. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think a number of the reasons I’ve 
said here today are reasons why we cannot adjourn. I believe, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the province of Saskatchewan has a 
great amount of potential. The problem being, as I said before, 
that we far too often have a socialist government here that 
seems to hold that potential down with things like high taxes, a 
lot of regulations, but lack of funding for things they should be 
funding and they’re really holding our economy back with 



2122 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

many of their policies. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will take my place at this time but I 
would urge the members opposite to take part in this debate and 
voice their opinion and also show their support for a number of 
the things that are hurting our farmers in this province. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter into the debate to discuss this motion and the amendment 
that’s before us regarding the shutting down of the legislature. 
 
It reminds me or makes me go back to while this administration 
was in opposition the kinds of things that they used to say and 
do and how they want everybody to forget all about that. When 
they were in opposition they used to call regularly for fall 
sessions, demanding that they have the legislature recalled so 
that they could voice the wishes of their constituents and bring 
the issues before the people of the province of Saskatchewan — 
bring it before the legislature to have open debate. 
 
(1645) 
 
On a regular basis you could count on the Premier, while in 
opposition, to get up and say exactly that. He had to have a fall 
session, bring forward all of the concerns, and he was as 
indignant as he could possibly screw up at the moment. He was 
always wanting to have those kinds of things. That’s something 
that the NDP has carefully forgotten since their days of being in 
government . . . or in opposition, now in government. 
 
Almost on a daily basis, almost on a daily basis in this 
Legislative Assembly we hear about how things were so bad 
before and how they’re so good today, and how the debt has 
been run up over the years and how they absolutely take no 
responsibility for anything of that nature at all. 
 
Do you remember, any of you that were here at the time, and 
the member from Regina — the former House Leader — would 
remember, and other members of this Legislative Assembly 
would remember, how when the debt was being run up in this 
province and how there was difficulties in agriculture and how 
there was difficulties in many areas because of a stagnant 
economy through that period of time. 
 
What were each and every one of them doing? What were you 
saying? What was your party saying at the time? Even the 
former premier in this province, Allan Blakeney, said yes, there 
are times when we would look at running a deficit budget. 
There are times of need. There are agricultural crisis times in 
this province when we would run a deficit. That was after he 
was bounced out. That was after he was bounced out in 1982. 
 
What did you say all through that time frame, from ’82 through 
to ’91? What was your rallying cry every day in this legislature? 
What was it that you said on a consistent basis more than 
anything else? 
 
You, each and every one of you in the NDP party, every time 
there was a budget presented, every time there was a debate 
about anything in this legislature, you guys, every single one of 

you, men and women, got up and said, it’s not enough; we want 
more. We want more spending for agriculture. We want more 
spending for education. We want more spending for health care. 
You absolutely absolve yourself of any responsibility for that. 
 
And the member from Regina . . . or from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow would remember those debates. I remember them 
very well. I wasn’t in the Legislative Assembly at the time, but 
I certainly remember those debates that went on, each and every 
one of them standing up in their place. The Premier today used 
to do it. The Deputy Premier used to do it. All of the members 
from Regina that you had at the time, and the members from 
Moose Jaw used to do it. 
 
Remember back in 1986, the election campaign? And the 
member from Lloydminster would remember that election 
campaign I’m sure. What was the central plank of the NDP’s 
platform at that time? What was the central part of it? I think it 
was called 7-7-7. It was some hare-brained scheme. It was some 
hare-brained scheme if I have ever heard one. Seven years at 7 
per cent on $70,000. That’s what that member used to say 
opposite. 
 
Spend more, spend more, spend more. That’s what the House 
Leader there is waving her finger at me now saying, you want 
to talk about those days. Yes, let's talk about those days — 
7-7-7; 7-7-7. Spend more. Spend more. Spend more. 
 
You remember that, Ms. House Leader. You remember those 
days when as the House leader you were talking about those 
kinds of things. Your party was talking about it. A billion and a 
quarter dollars of a promise in one fell swoop. A billion and a 
quarter dollars worth of promises. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to bring his 
remarks back to be relevant to the amendment that we’re talking 
to. He has not touched on anything that’s been in the 
amendment for the last while, so I would ask him to come back 
to the amendment. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 
important that we remind the members, while in opposition, 
what they were saying about House business and what they 
were saying about election campaigns, and what they were 
saying about fall sessions and what they were saying about 
adjourning fall sessions, even if there was such a thing at that 
time. 
 
Each and every one of them stood up in their place and said we 
have to have fall sessions. We have to have more spending in 
this government. We want to have more for agriculture, more 
for education, more for health care. That’s what they were 
saying at the time the debts were being run up in this province. 
 
That’s what you were saying, Ms. House Leader — that’s what 
you were saying. Yes, there was debt run up in this province, 
and there was considerable debt and there was lots of mistakes, 
no question about that, being made. But each and every one of 
you opposite can take some responsibility for some of those 
mistakes as well, because at the time that the debt was being run 
up all of you were saying, let’s even spend more. 
 
And even the premier of the day, the former premier of the day, 



October 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2123 

Allan Blakeney, was saying there are times when it is 
acceptable, in his view, to run deficits. 
 
Well now we sit in the legislature here today — now we sit in 
the legislature here today, and the only thing the government 
wants to do, the only thing that’s on their agenda according to 
them, the only thing that’s on the agenda, the people of 
Saskatchewan, is shutting the place down so you can go back 
home and do whatever it is you do when you aren’t in this 
legislature. Spend time doing anything but the business of the 
House; spend time doing anything but the business of the 
people of this province. 
 
Well I say to you, and I think the people of Saskatchewan 
support us in our view, that that isn’t good enough. We should 
be talking about agriculture; we should be talking about health 
care; we should be talking about education; we should be 
talking about our Crown corporations here in Saskatchewan. 
Those are some of the issues that are before the people. And 
there are many, many more. 
 
Highways is an important issue. This evening in my 
constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a public meeting 
going on with regard to highways. By rights I should be at that 
public meeting discussing the issues that the people want to 
discuss about their highways, the condition of their highways. I 
look at Highway 317, look at Highway 31, 307, 44, No. 21, all 
kinds of highways in my constituency that are in absolutely 
dangerous condition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I remember hearing the member from Lloydminster 
comment here a little while ago about how she’s getting some 
things done in her constituency, about how there’s been some 
schools renovated, and about how there’s been some highway 
construction go on in her constituency. 
 
Well congratulations, Madam Minister, Madam . . . and I 
overstepped my bounds a little bit there. Thankfully, not 
Madam Minister . . . Madam Member. Madam Member, 
thankfully for the people of this province, at least in your 
constituency, there’s a few things going on, because in mine 
there isn’t. 
 
And you look at, you look at all of the constituencies that 
opposition members look at. What’s the name of that program 
that you guys have going over there where you go out and dole 
out little cheques? What’s it . . . I can’t recall the name of that 
program. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The equity fund. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Equity fund, something of that nature, where 
each and every one of you go around and you stroke out . . . the 
Minister of Finance’s name is on the bottom, a nice cheque to 
some organization — many of them, many of them, we would 
readily admit, deserving organizations, deserving organizations. 
 
But you make sure, you carefully make sure there isn’t an 
opposition member within 200 miles of the announcement. You 
don’t even give notice of the fact that it’s going to happen in 
any of the constituencies. 
 
In fact you parachute into other people’s constituencies and 

make these grandiose announcements, and then take all of the 
credit for doing it. In about 200, in about 200 of these 
presentations to this point there hasn’t been a single, solitary 
opposition member take part that I’m aware of — not a single 
solitary member has taken part. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t be so negative. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And the House Leader says, don’t be so negative. 
I can just imagine in opposition what you would be saying to 
that, Madam Minister. What would you be saying if that was 
happening in this province and you were sitting on this side of 
the House? You would be rising up in your classic style of 
indignation and saying that this is wrong, the opposition 
shouldn’t be . . . or the government of the day shouldn’t be 
doing these kinds of things — pork-barrelling with the 
taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Is that something kind of consistent with what you would be 
saying, Madam Minister? I think that’s exactly what you would 
be saying because that’s exactly what the members of the NDP 
did when they sat on the opposition benches. Everything was 
righteous indignation, constantly berating people for doing 
exactly what you are doing today. That was the measure of the 
NDP. 
 
One thing you can always count on from the NDP in this 
province is that they feel that they have a God-given right to 
govern, and how dare you for even suggesting different. 
 
Well the people of this province, I think, Mr. Speaker, feel that 
there is a lot of things that need to be talked about right now. 
They don’t want to see this House adjourn so that the NDP can 
go back to doing those same kind of pork-barrel politics that the 
member from Lloydminster talks about. 
 
I don’t think they want to see that in this Assembly any longer. 
I think they want to see things debated in this Assembly. I think 
they want to see the House Leader take her place and allow 
debate to continue. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on her 
feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, to comply 
with the member’s request to allow debate to continue, we ask 
leave to stand the clock. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Oh well, look at what we have here now. Look at 
what we have here now. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Isn’t this quite an occasion here in this House. In 
the dying seconds before the closure — the normal closure — 
of the Assembly, the House Leader gets up and makes some 
hare-brained scheme about extending the hours of the 
Assembly. 
 
You want to talk about . . . you want to talk about the issues? 



2124 Saskatchewan Hansard October 22, 1998 

We’ll talk about the issues tomorrow and the next day and the 
next day and into the next weeks. You want to talk about the 
issues that the people of this province? Remove your motion, 
Madam Minister. 
 
I would ask that member opposite, remove your motion. That 
would stop closure of this Assembly and then we can talk about 
them. We’ll give you leave. If you want leave . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The debate is not 
following the amendment at all and the debate is not going 
through the Chair, or through the Speaker’s Chair, which debate 
is supposed to flow through. 
 
So I would recognize the hon. member from Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — If this government wants to talk about the issues 
of the day, we’ll give you that occasion. Stand up and support 
our amendment to stop the adjournment motion, to stop that. 
Stand up, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam House Leader, if you’re so smart, if you’re so 
intelligent and you want these issues debated in this Assembly, 
if you’re so sure of your ability to debate those issues and if 
you’re so convinced that you have all of the answers for the 
people of this province. Now’s your chance. Stand up and say 
you will support this amendment. I’ll take my place right now. 
It gives you 20 seconds before 5 o’clock to stand up, to stand up 
in this Assembly and say that you’ll support our amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It now being past 
the hour of closure, I move that this House adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being the hour of 
adjournment, this House stands adjourned until 10 a.m. 
tomorrow morning. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2093 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2093 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2093 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2093 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................2093 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2093 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2093 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2093 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2094 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Reprimand of Liberal MLA 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2094 
 Canoe Lake to Pinehouse Road Improvements 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................2094 
 Highway Contest 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2094 
 Breast Cancer Month 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2094 
 Saskatchewan’s Aboriginal People 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2095 
 Home Hardware Opening in Swift Current 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2095 
 Successes in Cypress Hills Constituency 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2095 
 Nutraceutical Firms Expanding in Saskatoon 
  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................2096 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Highway Contest 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2096 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................2096 
 Federal Assistance for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2097 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................2097 
 Government Advertising 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................2097 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................2098 
 Care for Dialysis Patient 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2098 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2099 
 Surgery Waiting Lists 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2099 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2099 
 Surgical Waiting Lists 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2100 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2100 
 Friends for Life Program 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2100 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................2100 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 755  The Crown Corporation Managers Salary Act  
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................2101 
STATEMENT BY THE DEPUTY SPEAKER 
 Parliamentary Language 
  Deputy Speaker .......................................................................................................................................................................2101 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2101 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 House Adjournment 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2101 



 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2102 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2105 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2113 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2116 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2117 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................2122 
 
 


