





























































Hansard: April 02, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 407 
 April 2, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition signed by residents of the community of Nipawin. 
The prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from Prince Albert, Melfort, Birch Hills, 
across the North, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, to present petitions as well. Reading 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the community of 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 
Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 
and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 
everyone regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The community the signatures came from, Mr. Speaker, are the 

town of Saltcoats. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
as well. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Weldon and Kinistino. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased as well on behalf of 
Saskatchewan residents to present a petition this afternoon 
dealing with the Channel Lake/Jack Messer situation. These 
petitioners come from the Kinistino, Prince Albert areas of the 
province and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the people from 
the area surrounding Assiniboia, Mankota, and Glentworth. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of people concerned about the Plains Health 
Centre closure. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Waldeck, Gull Lake, Wymark, and Swift 
Current. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a petition 
on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The signatures are from Pilot Butte, White City, and 
surrounding areas. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll read the prayer 
for relief: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre by 
enacting legislation to prevent its closure, and by providing 
adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that 
essential services provided at the Plains may be continued. 

 
Your petitioners include some of the upset and concerned 
citizens of McLean, Regina, and Qu’Appelle. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today and bring forth petitions from people 
throughout Saskatchewan who are becoming increasingly 
frustrated and angry with this government’s decision to 
unilaterally close the Plains hospital . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the hon. member 
will be well aware of course, that in presenting petitions one is 
not to enter into debate. A brief description of the petition but 
without the debate is most appropriate, and I will invite him to 
present the prayer of the petition immediately. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Mankota. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the spirit of 
continuing pressure, I’ll read the following prayer for relief 
from the people of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 

Today these folks are all from the community of Fox Valley, 
and I’m happy to present it on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order a petition regarding the Plains 
Health Centre presented on April 1 has been reviewed; pursuant 

to rule 12(7) it is found to be irregular and therefore cannot be 
read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed 
and are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly 
regarding the funding of the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; acting to save the Plains Health Centre; and 
cancelling severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
calling an independent inquiry into Channel Lake. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 24 ask the government the following question: 
 

Regarding home schooling in Saskatchewan: (1) please 
indicate what types of support are available for families 
engaged in home schooling; (2) how is this support 
determined; and (3) how is this support accessed? 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following question: 
 

Of the Minister of Energy and Mines: (1) During the last 
reporting period how many crude oil, salt water and other 
related spills of pollutants occurred in the province; (2) 
how many flow line breaks and well head blow-outs and 
breaks occurred; (3) how many effluent overflows and 
spills occurred in the natural gas field, including brine 
collectors? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I would like to introduce to you and through you a very 
distinguished gentleman sitting in your gallery, Dr. Jack Boan. I 
wonder if he might stand please. 
 
He was a professor emeritus of health economics at the 
University of Regina and a member and past president of the 
Canadian Health Economic Research Association. Dr. Boan is 
also the president of the Justice Emmett Hall Memorial 
Foundation and is here today to accept a cheque on its behalf. 
Dr. Boan had the privilege of being a researcher on the 1964 
royal commission and a colleague of Justice Emmett Hall. 
 
I would like all members of the Assembly today to join with me 
in welcoming Dr. Boan to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Multiple Sclerosis Fashion Show 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatoon volunteers and businesses rose to the occasion once 
again when they joined forces late last week to make the first 
annual MS (multiple sclerosis) Spring Fling Fashion Show a 
tremendous success. 
 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

Fun was the focus of this special evening and every member of 
the sold-out-to-capacity crowd not only had a great time but 
they got to be entertained by Ramblin’ Dave; Maurice Drouin 
with Melanie Gibbs; Ventson Donelson of the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders; and they all went home with a personal gift pack 
to boot. 
 
All of this was made possible by the generosity of local 
sponsors and the hard work of the MS Society’s staff and a host 
of volunteers, including Saskatoon fire-fighters. 
 
Every single dime raised goes to helping to find a cure for 
multiple sclerosis. I am very proud of my community, Mr. 
Speaker, and very grateful to those who care so much about the 
quality of lives of other people. 
 
I wanted all members to know of this terrific event and extend 
to them an invitation to the second annual MS Spring Fling 
Fashion Show — not so easy to say — to be held in Saskatoon 
in March of 1999. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Donation to the Emmett Hall Memorial Foundation 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For a small 
province we have given to Canada a disproportionate number of 
men and women who have made a difference in the life of our 
nation, whose influence has extended far beyond our provincial 
boundaries. 
 
Two names in particular are associated with our national health 
care system, Saskatchewan’s gift to Canada, as our Premier 
says; Tommy Douglas, members of the Assembly might have 
heard of before; and as we are reminded earlier by the Minister 
of Health, another distinguished Saskatchewan son, Justice 
Emmett Hall, chaired the 1964 royal commission which 
recommended that the rest of the country join Saskatchewan in 
providing universal, accessible, portable, comprehensive, 
publicly funded and publicly administered health care. 
 
Both Premier Douglas and Justice Hall can be rightly called 
fathers of medicare. Both brought honour to our province. And 
I know all members are pleased that Dr. Boan and his 
association are establishing the Emmett Hall Memorial 
Foundation in order to, and I quote, “honour those who have 
made outstanding contributions to the advancement of health 
ideals of equality, fairness, justice and efficiency in Canada’s 
health system.” 
 
We are pleased that the government today has presented a 
contribution of $7,500 to the foundation and we look forward to 
the biennial Emmett Hall memorial lecture. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Betaseron Approved for MS Victim 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
not often that the Liberal opposition will stand in this House 
and thank the Minister of Health for a job well done. But today 
we’re doing just that. 
 

We recently introduced the minister to a number of MS victims, 
including Debbie Roger of Avonlea, and called on him to 
personally ensure her case and others are treated fairly by a 
formulary committee. 
 
Mr. Minister, Debbie Roger of Avonlea has been waiting 
months for this government to allow her to access Betaseron 
and today we’ve received news that the formulary committee 
has approved an application for Ms. Roger. We hope that she 
will now see an improvement in her quality of life as other MS 
victims have seen after being able to access these drugs. 
 
On behalf of Debbie Roger I would like to thank the minister 
for addressing this issue in such a serious fashion. I only hope 
this is a sign that the minister and his government are starting to 
listen to and care about the health care concerns of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Turtleford Fair Canada’s Best for 1997 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Turtleford’s claim of 
having the best little country fair in the West has gained new 
credibility. It was recently chosen as the best local fair in 
Canada for 1997. 
 
The Saskatchewan Association of Agricultural Societies and 
Exhibitions nominated the Turtleford Fair over all other 
competitors from Saskatchewan. The Canadian Association of 
Exhibitions then judged Turtleford against all other Canadian 
local fairs. 
 
Special attention was paid to the quality and variety of 
programs offered, demonstrated community support, 
participation of volunteers and exhibitors, and the use of 
innovative ideas and concepts. 
 
To put on a fair of this calibre takes a great deal of planning and 
a lot of volunteer effort. Congratulations are in order for all 
involved. A special thanks to Marion Nordell, 
secretary-treasurer of the agricultural society; Marlene De 
Graaf, president of the agricultural society; and Judy Reimer, 
executive director of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Agricultural Societies and Exhibitions, who accepted the award 
on behalf of the Turtleford Fair in Toronto last month. 
 
In 1998 the fair will be held on August 1 and 2 in my 
constituency. I invite all of you to come and enjoy the best little 
country fair in Canada in Turtleford. You’ll find it in my 
constituency. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Road Hazards 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
the Minister of Labour stood in this Assembly during reply to 
the budget address and spoke on the merits of the occupational 
health and safety program and its regulations. He lauded the Act 
for providing persons the right to refuse work if their lives are 
endangered or they are in danger of injury; and he suggested 
such persons could not be terminated from their job or be 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

penalized if they refuse to work in a dangerous environment. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on that very same premiss, I am thinking of 
claiming that very right this day, because every day I find my 
life endangered as I am tossed to and fro in my vehicle 
travelling on the crumbling, life-threatening, crater-ridden roads 
of Saskatchewan praying all the time that I will make it to my 
destination. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I may not be the only person in this 
Assembly who has encountered danger on our streets and roads. 
The member from Regina South turned up in the Assembly this 
week with a black eye and a fat lip. Could it have been from the 
dangerous roads or perhaps the dangerous streets? 
 
So in respect to the aforesaid legislation, Mr. Speaker, I am 
heartened to know that I cannot be terminated from my job or 
penalized should I refuse to work because of the state of 
Saskatchewan highways. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I shall be 
speaking to the Premier, the Minister of Highways, and the 
Minister of Labour about improving those conditions on the 
roads, and the possibility of extending to me the rights, in this 
great piece of legislation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 

Saskatoon Cadet Selected for Honour Band 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A young 
constituent of mine, John Weisgarber, has been selected as a 
member of the prestigious cadet honour band of the prairie 
region. John is one of 100 cadets chosen from the 210 sea, 
army, and air cadets units from across the prairies to tour with 
the honour band. 
 
The Royal Canadian Sea Cadets, the Royal Canadian Army 
Cadets, and the Royal Canadian Air Cadets are collectively 
referred to as the Canadian Cadet Organizations. These 1,100 
units are located across Canada. The Navy League, the Army 
League, and the Air Cadet League, in conjunction with local 
community sponsors, operates and support the Canadian Cadets 
Organization in partnership with the Department of National 
Defence. The aims are to develop in youth the attributes of 
good citizenship and leadership, promote physical fitness, and 
stimulate interest in the sea, land, and air elements of the 
Canadian Armed Forces. 
 
John plays the bagpipes and is a member of the 2293 North 
Saskatchewan Regiment of the Royal Canadian Army Corps. 
The unit is commanded by Captain Mark Rosin and is 
sponsored by the 38th Army, Navy, and Airforce Veterans 
Association. The cadet honour band of the prairie region will 
play concerts in Thunder Bay, Winnipeg, Regina, and 
Edmonton. And I would like to take this opportunity to 
congratulate John, and to wish him the best of luck in his future. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

B.C. By-election 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what is now a 

little red riding in a certain neighbourhood in a province called 
B.C. In this riding voters wanted a candidate they could send to 
the big House far away in Ottawa. First the people visited the 
Reform candidate, but this time they thought his policies were 
much too hard. The people of this “little red riding” then visited 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) candidate. His policies were 
much too soft and cost far too much. 
 
They tried to visit the member from Kindersley’s Tory cousin 
but, although the lights were on, no one was home. 
 
Then the people of this riding visited the Liberal candidate and 
they thought his policies were just right. So when it came time 
to send a candidate to this House in a far away land, the people 
of this riding chose the Liberal candidate. 
 
In the end, Mr. Speaker, 1,000 more people chose the Liberal 
candidate over the Reform candidate and over 6,500 chose the 
Liberal over the NDP candidate. And almost 10,000 more 
people chose the Liberal candidate over the member from 
Kindersley’s sorry Tory Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is no fairy tale; this is reality. And I would 
like to congratulate the new Member of Parliament from B.C. 
(British Columbia), and wish Lou Sekora good luck. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

E & C Quine Resource Centre 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, one of Canada’s most 
prominent library suppliers, Brodart, recently issued their 1998 
catalogue. On the cover of the catalogue is a picture of the E & 
C Quine Resource Centre at the Yorkton Regional High School 
in my constituency. 
 
According to Brodart, E & C Quine Resource Centre is a truly 
beautiful learning centre — lots of natural light, an abundance 
of oak and greenery creates an atmosphere of warmth. The 
circular resource centre is the heart of the school. 
 
In 1997, thanks to the generosity of the Quine family and the 
support of the school board, most of the furnishings in the 
centre were replaced and the entire centre was redecorated. All 
of the redecorations were planned by the school staff with the 
expert guidance of the art teacher, Ms. Diane Koch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the E & C Quine Resource Centre is a credit to the 
Quine family and the Yorkton Regional High School. This 
national recognition is a tribute to the Quines, the Yorkton 
Regional High School, and the quality of education in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier or his designate. 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

This morning’s article in the newspaper confirmed what 
everyone already knew, the Premier’s political interference in 
SaskPower cost Saskatchewan taxpayers millions of dollars. 
 
According to David Leighton, a well-known professor of 
business at the University of Western Ontario, the Premier 
undermined the authority of the SaskPower board when he 
stepped in to save Jack Messer’s job in 1994. Professor 
Leighton says that you weakened the company . . . says the 
Premier weakened the company and contributed to the eventual 
loss of millions of dollars in the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
To the Deputy Premier: will the Premier of Saskatchewan agree 
to testify under oath in front of the Channel Lake investigation 
to explain the political rescue of Jack Messer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I know that all members will be 
impressed with the new approach by the member opposite — 
not ranting and raving today, calmer, quieter. And I would 
congratulate the member on this new approach. 
 
Rather than calling the committee a kangaroo court, rather than 
coming to the committee unlike your colleague from Melfort 
who asks his questions in a reasonable way, your new approach 
today of asking in a reasonable tone of voice doesn’t go 
unnoticed. Because I would expect that since you started down 
this road, collapsing your vote to be equal with the Liberals has 
led many to believe that your ranting and raving at the 
committees of this legislature is not working. So I accept today 
your reasonable approach. 
 
I want to say to you clearly that the Premier explained his 
rationale for trying to bring harmony in government at every 
level. He explained that very well in the House. And for you to 
try to say that there is any other motive, I think is irresponsible. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Premier, in 
1994 the SaskPower board wanted to fire Jack Messer because 
he was incompetent, but the Premier stepped in to save Jack’s 
job. You and your government have sent a clear message to the 
SaskPower board that the NDP Premier for Saskatchewan is 
running the company and he isn’t interested in what any NDP 
SaskPower board member thinks. 
 
The message from the SaskPower board members was clear, 
that they were puppets for the NDP and nothing more. The 
message from the Premier was that either you do what you are 
told or the NDP will get different board members. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, it’s time to stop the NDP patronage 
games. He’s already cost the province millions of dollars. Will 
the Premier agree to come clean and explain his actions, under 
oath, before the Channel Lake investigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, now for close to 20 days we have been here answering 
all of the questions that you put forward about the arrangement; 
we’ve tabled the documents. I say again, unlike you, sir, and 
your government, the Devine government which you supported, 
which you went to the leadership convention to support Mr. 
Devine. You can run and hide now and pretend you’re not a 
Tory; you can do that. You can pretend it all you like. 
 

But the fact of the matter is that we have been more open with 
this file than anything your government did in the nine years 
they were in government while they ran the debt up to the tune 
of $15 billion. You’ve never apologized. All you’ve done is run 
and hide and pretend you’re in a different political party. 
 
Come clean with the public. Admit you’re a Tory; apologize for 
the 15 billion in debt. It will be good for you because being 
open is an exercise that is important in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Yesterday Jack Messer testified under oath that 
SaskPower was paying for lawyers advising him on the Channel 
Lake investigation. 
 
First the Premier rewards his old buddy, Jack Messer, by 
making him president of SaskPower in 1991, then the Premier 
steps in to save his job in 1994, and then again in 1996, in spite 
of the fact that the SaskPower board wanted to fire him. Then 
Jack goes out, Jack Messer goes out and loses five million 
bucks because he forgets to read a contract and the NDP is 
forced to fire him, but not before the Premier has arranged for a 
$300,000 parting gift courtesy of the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Now we find that SaskPower is paying for Jack Messer’s 
lawyers. Mr. Minister, who gave the order to have SaskPower 
pay for Jack Messer’s lawyers, and how much of taxpayers’ 
money has already been spent on this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — That member opposite and his Tory 
buddies who are in court more than anyone will know about 
who pays for lawyers. And I think the question that many 
people have is are the lawyers that are defending your former 
colleagues being paid out of the slush fund? That’s what many 
people are asking. 
 
As it would relate to Mr. Messer, as it would relate to Mr. 
Messer’s legal bills for the inquiry — which you now admit is a 
legitimate process — SaskPower is not paying the legal bills. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we asked 
Jack Messer why SaskPower was paying for his lawyer, after he 
made the admission that SaskPower was paying for him, and 
you know what he said, Mr. Minister? Jack said that the lawyers 
were representing both SaskPower and himself. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you think that the NDP should be paying for 
Jack Messer through SaskPower? Paying for his legal interests 
and SaskPower’s legal interests are one and the same. Under 
whose direct authority did SaskPower hire Jack Messer a team 
of lawyers to assist him in testifying in front of the Channel 
Lake investigation? And, Mr. Deputy Premier, have you made 
arrangements to have Jack Messer reimburse SaskPower the 
legal services that he’s already received. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I congratulated the member earlier 
for his new approach — reading his questions; being 
disciplined. And I understand that that’s a nice new approach 
but that you also should listen to the answer which I gave you to 
the last question. I said we are not . . . I said SaskPower is not 
paying for Jack Messer’s legal fees in the inquiry. 
 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

Now I see the member who chairs the Public Accounts yelling 
from her seat. And I want to make it clear to her, who calls the 
committee a kangaroo court, that we are not paying for Jack 
Messer’s legal counsel in the inquiry that we’re holding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporations’ Foreign Investments 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
Minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan). More heads are now rolling over at 
SaskPower in a desperate attempt to save your hide. Now 
you’ve fired Michael Hogan over the botched Guyana deal that 
cost taxpayers millions of dollars, but who approved the little 
adventure in Guyana? You did — you and the former minister 
and the Premier. You stood up in the House, and in public day 
after day after day, telling us what a wonderful deal this was. 
But when it all went haywire every one of you went running for 
cover and left Michael Hogan to take the fall. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you going to start taking responsibility? When 
are we going to start seeing you and other NDP ministers 
involved in some constructive dismissals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to that member 
opposite who’s running for the leadership of the Conservative 
Party, having run as a Liberal, having run as a Liberal, having 
deceived his constituents, having deceived his constituents that 
he was a Liberal — having promised and signed documents 
saying he would never leave the Liberal Party — and then to 
turn his back and run as a Conservative . . . And he talks about 
credibility. He talks about credibility. 
 
I want to tell you about the situation as it relates to Guyana. 
There was a letter of intent signed to review whether or not this 
was a good arrangement. And, Mr. Speaker, if you get some 
control over the yelling and hollering from the Conservatives, it 
would be very helpful. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. It’s 
obvious that we never get any answers in question period. 
We’re going to have to ask you to come and testify under oath 
and maybe that will get to the bottom of some of the questions 
we’ve been answering. 
 
Mr. Minister, finally in Guyana you recognized that you blew a 
million and a half of taxpayers’ dollars, and it looks as if 
SaskPower actually got the messages of getting out of these 
ridiculous deals. Unfortunately, SaskEnergy and SaskTel 
haven’t quite figured it out. 
 
People over Saskatchewan have said, we don’t want you in 
Guyana or New Zealand or Chile. Haven’t you learned anything 
yet, Mr. Minister? Haven’t you learned from NST or Guyana? 
 
Will you direct all Crown corporations, Mr. Minister, to get out 
of all foreign adventures and use taxpayers’ dollars for the 
benefit of Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I understand what the member is 

saying. When he moved to the Conservative Party, he accepted 
the program of privatization. I know you believe in 
privatization. 
 
Now I want to say, tomorrow when you read the Leader-Post, I 
don’t know what the result will be as it relates to the public 
opinion on Crown corporations, but I’ll make my bet that 
you’re on the wrong side on the issue as to whether the public 
supports Crown corporations in this province or not. 
 
Because I’ve been out at Unity, I’ve . . . I can’t hear, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the — order, order — the 
Chair is having some difficulty being able to hear the minister 
providing the answer. Order. And I do note that when the hon. 
member was putting his question, the House made it quite 
possible to be able to hear the question put. And I will ask for 
the same courtesy to be extended to the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again, the members opposite 
want to privatize the Crown corporations. We understand that. 
 
But I want to tell you that I was in Unity the other night where 
we had a meeting with the chamber of commerce and we had a 
show of hands of how many people supported equity 
investment outside of Saskatchewan. And do you know what? 
Over 90 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . This is the chamber in 
Unity, to the member who’s yelling from Cannington 
constituency, continues to yell, Mr. Speaker, to the point where 
you can’t hear in here. Yelling and hollering from their seat . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I will ask for the — order — I will ask for the 
cooperation of the House to provide the courtesy for the answer 
to be heard. And I’ll ask the minister to wrap up his response 
briefly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again, I’ve been 
at a number of public meetings — in Watrous, in Humboldt, in 
Unity — and I ask the chambers and the business people 
whether or not they want equity and consulting done outside of 
the province, by Crown corporations. 
 
At every meeting the majority say yes, on a cautious basis, with 
proper support, go and do equity, do consulting, and do project 
management. And I’ll tell you, when the poll comes out 
tomorrow in Crown corporations you, sir, as Leader of the 
Conservative Party, will be again on the wrong side of that 
issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition and the 
Save the Plains Committee joined forces today, announcing a 
number of initiatives so people don’t have the closure of the 
Plains shoved down their throats. 
 
A number of public forums will take place in the weeks ahead 
to give people a chance to speak out on this issue. When the 
minister was asked by the media if he planned on attending a 
Regina forum he said, it may not be appropriate. He didn’t 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

know what role he could possibly play. 
 
Well for God’s sake, he’s the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. 
Start acting like a minister. Will you attend this meeting? Will 
you listen to what the people have to say? Will you place a 
moratorium on the closure of the Plains hospital until after the 
next provincial election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have now over the 
last three weeks, on the questions that the Liberal opposition 
have asked me, what is the intention of the Plains Health Centre 
. . . And the member knows that yesterday or the day before 
there was announcement by the Minister responsible for 
Saskatchewan Property Management and the minister 
responsible for Post-Secondary, made the announcement that 
the Plains Health Centre will be assumed by the Saskatchewan 
institute of applied arts and science and will soon become the 
new technical institute for southern Saskatchewan and the rest 
of the province. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, when he says to me that he is 
going to be holding a number of public inquiries, going to be 
going around suggesting that we should keep the Plains centre 
open and what will be my role in the future, I say to the member 
that the district health board made a decision on the Plains 
Health Centre in 1993. And the decision that they made is that 
they’re going to have in Regina two state-of-the-art facilities. 
And they’re going to provide more services in this part of the 
province and to Regina people than ever before in the past. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, he needs to understand that, 
have an appreciation for that, and begin to assist in people in 
southern Saskatchewan learning about the wonderful new 
services that we’re going to receive in Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, as Save the Plains chairperson 
Darlene Sterling put it this morning, this issue is now about 
more than just saving the Plains; it’s about saving our health 
care system and saving lives. 
 
The so-called plan to consolidate health care services that we’re 
hearing from this afternoon is out of whack, and a couple of 
examples illustrate this point. The cost of building City Hospital 
in Saskatoon in 1992 totalled to $110 million for a brand-new, 
state-of-the-art facility, and that’s about the same amount the 
NDP is spending just to renovate the General Hospital. The cost 
of a large expansion to St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon in 1989 
totalled $46 million, 62 million less than this government is 
spending today just to renovate the General Hospital. 
 
Mr. Minister, in health care and financial terms, your plan is 
way off-base. Will you come to your senses? Will you place a 
moratorium on the closure of the Plains hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that today 
demonstrates the total lack of understanding and appreciation 
that the member from Thunder Creek has in what’s been done 
with the health system over the last four years. Because when 
the member talks about the enrichments that were made in the 

Saskatoon City Hospital, why doesn’t he talk about the acquired 
brain injury to the eighth floor that was designed and developed 
to assist people across the province, not only from southern 
Saskatchewan but all across the province. 
 
The developments of the eighth floor, to ensure that we can 
work with people who are . . . who need rehabilitation, who 
have been in car crashes or in physical injuries. He doesn’t talk 
about that investment that we made in the Saskatoon City 
Hospital to ensure that that occurs. Doesn’t talk about the 
dialysis system that was set up in the St. Paul’s health centre to 
ensure that we can provide for all of Saskatchewan people the 
newest and the most adequate technology to ensure that we can 
provide those kinds of services. 
 
The member, Mr. Speaker, is stuck on a building, he’s stuck on 
a facility, and he’s not concerned about the services that we’re 
going to provide to Saskatchewan people, which is the case that 
will happen here with the transition to the two new facilities 
that we’re going to have here in Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a crisis of credibility. 
What the former head of SaskPower is telling us and what the 
Deputy Premier is telling us simply cannot be reconciled. On 
December 17 the Deputy Premier told this House, and I quote: 
 

. . . Mr. Portigal, in working for Channel Lake, did work on 
the negotiations. The company was sold; Mr. Portigal was 
then without work and the new company hired him. That’s 
about as devious as the plot . . . (gets). 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that was eight days after the minister had 
already ordered a full review of Channel Lake. That was over 
six months after Mr. Messer had fired Portigal for his apparent 
double dealing. There is a way out of this unfortunate situation. 
It has . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now the hon. member has been 
extremely lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask him to go 
directly to his question immediately. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister file 
with this House, documents which can assure us when he was 
informed . . . that he found out about Portigal’s firing and that 
he knew that this was not a simple case of him quitting? Will he 
file documents that will clear up the discrepancy between what 
he is telling us and what Mr. Messer is telling us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yesterday the member was shocked 
that Mr. Messer had a different recollection of the circumstance 
as compared to the Deloitte Touche report, and he couldn’t 
understand that. And he was dismayed by the fact that there 
seemed to be a discrepancy between what the Deloitte Touche 
report said about the relationship between the board and 
management, and what Mr. Messer said. That astounded him. 
 
Well it shouldn’t astound him at all because obviously Mr. 
Messer was interviewed by the people at Deloitte Touche. He 
was interviewed and I assume he told them the same thing as he 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

told you and the committee, and the Deloitte Touche report 
came to the conclusion that documentations, and I quote: 
 

. . . presented to the board of SaskPower was, at a critical 
juncture, incomplete to the point where the board was not 
being effectively informed. 
 

You’re right, there is a discrepancy between what the report 
says and what Mr. Messer explained to them. I’m sure of that. 
And there’ll be other discrepancies. 
 
So I say to you, sir, when I found out, as I delivered my 
comments in the House four weeks ago, I said that when I 
found out this was an issue, I called for a report by CIC and we 
called for a report from Deloitte Touche. As soon as we 
received those reports we tabled them here in the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The Deputy Premier can simply file the 
documentation he received from Mr. Messer at the time that 
Mr. Portigal left. That will clear up all the discrepancy. 
 
Yesterday I asked the minister about Mr. Messer’s contract of 
employment and the details of severance. According to that 
contract, Mr. Messer is entitled to two days severance for every 
year worked prior to 1996 and five days for every year worked 
thereafter. That means that according to his contract of 
employment, Mr. Messer is entitled to severance of $7,352. My 
question of the minister: why didn’t we simply follow that 
contract? Why did we choose to ignore the contract and instead 
follow the precedent set by paying George Hill 300 grand? Why 
did we follow that precedent instead of following the contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to reiterate to the member 
opposite, who seems to not understand the situation here as it 
relates to what is known as the retirement severance benefit, 
which applies to all IBEW (International Brotherhood of 
Electrical Workers) members and to all people who work in 
SaskPower, you’re right. It’s a small token that tops up their 
pension, and you know that very well. 
 
It was explained to you yesterday. And being a lawyer you 
know that it doesn’t mitigate under the law what he is entitled 
to under common law. You know that. You’re a lawyer. And to 
come here and plead ignorance — to plead ignorance of the law 
— is not good enough. And it’s unbecoming of you as the 
member for North Battleford to pretend that Mr. Messer, 
because of something that’s in the agreement for all employees 
of SaskPower to top up their pension, mitigates or detracts from 
what they are entitled to under common law. 
 
You know that. You’re faking it here in the House. And I say to 
you, apologize, because you know better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, if my integrity as a lawyer is 
being called into question, then I don’t think I’m the one who 
has to apologize. I think you should be joining the 
Saskatchewan Party, who yesterday told us there isn’t such a 
thing as an honest lawyer in this province. 
 

Well I’m not the one who has to apologize. And if you’re 
saying that I as a lawyer know that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I will ask both sides of the 
House to come to order and to allow the hon. member for North 
Battleford to complete his question. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I am saying that as a lawyer I know no such 
thing, that a contract of employment would not be valid and 
binding. If the contract of employment said upon termination 
he’s entitled to 15 days, then that’s what he’s entitled to. Will 
you file the contract of employment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite, he’s 
playing games and he knows it. He knows very well. And I say 
you do a disservice to yourself, to your caucus, and to your 
profession when you pretend — and you are pretending — that 
Jack Messer gave up any right under common law because of 
something based on severance in a small token which all 
employees are entitled to, and you know that. You are playing 
games with words, which does a disservice to you, your 
profession, and your caucus, when you say that he disbanded 
his right under common law to severance. You know that isn’t 
true and I say you should apologize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposed South Saskatchewan River Dam 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the minister of the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation, and I know that this is a pretty tough act to follow 
but we do have other things to talk about besides Channel Lake. 
 
Mr. Minister, a group of people calling themselves the Meridian 
Water Management Association have initiated efforts to build a 
dam on the South Saskatchewan River. This dam, as proposed, 
will be on the South Saskatchewan River west of the town of 
Leader, Mr. Minister, and it would greatly improve the irrigated 
crop diversification for our farmers in Saskatchewan as well as 
Alberta. And the area provided will provide much-needed water 
for the expansion of industry as well as livestock operation, as 
well as to provide a crossing for railroads and highway traffic 
and new sources for cheap electricity. 
 
Have you met with representatives, Mr. Minister, from the 
Meridian Water Management Association, the Medicine Hat 
Chamber of Commerce, or anybody from the provincial Alberta 
government to discuss this matter and to see what results there 
can be from meetings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member from Maple Creek, 
who asks, I think, probably the most legitimate question of the 
day dealing with the water project being proposed by 
individuals from Medicine Hat and south-western 
Saskatchewan on a project known as the Meridian project, I 
have met with association members in Medicine Hat as well as 
here in Regina and there’s ongoing discussions as to the 
worthiness of the proposal. 
 
As the member knows, in building a dam on any river or stream 
in the province or in western Canada there is a lot of research 
and diligence that has to be proven on the project. But I say to 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

him I would be very interested in meeting with him. And I’m 
sure our minister of Sask Water or others involved, the 
Department of Environment, would be very interested in 
arranging a meeting where you’re present to deal with this 
issue. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I request that question no. 19 
be converted to order for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 19 is converted to motions for 
return (debatable). 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
have the opportunity to say a few words on this budget. In the 
last few days we’ve certainly had some very dynamic speeches 
from members on this side of the House. I particularly enjoyed 
the passion of the member from Swift Current and the dry wit 
of the member from Regina-Victoria. 
 
I want to just go back a little bit to the year 1991, when we 
formed government, and the first thing we did was open the 
books — and the huge debt we found that we had to deal with. 
In fact I think the province was very close to being in a state of 
bankruptcy. But we decided that it was possible to work this 
out. We decided that with the help of the people of 
Saskatchewan and some tough decisions, that we would come 
through this. And we did; we did make some tough decisions. 
 
But something we never did was cut funding to the most 
vulnerable people in Saskatchewan — the children and the 
families. We never cut any funding from Social Services, and 
we never cut any funding from Health. But we did realize that 
we would have to do things differently. And we began, 
therefore, on the road to health renewal, changing the way in 
which we delivered services. 
 
Well we all contributed and we all helped with the tough 
decisions. And I think it’s important to continue to thank the 
people of this province, because without them we could never 
have done it. But, by golly, in 1994, Mr. Speaker, we balanced 
the budget, and we have balanced every budget since then, 
including the one that was tabled on March 19. 
 
And not only that, but it includes plans for three more balanced 
budgets, Mr. Speaker. This is good news for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Our economy is growing; our economy is diversifying. Incomes 
are going up and taxes are going down. This is good news for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
When I speak with people across my constituency and across 
this province, they tell me that jobs are very important to them. 
We can tell them that we are working in partnerships with 
business, with labour, with farmers, with cooperatives and 
communities, to create new job opportunities. And it’s working, 
Mr. Speaker. More people are working in Saskatchewan than at 
any time in our history. There are full-time jobs . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Jobs for women; jobs for young people. In fact 
13,000 jobs were created in 1997. This is good news for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The budget focuses on four key elements vital to jobs and 
growth in Saskatchewan: building the local economy, 
encouraging investment and growth, strengthening our 
transportation system, and enhancing education and training. 
Let me just tell you about two of those. 
 
Building the local economy is crucial to our communities. 
People are organizing local resources to build on local 
strengths. They are using their local regional economic 
development authorities. They are using them for training; they 
are using them for business counselling. And this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, doubles the amount of money we invested last year in 
regional economic development. It doubles it to nearly $6 
million. This is good news for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
One more point on the local economy. This budget helps 
SARCAN recycling and its member organizations. It helps 
SARCAN by stabilizing its funding and expanding our 
recycling program to include juice boxes and other cardboard 
beverage containers. 
 
And actually I saw, Mr. Speaker, in the Sun of March 29 that, 
according to Dale Botting, who’s the executive director of 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres, that the 
extra work means SARCAN, which provides employment for 
disabled people, will add 10 new jobs in ’98 and ’99 and in the 
long-term, 35 new jobs could be generated. This is good news 
for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a local SARCAN depot just in the same 
mall as our constituency office and we’ve got to know the 
people who work there very well. They’re wonderful people, 
very committed to their jobs. And it’s wonderful to see the 
dignity that a job brings to these people. 
 
I’d like to say a few words about encouraging investment and 
innovation. The budget address says this: 
 

Economic expansion and jobs also depend upon creating a 
climate for business and industry to invest and grow. 

 
Invest and grow, Mr. Speaker. Our targeted tax strategy is 
paying off with more investments and jobs. The manufacturing 
and processing sector alone created 3,200 jobs last year. 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — So what are we doing this year? This year, Mr. 
Speaker, we are providing a 15 per cent income tax credit for 
research and development to help a broad range of industries 
stay competitive and invest for the future — 15 per cent income 
tax credit. We’re eliminating the sales tax on exploration 
equipment purchased for use in mining. And this next one is a 
very exciting one, Mr. Speaker. We are introducing a film 
employment tax credit equal to 35 per cent of the cost of 
employing Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — This will be increased by an additional 5 per 
cent of eligible expenditures for productions in rural 
Saskatchewan. This is good news for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think we are all very proud of the film and video industry in 
this province. It is vibrant, it is innovative, it is exciting, and it’s 
flourishing. Have you seen their ad campaign which says, 
lights, camera, jobs? Skilled, well-paid jobs for our youth and 
our future. 
 
The last few days the member from Regina Wascana Plains and 
I have had the opportunity with meeting many of the people 
involved in this vibrant industry. They’re very excited about 
this initiative, Mr. Speaker, and they have made a real effort to 
say thank you, and we appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken just briefly about community 
economic development and targeted tax incentives. There’s 
much more to say on the issue of economic development and 
job creation and I know that my colleagues before me have 
spoken of many of these initiatives and others speaking after me 
will do the same. 
 
But I want to move on to say a few words about this budget and 
building a modern, secure health system. The budget address 
says Saskatchewan people today have access to a broader range 
of fully insured health services than ever before. 
 
We worked together to get here, Mr. Speaker, beginning in 
1991. Saskatchewan people worked with us — and it wasn’t 
always easy — to build a modern, secure health system, a 
health system that would carry medicare forward into the next 
century. 
 
But look where we are, Mr. Speaker. Our health services today 
include province-wide screening for breast cancer; nutritional 
supplements; education and counselling for expectant mothers; 
treatments for people with eating disorders; new health and 
safety programs for farm families; in-home renal dialysis for 
over 100 Saskatchewan residents; specialized pediatric teams to 
transport children anywhere in Saskatchewan for specialized 
services. This is good news for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one-third of our entire budget — one-third — will 
be invested in health care. That is $1.7 billion, Mr. Speaker — 
$1.7 billion — an increase of $88 million over last year. And in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, that is the largest investment in health care in 
the history of this province, $1.7 billion. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — And what does that mean for the people of this 
fine province? It means health districts can recruit and retain 
physicians. It means physicians can provide better emergency 
coverage. It means more people will receive improved 
emergency service with more and better trained first responders 
and paramedics. 
 
It means upgraded, modern base hospitals in Saskatoon and 
Regina with a full range of quality services for all 
Saskatchewan residents. It means increased specialist services 
such as kidney and cancer treatment and CT (computerized 
axial tomography) scanning. It means a new MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) operating in Regina, Mr. Speaker, to 
improve access to this service in southern Saskatchewan. It 
means expanded immunization programs and it means 
advanced clinical nurses bringing more health services to more 
communities. 
 
(1430) 
 
And there’s more, Mr. Speaker. We are working on our new 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network, or SHIN. SHIN 
will allow physicians and other health care professionals to 
share vital health information. It will give people faster access 
to informed information and reduce duplication of medical 
tests. It will give health professionals advance warning of 
potential drug interactions to ensure the safety of Saskatchewan 
people. And as we are developing this system, Mr. Speaker, we 
are ever mindful of the importance of the confidentiality of 
patient information. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people today have 
access to a broader range of fully insured health services than 
ever before. We are proud of that, Mr. Speaker, we are proud 
that we are investing more money in health care than we have 
ever done before in the history of this province. 
 
And we will continue our commitment to health care. We will 
continue to work with the men and women who are our health 
care professionals — our nurses, our doctors, our home care 
workers, our paramedics, and our lab technicians. We will work 
with these professionals and our health districts to build a 
secure, publicly funded, modern health system that will be there 
not just for us but for our children and for our grandchildren. 
And this is good news for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Mr. Speaker, there is so much more good 
news in this budget. The increased funding in education, the 
dollars for agricultural research and development, the 
cost-sharing formula for RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) policing, the 10 per cent increase in the Highways 
budget, the reduction in the personal income tax rate, and, Mr. 
Speaker — and this is very dear to my heart — the 
announcement last week by our Premier and the Minister of 
Social Services of our “building independence” strategy. 
 
I have spoken of this initiative before and I look forward to 
doing so again. Because as I said before, Mr. Speaker, this I 
think, is a defining moment for this government. The new 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

Saskatchewan Child Benefit, the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement, and the family health benefits — programs that 
target assistance to children and low income families. Programs 
that break the cycle of dependence and build bridges to jobs and 
independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a fifth consecutive balanced budget, which 
includes plans for three more balanced budgets. A budget that 
invests in people, invests in jobs and growth, invests in 
stronger, safer, healthier communities. A budget that reflects 
our growing financial freedom and looks to a prosperous future. 
A budget that is good news for Saskatchewan people. Mr. 
Speaker, I shall be proud to support the budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a little bit hard to 
actually, to follow that member because she is always so sincere 
about her thoughts on Saskatchewan. And she’s speaks very 
eloquently about the province always, and in a very forthright 
manner. And we’ll be very disappointed to see if the rumours of 
her moving from Saskatchewan come to pass. And I hope that 
that — actually I hope that that isn’t the case — but we hear 
that that’s a possibility. 
 
I unfortunately don’t share her enthusiasm for the Government 
of Saskatchewan. The fact of the matter is, is not even her warm 
wishes for the province are going to be what is needed for 
Saskatchewan these days. 
 
The budget, in my view, has many, many priorities that are 
wrong — a budget that is predicated on a lot of assumptions of 
revenue for the government that are going to be difficult, if not 
impossible, to arrive at. If you look at, for example, oil price 
predictions, they’ve been very volatile the last little while. 
 
I had a discussion the other day with the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar about the prices, and he knows as well as I 
know, coming from an oil producing area, that the prices are 
extremely volatile right now, with the prices being impacted 
upon by an OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries) agreement that may or may not result in lower 
production. If the production is reduced we may see increased 
prices here in Saskatchewan, but unfortunately already it 
appears that the agreement is falling apart, with Venezuela, in 
the last few days, suggesting that they may boost production to 
offset any reductions in mid-east oil. 
 
And as a result of that the prices are extremely volatile right 
now. It’s a little bit like commodity trading in natural gas 
futures contracts in Channel Lake; you better know what you’re 
doing. The RBC Dominion forecasts for oil in the next year, for 
the balance of 1998, are $14.80 — somewhere close to the 
Bank of Montreal’s prediction of $15.00. You don’t get up to 
. . . The government’s projection was $17.25, if memory serves, 
and according to RBC, they don’t predict a $17.34 barrel of oil 
until calendar 2002. So we’re out by a little bit there, folks. 
 
And when it comes to forecasting, RBC has a pretty good track 
record, pretty good track record, and so you have to be pretty 
cautious. And I’m surprised, I’m surprised frankly that the 
government would want to go out on a limb as far as it has in 
terms of predictions of prices in the oil industry, particularly 

given their track record in other commodity ventures lately. 
You would think they would want to be as conservative as 
possible in terms of making predictions in these areas. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No pun intended? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — No pun intended. Absolutely. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is the balancing of this budget in this 
past year and this current year and the upcoming year have been 
a result of a lot of forces that have happened outside of 
Saskatchewan. Low interest rates have had a huge impact on the 
balancing of the budget here in Saskatchewan. Transfer 
payments from the federal government have had a huge impact 
on it. Three hundred million dollars — $300 million, the 
member speaks from his seat — $300 million compared to 
about $30 million last year, of transfer payments. And it’s a 
huge increase to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This budget would not be balanced had it not been for a big, fat 
welfare cheque arriving at the doorstep of the Department of 
Finance here in Saskatchewan. And that is not something, Mr. 
Speaker, that I think we should be proud of, of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
We work long and we work hard in Saskatchewan, and still, in 
spite of all of that effort that Saskatchewan people have put into 
it, this government is incapable of balancing the budget except 
for the fact they were getting a big, fat cheque courtesy of 
Ontario . . . courtesy of Ottawa — courtesy of Alberta, more or 
less. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Speaker, had it not been for the 
privatization, the privatization of the upgrader up at 
Lloydminster . . . there was about another $100 million that was 
poured into the budget here in Saskatchewan. So you have $400 
million that just came in under two things: welfare and 
privatization. Two words that this government never likes to 
talk about — welfare or privatization. 
 
And they should talk about welfare here in Saskatchewan 
because we have increasing number of welfare recipients all the 
time in this province and the only thing that this government 
wants to talk about is the fact that we’ve had some success — 
we’ll admit it — some success in job creation. When you 
compare it, when you compare it to other provinces, it is 
absolutely meagre in comparison. 
 
But there has been some modest increase in jobs here in 
Saskatchewan in the service sector — relatively low paying 
jobs, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, but we do have some coming 
into the province. 
 
If we were to believe all of the forecasting of the members 
opposite — and I think of the member from Estevan there when 
he was making his speech and a number of the other members 
talking about the wonderful job that they are doing here in 
Saskatchewan and how jobs are pouring into the province and 
how all of these kinds of economic diversification and things 
are taking place here in Saskatchewan — if that is happening, if 
that is happening here in Saskatchewan, why then aren’t the 
people from Alberta . . . and Texas is one of the other places he 
mentioned; Arkansas is another good example. Arkansas is the 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

place you’ve been compared to lately by some business 
forecasters here in the last few days. 
 
If that’s the case, why aren’t we seeing all of these people 
loading up the U-hauls and the moving vans and the half-tons 
and everything else and pouring back into Saskatchewan? 
Because it just isn’t happening. Because it isn’t true. 
 
These people would have you believe that we are the 
best-managed place in the entire world. But the fact of the 
matter is, is we’ve got lots of problems, we’ve got lots of 
problems here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And the member from Swift Current should 
know that because on the west side of Swift Current there’s one 
of the biggest U-Haul dealerships in all of Canada. And what do 
they do? What do they do? What is their business made up of? 
 
I stopped out there awhile back and was talking to the dealer 
out there and he tells me we have a one-way traffic here. We 
load them up in Saskatchewan, we load up these U-hauls in 
Saskatchewan. We take them out to Medicine Hat; we take 
them out to Calgary; we take them out to Kelowna. We take 
them out to western locations all over western Canada and then 
we haul them in a convoy back, in terms of empty U-hauls, to 
load them up again and head out to Alberta. It’s an unfortunate 
circumstance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact I was talking to a trucking company friend of mine just 
the other day and he says that they are hauling unprecedented 
amounts of barley out of Saskatchewan right now into Alberta 
feedlots. And you have to wonder why. And the answer is very 
simple. Because there is a tremendous increase in the feeding of 
cattle in southern Alberta, in feedlot alley, as it’s called — some 
of the members will be familiar with that Lethbridge area right 
through to High River — feedlot alley, where there’s just huge 
mass of investments in feedlots in that area. And as a result of 
that they’re trying to bring in and purchase barley from all over 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition to those feedlots, who are made up primarily of 
Saskatchewan feeder cattle to begin with, calving in 
Saskatchewan, winding up as feeder cattle in Alberta, fed with 
Canadian — or pardon me — Saskatchewan grain by 
Saskatchewan people living in Alberta . . . And it’s a huge 
indictment of this government’s fiscal management, this 
government’s attempts over the years to socialize this province 
every step of the way. Any time we had anybody with any 
entrepreneurial aspirations, where do they go? They head to 
Alberta. And that’s why you see, that’s why you see out in 
Medicine Hat more housing starts in Medicine Hat than we saw 
in all of Saskatchewan in the last year. 
 
And that’s why when you go to . . . a good friend of mine also 
— I want to remind the member from Saskatoon Northwest — 
some good friends of mine own — used to own; they sold it 
recently because they made a fortune — used to own a business 
in Medicine Hat. It was a little business in one of the malls. 
 
And they used to do an experiment every once in awhile 
because they were curious. One of the things that they were told 

when they bought this franchise . . . oh, one of these businesses 
that caters primarily to female clientele, and they sold cosmetics 
— I forget the name of the business. 
 
(1445) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Body Shop. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — No, it’s not Body Shop. That’s wrong. 
SoapBerry, SoapBerry is the name of the store. 
 
And they’d been told by the parent company as franchisees that 
something you should know is to get familiar with your 
customers, where is your customer based. And everyone in 
business knows that that’s really important, to be in touch with 
your customers. 
 
So they do a very, very careful analysis of where their 
customers are from — and they have a location in the Medicine 
Hat mall, the big mall that services all of Saskatchewan — they 
do a very careful analysis of where their customers come from, 
and fully 75, 75 per cent of their customers write them a cheque 
from Saskatchewan, hand them a Visa or Mastercard from 
Saskatchewan, or hand them cash that comes from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They ask each and every one of their customers, they ask each 
and every one of their customers that comes up and purchases 
an item from there at a given time — I think they do this about 
one week every two or three months — they ask every customer 
where they’re from and they keep extensive records of that, Mr. 
Speaker. And the reason they do is because as I said, they want 
to be in touch with their customers. 
 
And I think that that is . . . They were astounded at that. They 
were astounded at that when they first started their business. 
They were astounded at it because they thought that their 
business clientele would be primarily made up of Medicine Hat 
people. 
 
And even . . . in fact on top of that, most of the people that 
came up and purchased goods from them would say to them, 
well — they’d ask them where they’re from — and they’d say 
I’m from Medicine Hat, but I’m formerly from Swift Current or 
I’m formerly from Rosetown or I’m formerly from Eston or I’m 
formerly from Herschel or I’m formerly from Saskatoon or I’m 
formerly from Regina or I’m formerly from Estevan or I’m 
formerly from any other place in Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s what Saskatchewan has going for it these days is, it’s got 
a lot of people that are really pulling for us. Unfortunately, they 
all reside outside of this province. 
 
Why is it in Saskatchewan’s history, why is it in 
Saskatchewan’s history that we only have barely over a million 
people? And we have seen provinces like Alberta, who at one 
point throughout the history of Canada had less people than 
Saskatchewan . . . I would ask the member from Rosetown if he 
could provide me a little help in understanding that. 
 
Why has Alberta’s population blossomed to several million 
people — I’m not even sure what it is now — just about three 
million people, three times Saskatchewan, when 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

Saskatchewan’s population has stalled for decades at a million 
people? 
 
Why is that? Why is that? Why is that? Why is that, Mr. 
Member from Rosetown? You always have all of these theories 
about why things are taking place, and the Chair knows it. The 
Chair has heard you speak many times in this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Well now the hon. member from Kindersley 
will recognize that he’s managing to offend simultaneously two 
rules of debate in the House. The hon. member will recognize 
of course, that he’ll want to direct his debate through the Chair 
but not involve the Chair. Order, order. Order, order. And I 
know the hon. member is capable of debating effectively 
without that and I’ll invite him to continue. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize for that 
momentary memory lapse. A number of people around this 
building are having those kinds of things these days, the least of 
which is the Premier of Saskatchewan. In fact we had people 
wondering whether he had been . . . Well I won’t get into that. 
That’s probably not a very good subject in this debate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the areas of my responsibilities as a member opposite, as 
an opposition member, is the Department of Agriculture. And 
as critic for Agriculture there’s lots of concerns within the 
budget. And some of farmers opposite — well there’s darn few 
of them — but some of them opposite might realize some of the 
concerns that agriculture is faced with these days. And the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest, well I’m pretty sure he’ll 
understand what I’m talking about when I suggest that we are 
on, I think, on the edge of a very, very serious problem 
upcoming in agriculture in this upcoming year. 
 
We see prices have been depressed by the Canadian Wheat 
Board by about 30 per cent in some cases in the last year. You 
have to wonder what’s going on over at that office these days. 
But anyway, they’ve been depressed by the Canadian Wheat 
Board by about 30 per cent. 
 
On top of that, we have a very, very dry soil conditions in a 
large part of Saskatchewan. We’re hopeful that the snows that 
have come in the last little while, and there’ll be additional 
spring moisture, we’re hopeful of that, but if it doesn’t 
materialize, we are onto the same kinds of drought-type 
proportions that we saw in 1998. And that is something that 
should be of great concern to this legislature — 1988 was the 
drought. That’s what I said, 1988 — 1988 — check the record. 
1988 was the drought year here in Saskatchewan. 1988 was the 
drought year in Saskatchewan as everyone knows. I remember 
it very well. 
 
As a farmer that was . . . all I was involved in at that point was 
not politics, was only in agriculture, and sitting out there 
disheartened, as all farmers were across Saskatchewan, 
watching your crops wither. 
 
One of the greatest joys that farmers have is, after you’ve 
seeded your crop and you watch it progress, is driving around in 
an evening with your family, your wife if you can talk her into 
going on these types of things — often you can’t, but 
occasionally, occasionally — one of the greatest joys is driving 

around and seeing how your crop is progressing. 
 
And I’ll tell you, about halfway through the summer, about 
halfway through the summer, in my area of Saskatchewan — 
I’m sure it was in the same in many other areas of 
Saskatchewan — farmers stopped doing it. They were 
disheartened to the point where they didn’t even want to see 
their crop any longer, it was in such desperate shape. It was 
terrible, Mr. Speaker. And then in our area we had an unusual 
phenomena that came through. On August 11 of 1998 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — ’88 
 
Mr. Boyd: — 1988 — he’s confusing me over there — 1988, 
right in the middle of the drought, August 11 of 1988, we had 
5.2 inches of rain. We had sloughs of water all over our entire 
farm to go around, to harvest around, to harvest nothing. We 
were driving around water to get to the next patch of grain that 
was virtually non-existent. It was the most disheartening thing I 
ever saw. 
 
My father came out to our farm, and I’ll never forget it. It’s one 
of the few times I’ve ever seen him weep. And he came out to 
the farm and he got on the combine with me and he rode around 
for a little while. Then he started weeping and said, I have to get 
off of here; I can’t stand this. I can’t bear to see this. 
 
He said, good crops grow this high. They don’t grow 2 inches 
high. Good crops in Saskatchewan in this area that I’m from 
that we’re familiar with, are crops of grain that are waist high or 
higher. He couldn’t believe how desperate it was. He’d been 
away for a little bit that summer; he’d been ill, so he hadn’t 
seen it until harvest and it was in desperate shape. 
 
And I’m afraid, I’m worried, and I think many, many people in 
the farm community would agree with me that they’re worried 
about this year. We look out the door today, it’s an absolute 
beautiful day if you’re a golfer. It’s an absolute beautiful day if 
you want to go outside and go for a stroll. It’s an absolute 
beautiful day if you want to go outside and bat a tennis ball 
around or play a little bit of basketball or something like that. 
 
But if you’re a farmer, every one of these days that goes by in 
the next few weeks leading up to seeding, is going to cause 
increasing concern and anxiety because there is less and less 
moisture available. 
 
I toured my farm on the weekend when I was home to have a 
look at the moisture conditions, and there was literally zero — 
absolutely zero — run-off. The dugouts are not experiencing 
any run-off into them at all in our area, and I suspect it’s the 
same in many areas of Saskatchewan. There is a desperate 
situation. 
 
And I know the member from Regina Northeast is conscious of 
that because he has a background in agriculture. He’s very 
concerned about it. I talked to him the other day about it and he 
is aware of the situation, coming from a, agriculture background 
and having family members that are still involved in the 
farming situation here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But the problem that farmers are faced with in terms of lower 
prices and impending drought — that we hope doesn’t happen 



420 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

but is there — is also compounded by the fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that we have a safety net problem as well in agriculture. We 
virtually have no safety net any longer. NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) provides some support, yes; crop 
insurance provides some support, yes. But did this budget make 
any provisions whatsoever — and I would ask the Minister of 
Finance — did this budget make any provisions, Mr. Speaker, 
whatsoever for the fact that we may be faced with a very, very 
desperate situation in agriculture, one of the areas of our 
economy that we can’t afford to have a substantial downturn in. 
 
I’ll just relate a little bit of what’s going on in our area again, 
Mr. Speaker. I’m involved in the seed business, as some of you 
may know. And up until about Christmas time the seed business 
was in good shape; there was all kinds of activity. Farmers had 
a lot of optimism. There was lots of activity in terms of sales. 
 
About January 2, when the Canadian Wheat Board announced 
the final payments and they were lower than a lot of farmers 
were hoping for and expecting, the buoyancy in terms of sales 
of seed — and when you talk to equipment manufacturers and 
equipment dealers they say the same thing — it literally dried 
up almost over night, sales did. 
 
And I think it’s in anticipation of the fact that farmers are 
concerned about cash flow management as we go into a year 
when we may see sharply — well we’re going to see sharply 
lower prices — and we may see lower than normal production. 
 
So there’s lots of concern in agriculture these days. There’s lots 
of concern because there is nothing in terms of a safety net 
program. And I hope, I hope it doesn’t happen but I think, Mr. 
Finance Minister, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, I think, Mr. 
Finance Minister, you better be prepared at some point to look 
into this situation and address it. And I hope you don’t have to 
go cap in hand to the taxpayers of Canada to make an ad hoc 
. . . put together some sort of an ad hoc program. We all know 
the problems with those kinds of programs in the past, and I 
hope we aren’t having to experience that. 
 
But one thing I’ll tell you, Mr. Finance Minister, and Mr. 
Speaker, that you’ll have the full cooperation of this party, the 
Saskatchewan Party, if it comes to that where you have 
concerns in terms of agriculture and what we’re going to do to 
address a sharply lower ag sector here in Saskatchewan. 
Because we are concerned about it, and I know you’re thinking 
about it and concerned about it as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is something that hits very, very close to 
home for a lot of us. Virtually all of us in Saskatchewan are 
touched by agriculture at some point here in this great province, 
so we better pay a lot of attention. And although it’s a great day 
outside today in terms of sunshine and a warm day, let’s all 
hope and pray for about a 2-inch rain here one of these days. 
 
Diversification is something that should be on the minds of the 
Finance minister, Mr. Speaker, as well. Diversification of our 
economy is extremely important here in Saskatchewan. We 
have to diversify our economy in terms of many, many things. 
Improving upon the manufacturing sector is just one of them. 
Improving in terms of agriculture diversification is another one. 
In terms of all kinds of manufacturing is extremely important. 
 

We see now, as was predicted by many people a number of 
years ago, that when the Crow rate was removed, when the 
Crow rate changed, there was going to be a lot of people 
deciding to themselves that rather than shipping the raw product 
to the coast or to Thunder Bay or to Hudson Bay, we were 
going to be in a situation where we better start diversifying. 
 
And that’s why you’re seeing the kind of massive investment 
that you are seeing in agriculture today in this province, where 
we’re seeing Heartland Livestock getting involved in huge 
investments in terms of pork production here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m a little . . . I have to admit I’m supportive of that, but I’m 
also a little bit concerned about where that pork is all going to 
be going. A lot of that pork production is supposed to be going 
to Asian countries who, as we know, recently have been faced 
with huge losses in terms of commodity . . . or currency, pardon 
me, currency values. And so there’s lots of concern about the 
Taiwanese economy and the Japanese economy and many 
economies in the Far East. Those were the areas that primarily 
we were hoping that this hog production would be going 
towards. 
 
American production, American consumption, will take up 
some of that slack, but unfortunately I am a little bit concerned, 
and I think probably the Finance minister and his department 
and the Ag minister and his department are wondering about it 
as well, whether or not this is going to be the panacea in terms 
of how we can diversify some of our ag sector. And the fact of 
the matter is, if the exports to some of these countries start 
drying up, we’re going to be in a lot of trouble in terms of these 
investments into hog production. 
 
Many of these facilities . . . and I was at one not too long ago — 
last fall, Mr. Speaker — the opening of one in the very northern 
tip of my constituency. I think they called it West Pork, I 
believe was the name of that. I may be mistaken about that and 
I would apologize to the people involved in that project, but I 
think that was the name of the project. 
 
And they were going to be carrying a tremendous debt load. I 
think their debt-to-equity ratio was up there pretty high where 
there was a lot of concern that if they saw a downturn in terms 
of prices, that they were going to be faced with a great deal of 
difficulty in meeting their debt schedules. 
 
So we have to be concerned about that. And I would encourage 
the Minister of Finance and the Department of Agriculture to be 
paying some pretty serious attention to those areas. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Finance Minister, and Mr. Speaker, the 
other area of concern that we have in the budget is the area of 
oil projections. I think you’re pretty optimistic about your oil 
projection, sir. 
 
As I said, I’m not sure whether you were present at the time, but 
the RBC Dominion forecast for this year, 1998, balance of ’98, 
is $14.80. And I would want you to see this and I’ll pass it 
across to you. 
 
(1500) 
 
The projections for ’99 are $16.50; the projections for year 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

2000 are 16.95; 2001 are at $17.18. Projections for 2002 are 
$17.34. So we don’t meet your projections of 17.25, 
accordingly to RBC at least, until year 2002. 
 
So I would caution you, in terms of your budget projections in 
the future, to recognize that there are many, many sources of 
information. And I hope you would be accessing as many as 
possible — and I trust you are — that I haven’t seen. And I 
would ask you, through the Department of Finance, if you 
would care to forward some of your projections as to where 
you’re getting your projections from a barrel of oil. 
 
Because I haven’t seen any. There may be some that I’m not 
aware of, but I haven’t seen any that are optimistic to the point, 
Mr. Speaker, that the Department of Finance is making at this 
point. 
 
The fact of the matter is, I believe the Bank of Montreal 
recently put out price projections that are in the, I think it’s $15 
range, which is pretty much the same area that RBC is talking 
about. 
 
I don’t know the exact number and I would ask the Finance 
minister, Mr. Speaker, to provide that information to the House; 
that if their projections are off, if their projections are off and 
we do see a barrel of oil coming in at $14.80 or $15, which 
those two outfits, RBC and the Bank of Montreal are suggesting 
it will, I would wonder, Mr. Finance Minister, what loss of 
revenue that that will result in to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In my constituency of Kindersley we have a significant amount 
of oil production, as everyone knows. However, it’s relatively 
an old, old field of oil production here in Saskatchewan and it’s 
a very low producing field. Normal barrels per day, or metres 
per day as they say now, is not the kind of production that we 
see down in some of the other areas, the Weyburn-Estevan, 
sometimes even the Swift Current areas of Saskatchewan. 
 
And my friends in the oil industry in the Kindersley, Kerrobert, 
right up to Lloydminster areas of this province, tell me that 
$14.80 oil means only one thing to them — it means losses. 
And it means as a result of those losses that they start shutting 
in production. And the way they do that is they don’t go around 
and turn the switches off on the pump jacks. That isn’t quite the 
way they do it because they have costs that they have to meet as 
well. 
 
But what happens is, is when an oil pump jack goes down, if 
they have trouble with it, mechanical trouble or something like 
that, they simply don’t go and fix it. They just leave it, taking 
that well out of production for a time period. And as a result of 
that there is not only a loss of revenue to the government, 
there’s a loss of revenue to the oil company and there’s a loss of 
perhaps even employment through some of the people 
associated with that industry. So I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Finance minister be paying pretty close attention to those 
areas as well. 
 
One area, one thing that I do agree with that the government has 
done in Saskatchewan in the last few years, last several perhaps 
I think it is, and they have come with quarterly projections of 
where they are going. I would hope that as the next quarter 
approaches that we’ll be getting a report from the Minister of 

Finance outlining how they’re making out on their projections 
of revenue from the oil industry, from the agriculture sectors of 
Saskatchewan, because those are two areas of our economy that 
there are some storm clouds ahead, I’m afraid. 
 
The other areas of concern of course to people all over 
Saskatchewan, are our tax rates. And I know that the Finance 
minister has spent some time thinking about those areas as well. 
They have reduced the provincial sales tax last year by 2 per 
cent. I supported it then, I still support it. I would have 
supported another 2 per cent reduction and I was hopeful that 
we would have saw that in this latest budget. 
 
The Finance department preferred to go in another direction and 
that was personal income tax. I don’t think we always have to 
follow Alberta and Manitoba in terms of these kinds of things 
— Alberta and Manitoba reduced their personal income tax 
rates. So really we haven’t made any more progress in terms of 
attacking the differences, different tax rates between 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, and Manitoba. All we have done is kept 
up with them. 
 
And that’s the concern that people have. If all we can do is keep 
up with them in terms of lowering it, we still have the 
differentials between the various provinces. And the Finance 
department I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, is aware that the differentials 
are causing a loss of economic activity here in Saskatchewan. 
That’s difficult, yes, difficult to measure but is nevertheless 
there. 
 
In the last budget we saw the projections, the conventional 
wisdom . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We’ll get to the debt. If 
you want to talk about the debt, we’ll get to the debt. We’ll get 
to the debt, we’ll get to the debt here in a minute if you want to 
talk about that. 
 
The fact of the matter is that here in Saskatchewan we have a 
huge difference in terms of our tax rates compared to other 
provinces and it does impact. We always were under the 
assumption that we would lose about $80 million per point of 
reduction in the PST (provincial sales tax). So when the 
government reduced the PST by 2 per cent last year, there was a 
widespread belief that it was going to result in $160 million of 
less revenue to the government. 
 
But what happened? That wasn’t the case. An offset in terms of 
the amount of increased economic activity took place, and we 
resulted in a loss of not $160 million but of $30 million. Still a 
loss — yes — but not anywhere near the kind of loss that the 
department and many of your members opposite always said 
would happen. 
 
We have maintained, and we still maintain, that there is an 
offsetting increase in economic activity as a result of lowering 
taxes. It creates a stimulus effect in the economy. And we 
continue to argue that had you done that again this year you 
would not have seen the kind of losses that you maintain always 
happen. 
 
We think another 2 per cent reduction in the provincial sales tax 
would have been prudent, would have been possible. And we 
believe that that would have resulted in maybe 30, or maybe 
even a little bit more, $40, we’ll say, million of lost revenue. 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

But I’ll give you one example of where you could have made 
up that 30 or $40 million — the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement. That agreement alone . . . I don’t know, what is 
your estimate, Mr. Speaker, what is the Department of 
Finance’s estimate of what that policy alone costs. We have 
never been able to . . . The Finance minister is holding his hand 
up in a goose-egg. 
 
Well I was visiting yesterday, Mr. Speaker, with a construction 
company in town here yesterday. I’m not going to give the 
construction company’s name because I don’t think they’d want 
me to. But I was visiting with them here yesterday, and if 
anybody wants — well there’s some people over there doubting 
it — if anybody wants to come with me after I’m finished my 
speech, I’ll take you out and we’ll talk to the guy. I’ll take you 
out to the company where I was at yesterday and we’ll talk to 
him . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s just one. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Just one company. They were a construction 
company here in Regina, located right here in the heart of 
Regina. 
 
And he told me, and he told me, he told me, Mr. Speaker, he 
told me that on one project that they bid on last year — a 
Crown Construction Tendered Agreement — they bid it two 
ways: they bid it as a non-union company and they bid it as a 
union company. And they also said, he said it was a four and a 
half million dollar project; I think it was the Wakaw water 
project, I think that was what he said it was — four and a half 
million dollar project. 
 
And he tells me that on that project, on that project, he was only 
able to bid it as a unionized contract with any hope of getting it. 
But he bid it as a non-unionized contractor too to show the 
differences in that cost structure. And he said he was only able 
to get bids from two sub-contractors — I think it was carpentry 
and plumbing, if I recall — that he could only get the contracts 
from two of those . . . sub-contracts from two of those different 
sub-contractors, different trades. Of about 20 trades in that total 
project, there’d be about 20 trades involved in it, but only 2 of 
them would bid with them in a non-unionized fashion. 
 
It was $258,000 lower he could have bid, and that is only 2 out 
of 20 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s phoney. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — No, it’s not phoney. The member from . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well what you are saying, what you 
are saying, member from Regina, is that this man, this man with 
30 years experience here in Saskatchewan in the construction 
industry, is not telling us the truth. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is that he went out on his own as a 
business person, as an entrepreneur here in Saskatchewan, and 
wanted to find out what the differences were. And he said out of 
two, out of two sub-contractors, two tenders that he could have 
got from sub-contractors, two trades companies, he was able to, 
would have been able to, save on that project $258,000. 
 
And the member says well he couldn’t get it because it had to 

bid as a union contract. Why don’t we open it up then I would 
say to you? If you’re so confident, if you’re so confident that 
there is no difference in costs, if you’re so confident that there 
is no difference in costs, open it up and let’s see whether you 
are correct. Put your money where your mouth is. You’re 
wrong and you know you’re wrong. You’re wrong and you 
know you’re wrong and this contractor can prove it to you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he said to us yesterday . . . and I have no reason to 
disbelieve this man, I’d never met the guy before in my life, 
never had occasion to meet him, never had occasion to meet 
him. We went and talked to him yesterday about a number of 
things. Asking for support for the Saskatchewan Party was one 
of them, and we got that, but he also provided us with some 
information about those kind of things. 
 
And I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that it’s just one example, 
it is just one example of how this government could have 
reduced the provincial sales tax — getting back to my original 
point — by 2 per cent. That was an area that they could have 
plucked 30 million, $40 million out of, to provide a tax 
reduction to the people of Saskatchewan. And I’m sure people 
in this province would have thought that would have been a step 
in the right direction. It would have helped start and continue to 
address what we believe is one of the primary barriers to growth 
here in Saskatchewan and that is the tax rates. 
 
Another area of problem for business owners here in 
Saskatchewan is the regulations problem that we have in 
Saskatchewan. And I remember a couple of throne speeches 
ago, Mr. Speaker, and you’ll remember this as well, that this 
government promised in throne speeches of the past to reduce 
the regulatory problems that businesses are having here in 
Saskatchewan by, I think it was 25 per cent if memory serves. 
Have you reduced it at all? In fact it’s gone up. 
 
There’s more red tape and regulation placed before businesses 
in Saskatchewan today than we have ever seen in the past, in 
spite of the fact, in spite of the fact that this government 
opposite promised to start reducing the amount of regulation 
and business red tape that business owners all over this 
province have to go through. And I’d be interested what the 
member from Regina, speaking from her seat back there, has to 
say about this. In spite of the promises that they’ve made we 
haven’t seen any progress in this area at all. 
 
And that’s disturbing, Mr. Speaker, because I think one of the 
things that people expect from governments, they expect from 
governments is to keep the promises that they’ve made. 
Business owners in this province expected this government to 
hold true to their word to reduce business regulation. And have 
we done that? Have we done that? In your department, Madam 
Minister, have you reduced any regulation at all? Tell me one. 
Tell me one. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that 
member to produce one example within her department of less 
regulations. Hasn't happened, hasn’t happened, and we know it, 
and business owners all over Saskatchewan know it. 
 
Now the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, were encouraging me 
to speak about debt here in Saskatchewan and I’ll be happy to 
speak about debt. Yes, we have a significant debt here in 
Saskatchewan. The former Finance minister, former Finance 
minister sitting over here, from Regina, at one time in this 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

legislature a few years back admitted that of the $15 billion of 
debt here in Saskatchewan that Saskatchewan taxpayers are 
faced with, about $5 billion of that debt was brought together 
by NDP administrations of the past. He admitted that, he 
admitted that. He admitted that before this legislature. 
 
(1515) 
 
They like to suggest that all of the debt of Saskatchewan is all 
the result of the ’80s. And the fact of the matter is, is those 
members all know opposite that that isn’t true. And the Finance 
minister of a few Finance ministers ago — we’ve gone through 
a few of them — the Finance minister of the past has admitted 
that. And if they care to see within Hansard, we’ll provide that 
information to the Assembly. 
 
Because he did admit it. And he did finally, after persistent 
questioning from the opposition at one point. And the member 
from Rosetown-Biggar says he had a bad day. And I’m sure it 
was a bad day for him to have to make that admission — that 
part of the $15 billion of debt that we have here in 
Saskatchewan was as a result of NDP administrations of the 
past. 
 
Yes, we have a huge debt here in Saskatchewan. As we were 
going through the ’80s there was unprecedented call for 
government to intervene in the economy, and they did that. 
There was an unprecedented call from agriculture to intervene 
in terms of problems in agriculture. There was an 
unprecedented call from home-owners across this province to 
intervene in terms of mortgage rates, if you remember, Mr. 
Speaker. Twenty-two per cent mortgage rates were in 
Saskatchewan at one point — twenty-two per cent. 
 
And the fact of the matter is, is that governments all across 
Canada, all across the industrialized world, responded with 
interventionist tactics by flooding money into the economy to 
try and offset the downturn, in fact a global downturn in the 
economy. 
 
Yes, they did that. Yes, they did that. And did they do it with 
the approval of the NDP at that time? Yes they did. Yes, they 
did. And in fact at that time, Mr. Speaker, you will recall, you 
will recall just as every other person in Saskatchewan recalls, 
that every time there was a budget presented in this Assembly 
during the 1980s and early ’90s, every single time, members 
opposite stood up and said, it’s inadequate; you’re not putting 
enough money into agriculture; you’re not putting enough 
money into education; you’re not putting enough money into 
health. 
 
They have unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
have one of the most convenient memories I’ve ever seen. They 
totally want to absolve themselves of any responsibility when it 
comes to these things. 
 
The member from Regina knows full well that that’s what 
happened during that time frame. And we’ll produce speeches 
that he made, through Hansard, in this legislature to prove what 
we are saying if we have to. Because they are being . . . they are 
not being honest with the people of Saskatchewan if they 
suggest to them that they are not partially responsible for the 
debts that were run up in this province. 

Because all through that time frame, all through that time frame 
every single one of you, every single one of you were making 
speeches across this province. Every single one of you were 
making speeches to this province, Mr. Speaker, including, 
including a number of people, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly. 
Every single one of them were making speeches across this 
province saying that we’re not spending enough in health; we’re 
not spending enough in education; we’re not spending enough 
in agriculture; we’re not spending enough in terms of social 
services; we’re not spending enough in terms of highways; 
we’re not spending enough in terms of economic development. 
That’s were the kind of speeches that they were making. 
 
And then after 1991, after 1991, what happened? They forgot 
about it all. They forgot all about those speeches. They forgot 
all about their call on the treasury of the day at that time. They 
forgot all about all of the things they were saying. The member 
from Rosetown-Biggar, the member from Rosetown-Biggar 
used to go across this province and scream his head off calling 
for more spending for education. More spending for education. 
 
And what happened? Oh, here we go. And the member from 
Rose . . . from Regina . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, oh 
but, when it comes to laying blame today, who do they want to 
lay the blame at the feet of? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Me, exactly. Was I a member at that time? If 
you’re not going to take any responsibility, why are you asking 
me to take any responsibility? 
 
And you were supporting the call for more spending. You were 
supporting the call for more spending. And the member sitting 
behind you was; and the member sitting behind her was. Every 
single last one of you in the NDP Party were calling for 
increased spending. 
 
You people, you people . . . Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we grow tired of that kind of thing. 
You did a pretty good job, you did a pretty good job of trying to 
absolve themselves, Mr. Speaker, of any responsibility in this 
area, but there are many people across Saskatchewan who 
remember the speeches that you made, Mr. Member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, Mr. Member from Regina . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now I know — order! — 
the hon. member for Kindersley is an experienced debater in the 
House and he knows that the rules of the House require debate 
to be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The rules are the rules and 
they apply all the time. And the hon. member recognizes fully 
well, I know, that he’s to direct his debate through the Chair 
and I encourage him to do that in the spirit of proper 
parliamentary debate in the House. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I will undertake to try and do that, Mr. Speaker, 
and I thank you for reminding me of that. The fact of the matter 
is here in Saskatchewan, that there are many of us who 
remember the 1980s. Memories of that are long within our 
memories. The people of Saskatchewan will remember it, yes. 
There was lots of problems in the ’80s. There was lots of debt 
run up in the ’80s. There was lots of debt run up in the ’70s and 
before that. 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

And the member from Regina . . . What’s that member’s seat 
over there, the Finance minister of the day? The Finance 
minister of the day, the fellow that appears to be sleeping over 
there. He said in this Assembly, he said — Regina Dewdney, 
Regina Dewdney, the member that appears to be sleeping over 
there — he said to the people of Saskatchewan yes, there was a 
debt of about $5 billion when we took over the administration 
in 1991 . . . or pardon me, when the Devine administration took 
over in 1982, there was about a $5 billion, there was about a $5 
billion debt here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And all through the ’80s while there was debt being run up, do 
any of you remember the speeches you made? Do any of you 
remember them? Mr. Speaker, I would ask this Assembly if any 
of the members opposite remember the speeches that they made 
back in those days when they were saying, spend more, spend 
more, spend more, spend more. 
 
There was only one member, if I recall, at that time that was 
saying any different and it was Ralph Goodale. It was. And I 
have no problem admitting it was Ralph Goodale, because at 
the time, at the time I have to admit that I agreed in large 
measure with Ralph Goodale on that point. Ralph Goodale had 
a good point at that time. 
 
Unfortunately it was only for political expediency. It had very 
little to do with what he believed. It had a lot to do with 
political expediency and absolutely nothing to do with what he 
believed, because he went from there, he went from those days, 
he went trotting off down to Ottawa, went trotting off down to 
Ottawa to be a principal secretary to the Prime Minister at that 
time, where they were having massive deficits, and supported it 
at that level. 
 
So while he was saying one thing in Saskatchewan he sure as 
heck was saying something different when he got to Ottawa. 
And the fact of the matter is, is this fellow over here, 
Rosetown-Biggar, Mr. Speaker, is saying we give away things 
to the friends. That was the other famous rallying call of the 
NDP opposite all through the days when there were things 
happening. Well who’s been getting it these days, Mr. Member, 
and Mr. Speaker? Who’s been getting it these days? Who’s 
been getting a patronage these days? Who’s been getting the 
largesse of the government these days? Who’s been up to the 
trough lately? Who got the latest cheque from you guys? Who 
wound up with $300,000 courtesy of the taxpayers? 
 
Who wound up, who wound up as the man in charge of the 
SHIN project here in Saskatchewan? Who wound up with the 
member . . . who wound up with the SHIN project? Even in 
spite of the fact that there was applicants that were far more 
qualified, you went and found, dug old Nystuen out of the 
woodwork . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m sorry if I’m not 
pronouncing his name properly. Nystuen then . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Whatever. You went and dug him up out of 
some NDP hole and you found him and you put him into a 
place that he is no more qualified for than Jack Messer was 
qualified to run SaskPower in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what people across Saskatchewan are asking for 
from their government in budgets these days have been 
illustrated in the newspapers of late. They’ve been asking for 
the budget of this province to be balanced, yes. One of the other 

priorities that people have in this province today are tax relief. 
They don’t believe that the government went anywhere near far 
enough in terms of tax relief. They don’t believe that the 
government put enough money into education, or they don’t 
believe they put enough money into health care or highways. 
 
You have to be responsible in terms of your call for money, for 
increased amounts into those areas. We think in the 
Saskatchewan Party we have been responsible in calls for those 
areas. Every time we have called for increased spending we 
have identified areas where we think it could come from, every 
single occasion. We think that that is being responsible. We 
think it is different than the oppositions of the past. We think it 
is different than the oppositions of the past that just simply 
called for more, more, more, more. 
 
And every time someone said where are you going to get it 
from, they said things like GigaText — $7 million . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 5 million was it? — 5, 7 whatever 
the figure was; 5 to $7 million. We’ll use the higher estimate 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What do you care? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I care a lot about it. I care a lot about it, Mr. 
Speaker. I think all members of this legislature should care a lot 
about it. It was a bungled deal, GigaText was. It was an ill-fated 
attempt to try and translate French language into English law 
here in Saskatchewan. It was a huge mess, it was a huge mess 
and it should never have started. But it is exactly the same kind 
of mess that this government finds itself into today. 
 
What happened in this Channel Lake thing, Mr. Speaker, could 
have financed a few things here in Saskatchewan. We’re not 
going to say it’s going to finance a $300 million increase in 
highways or anything else like that, because that would be 
irresponsible. Because this deal has only lost $5 million, by the 
government’s estimates, all the way up to $15 million by Jack 
Messer’s estimates. But the fact of the matter is, is we should be 
just as concerned about the losses in Channel Lake as we were 
in the losses of GigaText. 
 
And you people over there take great pride, Mr. Speaker, this 
Assembly’s members on that side of the House take great pride 
in trying to want to ram down the throats of Saskatchewan 
people to try and remind them of GigaText. 
 
Well you should take just as much pride, members opposite, of 
talking about Channel Lake and the misadventure in that 
respect. Because the people of Saskatchewan lost money then 
and they’re losing money today. And every time one of you 
opposite wants to get up and talk about GigaText, or the debt, 
we want you to talk about Channel Lake and Jack Messer. 
Because it’s just as important to the taxpayers of this province 
now as it was then. 
 
We were involved in some very, very serious problems in the 
1980s, yes, but we’ve got a serious problem here now, Mr. 
Speaker, in the 1990s. We got a SaskPower board that has been 
neutered by the Premier of this province. We’ve got a 
SaskPower former president that was involved in all kinds of 
activities that weren’t under the authorization of the board, did 
not have the authorization of the minister — although that’s 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

coming into question these days, although that’s coming into 
question. 
 
The other day down in Crown Corporations Committee, Jack 
Messer said . . . he had a little tell-all confession down there. He 
said yes, the member from Rosetown-Biggar knew what was 
going on; and yes, the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) knew 
what was going on; and yes, the member from Cumberland 
knew what was going on; and yes, the entire board knew what 
was going on; and yes, the minister responsible for CIC knew 
what was going on; and yes, the Premier of Saskatchewan was 
informed of all of this. 
 
We have to ask, why is this government being reluctant, why is 
this government being reluctant in talking about these issues? 
Why is this government not wanting to have a public inquiry? 
Why is this government, why is this government not wanting to 
turn over documents? You know very well, member for Regina 
. . . Northeast — I can never think of his constituency — 
Regina Northeast is a lawyer here in Saskatchewan. As a lawyer 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as a lawyer here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that member would know full well 
that when you get to court you have to have relevant documents 
presented in advance. 
 
The prosecution provides all of the information that the other 
. . . the defence asks for so that they can have weeks and 
sometimes months to prepare. And these people opposite want 
to turn over the documents, they want you to turn over the 
documents on that one day and then they want you to go 
straight into asking questions about it. My prediction is, is 
they’re going to bring in a wheelbarrel practically full of stuff, 
and they’re going to dump it out on our doorstep, and they’re 
going to say to us, okay you’ve got a few minutes to prepare, 
let’s go ask questions about this. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well they didn’t read the contract. They 
don’t think we have to either. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — That’s a good point. That’s a good point. But I 
think anyone in Saskatchewan that has any, even a minuscule 
amount of fairness, a minuscule amount of fairness would 
realize that that is not right; that that is not appropriate; that is 
not what open and accountable government, as they have 
promised would be, is all about; that is not how a legislature 
should work. 
 
We should have opportunity to review all of the information. 
We should have opportunity to have legal counsel. Not some 
NDP legal counsel that the member, the chairperson of this 
committee drags in at the last minute and then fails to provide 
information about the background or anything else; oh, it 
slipped her memory. As I said, there’s a lot of people having 
memory problems around here these days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that that is unfortunate, because just as it was 
unfortunate, just as it was unfortunate with GigaText, it’s 
unfortunate today. Just as it was unfortunate then, it’s 
unfortunate today. And every one of you opposite should be 
ashamed of yourselves for trying to withhold information from 
that committee. 

Every single document should be turned over. Every single 
witness that we ask for that we believe is relevant should be 
brought before that committee and subpoenaed if necessary and 
asked to testify under oath. 
 
Because if we’re going to get to the bottom of this, Mr. 
Speaker, if we’re going to get to the bottom of this and try and 
correct that, this problem, try and correct the GigaTexts of the 
past, yes, and try and protect the taxpayers of the province of 
Saskatchewan in respect to Channel Lake today, if we’re going 
to try and do that, if you are truly sincere over there, Mr. 
Speaker, if you’re truly sincere about it, you’ll provide that 
information as soon as possible; and you’ll delay if necessary, 
you’ll delay if necessary — we’re not asking for that at this 
point, but we may — we may ask for delay if necessary to 
review that information, to go over that. We’re not asking for 
that now but we may. 
 
Because we want to have proper time to prepare for this 
committee because we think it’s important for the taxpayers of 
this province, Mr. Speaker. We think it’s important because 
there’s money that has been lost. And it’s not my money, it’s 
not the members opposite’s money; it’s the taxpayers of this 
province’s money. 
 
You have a sworn duty, you have a sworn duty and a 
responsibility as members of Executive Council and cabinet and 
members of this legislature, as we all do, to try and protect the 
interests of this province and the people of this province and the 
taxpayers of this province. And I have seen anything but 
cooperation from the members opposite. 
 
When we ask for witnesses . . . And I don’t think there’s anyone 
in Saskatchewan any longer that doesn’t believe that we are 
right in our call. If this was an investigation, if this was an 
investigation, a murder investigation, Mr. Speaker, do you think 
we couldn’t call any witness we wanted if we were the 
prosecution? Do you think we couldn’t call any witness we 
thought was relevant? Of course we could. Of course we could. 
 
There’s a huge difference, yes, between a murder investigation 
and this, and I’ll be the first to admit that. But there is a 
fundamental premiss that we should be able to call before that 
Assembly, before that committee, anybody that we feel is 
relevant. And this government should not be moving to block 
that testimony. 
 
And the Chair, Mr. Speaker, speaks from her seat and says they 
are not. We have seen anything but an unbiased Chair. And I 
would ask that member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now I think the 
hon. member will recognize the use of unparliamentary 
reference to a member of the Assembly in capacity as a 
presiding officer of a committee, and I’ll ask that he withdraw 
that remark. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I would want to withdraw that remark 
unconditionally, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have some concerns about how that committee is working, 
Mr. Speaker. We have concerns as members of the legislature. 
We have concerns about ordinary citizens in Saskatchewan and 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

we have concerns about taxpayers here in Saskatchewan. And I 
think those concerns are shared by people all over this province. 
 
And if the polling indicates anything here in Saskatchewan, it 
indicates that people across, right across political lines, right 
across political lines also believe that there are concerns with 
this investigation. They believe that there are concerns, yes. 
 
We’re going to get to the bottom of this one way or the other. 
We’re going to call members opposite, including the Deputy 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, to that committee, and the Premier of this 
province and the member from . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes. This is their answer to it: you can ask questions in question 
period. He’s going to testify in question period he says, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well unfortunately we don’t think that that’s good enough, nor 
do the people of Saskatchewan think that’s good enough. If 
anyone wants to take, for example, and review, if anybody in 
Saskatchewan wants to take and review the questions and the 
answers in question period over the last few years, can anyone 
make any connection between the questions and the answers 
provided by that minister over there, Mr. Speaker. Because I 
don’t think there’s any connection. 
 
We asked whether Jack Messer was receiving any kind of 
information or support from SaskPower, and unfortunately the 
minister gets up and gets into some rant about the 1980s. How 
possibly could we get into that? The people of Saskatchewan 
want to know a little bit about this now, sir. The people of 
Saskatchewan have a right to know. They have a right to know 
what went on in this situation, and we’re going to continue, 
we’re going to continue to ask the questions in spite of any kind 
of efforts of this government, through their committee, is 
wanting to . . . 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, I would offer some advice. I would offer 
some advice to the members opposite. I think that the Chair of 
that committee should be acting in the same kind of impartiality 
that the Speaker of this Assembly acts in. We ask for and we 
demand, we ask for and we demand the same kind of 
impartiality that the Speaker of this Assembly displays. We 
think that that’s what this calls for. We’re not even sure you 
should be sitting in caucus any longer because we have some 
legitimate concerns about the impartiality in this committee. 
 
We’re not even sure you should be speaking to the members of 
your party any longer, Mr. Speaker. There is concerns about 
impartiality on this issue and as . . . I hear that member cackling 
from her seat but people across Saskatchewan aren’t laughing. 
People across Saskatchewan aren’t laughing any longer, Mr. 
Speaker, because they have concerns about that. 
 
I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that anyone has made any kind of 
sexist remark in this regard. I don’t believe anybody’s made any 
kind of sexist remark. But I believe that the members of this 
committee, that committee Chair, Mr. Speaker, has to be 
impartial. And I think everybody in Saskatchewan believes that. 
If we are to read the editorials here in Saskatchewan, the 
editorialists of Saskatchewan believe it as well. 
 
The editorialists . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member 
from Regina Elphinstone is suggesting from his seat about what 

should happen to members opposite over here. Well I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that there’s going to be spankings handed out 
all right. There’s going to be spankings in the next election. 
There’s going to be spankings in the next election campaign 
here in Saskatchewan, and I think a bunch of members opposite 
are going to get them. And the one holding up something over 
there is probably one that’s going to get the worst. 
 
Well we’ve probably gone a long ways from the budget 
discussion, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll bring it back. I’ll bring it back 
to that discussion now by saying I think that the government has 
wrong priorities in a number of areas. I think they’ve been 
wrong in terms of the management of the Crown corporations. I 
think they’ve been wrong in terms of the management of the 
Department of Finance in a number of areas. I think they’re 
wrong in terms of their direction in terms of the Department of 
Highways, the Department of Agriculture, and Department of 
Health, and Education, just to give you a few examples, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I believe that I certainly won’t be 
supporting this budget, and I think that the people of 
Saskatchewan have some problems with this budget. And I 
would ask that all members of this legislature listen to their 
constituents these days and vote with their hearts and their 
heads, rather than voting with their NDP card. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And first of all, I 
would like to also thank the hon. member for Carrot River for 
allowing me to speak now. I think it’s particularly generous of 
this member to allow me to speak in view of him just being told 
by the hon. member for Kindersley that his time with us is so 
limited. 
 
Well the budget, Mr. Speaker. What do I think of the hundred 
and fifty million new profits from the Crowns. Well members 
opposite have told us that we should be so happy we have such 
profitable Crown corporations. They tell us we should be proud 
that we are getting a fair return on those Crown corporations. 
 
I ask members opposite, where do those profits come from? 
They came out of our hides, and everybody knows that. It’s 
easy to have profits when you’ve gouged the people. You now 
say, look at all this money we made for you. You not only made 
the money for us, you made the money out of us. 
 
Have our utility rates become a source of hidden taxation? I 
think most of the people of Saskatchewan have long since 
arrived at that conclusion. Well we are told, we are told, Mr. 
Speaker, that we should not be concerned about high utility 
rates because they are so low. And I congratulate, I congratulate 
the Hon. Minister of Finance for being so forthright with the 
people of Saskatchewan in telling us just how low they are. And 
I would refer you to page 53. 
 
You know the Minister of Finance — and I have to apologize to 
him. I know I have often accused him of giving smarmy 
non-answers. I’ve often accused him of being a smart alec with 
a big mouth who rarely gives an answer that illuminates 
anything. But here, here I was wrong. He has told us on page 53 
of Investing in People, the budget address, he’s told us that we 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

have the highest power rates in western Canada and among the 
highest power rates in the entire nation. So there we have it. 
 
Now I congratulate the Minister of Finance for being so honest 
to point out to us that SaskPower gouges us harder than any 
other power corporation in the entire of western Canada, and 
here it is, his figures, not mine. And I know that the Minister of 
Finance, being an honourable man, will never again subject us 
to those ridiculous statements about our utility rates being so 
low. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pass that over here. I want to see this. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Fifty-three. Now what are these high power 
utility rates for, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. The hon. member 
from North Battleford has recently risen to his feet. I know at 
the beginning of speeches, members — order — I know at the 
beginning of speeches, members wish to help. All members 
have an opportunity to join this debate; some have already. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now why 
does SaskPower, why does SaskPower need higher rates in 
Saskatchewan than rates charged power consumers in 
Manitoba, in Quebec, in Alberta, in British Columbia? Does it 
have anything to do with Guyana? Does it have anything to do 
with George Hill? Does it have anything to do with Jack 
Messer? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know we’re being gouged — here are the 
figures. The Minister of Finance says we’re being gouged. He 
tells us we should be thrilled at being gouged because we’re 
getting all these marvellous, marvellous profits that he and his 
friends can re-invest around the world and we can watch them 
sink slowly into the muck and mire of Channel Lake. 
 
However there’s other good news in the budget. We have 88 
million new in health expenses. Whoops! But let’s look at the 
figures. Well it turns out that the 88 million is not based on last 
year’s expenditures at all; the 88 million is based on an 
estimate. Last year’s expenditures are in fact 39 million below 
the budget figure today — not 88. So there went over half of the 
so-called increase. 
 
Now so what else? On top of that, Mr. Speaker, what we find is 
that there is the new doctors’ agreement; there is the new 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network; and there are the 
existing deficits of most of our 32 health districts. On these 
three items alone I have more than eaten up the 39 million; 
we’re already behind last year’s expenditures, not ahead. We 
are told that municipalities get more money, but when we check 
the figures, they actually get less than spent money last year. 
 
We are told by these people who are continually blaming 
Ottawa for all of their failures, all of their lack of concern, all of 
their lack of vision, all of their lack of commitment, we are told 
that Ottawa this year will pay equalization of $310 million. 
Now last year it was 30 million. How did it get increased by 
over 300 per cent? 
 

Interestingly enough, the federal government itself forecasts 
106 million in equalization for this province. So I have to 
question how solid that figure will turn out to be. 
 
But the one thing I am confident of is that hon. members 
opposite will now for ever cease and desist blaming Ottawa for 
all their failures and all their shortcomings when they see that 
$310 million equalization from Ottawa and they realize that the 
new National Child Benefit Program comes from the federal 
government, and they will no longer blame the federal 
government for the money they have lost on their ill-found 
adventures. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t rise today to make a political speech. 
I do wish to address this House on what I consider to be the 
most serious public issue that will face this province in the next 
generation. And by that I mean aboriginal participation in the 
economy and life of this province. 
 
And that keys into the issue of taxation of aboriginals. And may 
I say at the outset that payment of sales tax by aboriginals is an 
issue that we are going to have to address. But in all of the 
issues concerning and surrounding aboriginal participation in 
our economy, it is frankly one of the more minor ones. There 
are far more serious ones we are going to have to address. 
 
The real issue facing us is that in the next few decades there 
will be a dramatic increase in the percentage of our population 
which is of native background, particularly among the younger 
years and in those entering the workforce and work age. 
 
Education, job training, and job opportunities for our young 
people in general, and our aboriginal young people in particular, 
will be a key challenge facing this province. And if we do not 
rise to it, quite frankly and bluntly, the future of this province is 
bleak. If the aboriginal population rises to the levels projected 
without at the same time becoming more active in our economy, 
then it will become increasingly difficult for us to sustain the 
infrastructure necessary for a modern economy and a modern 
society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the frieze above the main entrance to the 
legislature depicts justice. And on either side of justice are 
shown, on the one side what was described in the days when 
this legislature was constructed as the white man, and on the 
other side the red man. Rather archaic and out-of-date 
terminology, but the intentions are none the less modern and 
valid. 
 
It was intended to depict that this legislature would dispense 
justice and fairness to all members of the Saskatchewan 
community, both native and non-native. And that, I submit, is 
the key challenge that will face this province in the next 
generation or two, and indeed the future of our province 
demands that we rise to that challenge. 
 
Now specifically on the issue of the taxation of aboriginal 
people. The Saskatchewan Party adopted two resolutions at its 
founding policy convention. The first said they were going to 
abolish the provincial sales tax, and the second said they were 
going to charge it to aboriginals. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the utter nonsense and contradiction of these 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

two resolutions left me sad and embarrassed for my former 
colleagues. Each resolution put the lie to the other. If the 
Saskatchewan Party is serious about abolishing the provincial 
sales tax, then the party has to be lying when it says it will 
charge Indians. 
 
And by the same token, if charging aboriginals the sales tax is a 
key priority of the Saskatchewan Party, then obviously that 
party is lying when they say they’re going to abolish the sales 
tax. 
 
In short, the situation the Saskatchewan Party has placed 
themselves in is that by their own admission the Saskatchewan 
Party is lying in its platform. The only question is when they’re 
lying. Are they lying about abolishing the sales tax or are they 
lying about charging it to aboriginals? They cannot do both. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, these resolutions made me embarrassed 
for my former colleagues. I know them as decent people. The 
contradiction in these two resolutions, I assume, passed right 
over the heads of the former Tories but I suspect the former 
Liberals were painfully aware of just how nonsensical and 
contradictory the two resolutions are. 
 
Furthermore and on a serious note, I wish to point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party’s call for tax on 
off-reserve sales and not for some agreement as to what would 
happen on reserve would become a serious problem for this 
province if enacted. You are aware, Mr. Speaker, that we are in 
the process now of setting up urban reserves across the 
province. If we force native people to pay the sales tax but have 
no agreement with our first nations for the charging of that sales 
tax on on-reserve, then we will have tax havens springing up all 
over our province. 
 
We already, Mr. Speaker, have urban reserves in Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and North Battleford. 
There are more urban reserves planned. What would happen to 
commercial districts of those towns and cities if a mall on an 
urban reserve does not charge sales tax? Clearly it would 
devastate those business districts. It would make it impossible 
for merchants in the off-reserve area to compete. 
 
So obviously we have to have an agreement which includes first 
nations people, rather than parading around this province letting 
on that we can ram something down their throat to show them 
once and for all who’s boss. That will not work. It will destroy 
this province. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, that does not dispose of the issue. I 
believe we must come together to discuss the issue of native 
taxation for a number of reasons. My sense is that the present 
tax holidays enjoyed by first nations people . . . and here I must 
emphasize that half of our aboriginal population has no tax 
exemption. And I guess I have of course in that sense been 
wrong in using words like aboriginal and native because that 
implies that all aboriginals have a tax exemption. They do not. 
Only first nations do. And I think it is also important to point 
out in that regard that the tax exemption is certainly not 
universal. First nations people also pay many taxes. There are 
only a few which they do not pay. 
 
But I still have to come back and say my sense is that the 

present tax holidays are unfortunately becoming a source of 
racial disharmony. The future of our province demands that our 
various communities come together in respect and harmony. 
The fact that some people, by virtue not of their race but of their 
legal classification, are exempt from certain taxes is becoming 
an increasing source of tension between our communities. 
 
Furthermore, the expansion of our aboriginal population as 
projected can only mean that it will become increasingly 
difficult for us to afford the schools, the hospitals, the roads, 
and the other services that we all, native and non-native, so 
desperately want and need. The burden on those who do not 
enjoy any tax exemption will become increasingly onerous and 
be increasingly resented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see an unfortunate crisis looming. If a future 
government, for example my friends in the Saskatchewan Party 
who tell me they’re going to be government very shortly, if they 
are right and they do become that government and they decide 
to put aboriginals in their place and to show them once and for 
all who is boss by enacting provincial sales tax on first nations 
people, I think that we are asking for trouble. 
 
On the other hand, if the government refuses to discuss this 
issue to find a mutually acceptable compromise, then those 
citizens of our province who enjoy no tax abatement are going 
to become increasingly resentful, and I fear that they will direct 
their resentment against their native neighbours. 
 
(1600) 
 
We need mutual respect, we need to come together as a people 
to build this province. For both social and economic reasons, 
the future health of this province demands that we address this 
issue quietly, unemotionally, and with goodwill and respect on 
both sides. 
 
Mr. Speaker, threat will not work. Mr. Speaker, attempting to 
gain votes by playing on the resentments or prejudices of a 
small minority will not work. Ignoring this issue will not work. 
We share this land. We share a love for this land. We have a 
common destiny. And I ask that we deal with this issue so that 
we will strengthen our bonds of citizenship and friendship 
together. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those conclude my remarks, except for me 
to say that whatever gains are in this budget are by and large 
accomplished through sleight of hand, flimflam, and gouging 
utility rates. We see that there is some slight reduction in the 
personal income tax. Unfortunately most Saskatchewan 
residents will find that slight reduction in income tax more than 
burned up in their increased utility rates. 
 
The NDP obviously hopes that that reduction in personal 
income tax will leave the populous of this province numb with 
gratitude and impel them, on the next election day, to stream to 
the polls to thank them for some small mercies. That is if they 
can still pay the light and phone bill and drive on our roads. 
 
Well I’m not sure it’s working, Mr. Speaker. The phone calls 
I’m getting are from people who know that the increases in 
utility rates have little or nothing to do with the cost of service. 
People no longer believe that the reason for increases in utility 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

rates are because this is what it costs to generate the service. If 
they did, they would accept it. But they know that’s not the 
case. 
 
They know when they read the newspaper about record profits, 
they know when they read the newspaper that the government is 
thinking of sinking another 30 million in a country they haven’t 
heard of before — they know where that’s coming from. And 
so to be told that they should be so happy that out of their hides 
have come these dramatic profits in our Crowns, well I’m just 
not as sure that they’re as grateful as the NDP think they ought 
to be. 
 
So I congratulate the minister for some slight tax relief; I 
congratulate the minister for his sleight of hand in taking back 
that tax relief tenfold times over in utility rate increases. And I 
congratulate the minister for at least having the integrity to tell 
us that all that talk about our low utility rates is so much hooey. 
He’s now published a document saying it’s nonsense; he’s now 
published a document saying that in fact he has the highest 
power rates in western Canada. 
 
And I apologize, I apologize to the minister for saying that his 
answers are smarmy and impossible to understand because here 
is an answer that is possible to understand — we are being 
gouged with our utility rates. That’s the message of the budget 
and these utility rates. They’re going to Guyana; they’re going 
to Jack Messer; they’re going to Channel Lake. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Acting Speaker. Before I 
comment on a budget that I thought was very good, delivered 
by the member for Saskatoon Mount Royal, I want to tell the 
House a little bit of what I heard today. I know I listened to the 
member from Kindersley spouting off about everything. 
 
I thought that he would have learned by now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, from the 1980s when his party was in power. I believe 
it was 1982 to 1991 when that party spent $1 billion a year 
more than what they were taking in. But in listening to him in 
his speech today about this budget, another balanced budget, the 
fifth balanced budget in a row, Mr. Speaker, he hadn’t changed. 
His attitude is exactly the same. It’s a spend, spend, spend 
attitude. This government on this side of the House never does 
enough. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan will not accept that, Mr. Speaker. 
They know that integrity, they know that common sense is what 
they want, and that’s what they’re going to stick with, Mr. 
Speaker. So I was a little surprised in the member from 
Kindersley, expecting I guess something more from him. But I 
guess it’s the same old story. 
 
One of the reasons I think we heard a lot of chirping from the 
newer than newer Conservative Party and the Liberal Party this 
afternoon I think is because of the headlines in today’s paper, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that the Leader-Post and Leader Services, Leader-Star 
Services were . . . On Monday they did the Channel Lake affair 
and they were asking people about it. And on Tuesday they did 

the opposition’s performance in which they compared the 
Liberals and the Conservatives. And Wednesday they did the 
reaction to the budget that we’re speaking on today. 
 
And on both . . . on all of those occasions we heard the 
members from the other side of the House speak up and talk 
about the headlines in the paper. But today for some reason, Mr. 
Speaker, they haven’t mentioned a word about the headlines in 
the newspaper. And I can’t understand why until I looked at it. 
 
Well this is what it says, “NDP ahead among voters.” And it 
says here . . . I know they’re going to chirp, Mr. Speaker. And 
this bothers them a little bit because they thought they were 
really gaining here and they were really impressing the 
Saskatchewan people. But they keep forgetting that 
Saskatchewan people want integrity and common sense, not 
what they’re getting from the members across. 
 
Fifty-seven per cent, Mr. Speaker, said that they would vote for 
the New Democrats, 21 per cent said that they would vote for 
the Saskatchewan Party or the newer than new Conservative 
Party, and 21 per cent said that they would vote for the Liberals. 
Well even if you add those up, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t equal to 
the support that the people have for the New Democratic Party. 
And why do they support us? Because of integrity, Mr. Speaker, 
and common sense — accountability. 
 
And we hear from the other side, complaints. That’s all we ever 
hear. And I know John F. Kennedy said in 1964 that one-fifth, 
one-fifth of all the people are against everything all of the time. 
And that’s what he said, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why those two 
parties are at 20 per cent of the polls. It just makes perfect 
sense, because they’re against everything all of the time. 
 
I want to talk about integrity just for a moment . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, we’ll get to that a little later, the member 
from North Battleford and his remarks. But first I want to talk a 
little bit about integrity and why we are at 50 per cent in the 
polls, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On March 9, this government on this side of the House issued 
the throne speech, or delivered the throne speech. And in it it 
gave the plan to the Saskatchewan people, as we understand 
their priorities. So it’s not really our plan, but it’s listening to 
the people and it’s the people’s plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what they said to us is we should be investing in jobs. And 
they said to us we should be investing in education. And they 
said to us we should be investing in health care, social welfare 
reform, transportation, safe communities. But we should be 
doing this, Mr. Speaker, we should be doing all of these things 
with fiscal integrity. 
 
So I want to take a moment now to explain how the budget fits 
in to the plan that was delivered on March 9, the throne speech. 
So let’s deal with investing in jobs and economic growth for a 
minute. 
 
First of all, we have to understand that there are more people 
working in Saskatchewan today than at any time in our history. 
There are more full-time jobs, more jobs for women and more 
jobs for young people today than any other time in our history. 
 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

And if I go back and I look at that new Conservative Party and 
its policies, here it says: “eliminate preferential hiring policies 
aimed at women and minorities.” That’s the new policy by the 
Saskatchewan Party . . . or the Tory Party. Just the opposite of 
what this government is doing. 
 
This year when we said we were going to invest in jobs and 
economic growth, the budget answered to that by doubling the 
support for Regional Economic Development Authorities. It 
also introduced community-based economic development 
agencies. Five million dollars in investment in the northern 
development fund; the expansion of the spruce budworm 
spraying program to protect the forestry industry and the jobs 
there. 
 
And this is very important to me and in my constituency in the 
Hudson Bay area where the spruce is being eaten by the spruce 
budworm. This government has taken action and is going to add 
$1.2 million to protect the forest industry. 
 
An expanded recycling program to protect the environment 
while creating jobs at SARCAN, jobs for some of the people 
that are in most need. 
 
We are going to encourage investment and innovation as well, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re implementing tax incentives to encourage 
research and development. 
 
The film employment tax credit to spur growth in that industry. 
Our own people will be working. 
 
Improvements to tax rebates for livestock and horticultural 
facilities, and increased investment in research and development 
in the agricultural sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re going to strengthen the transportation system; enhance 
training and skills development. 
 
And as Mr. Peter McCann, president of Ag-West Biotech 
stated, “It’s certainly very good news. The tax credit will 
encourage people to invest in more resources in ag-biotech and 
it will be a major attraction for people looking to invest in 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
So how did the budget then deal with investing in education and 
training? — the second point of our throne speech, our plan, our 
map, so that we move to the light at the end of that tunnel. 
 
Well when we’re investing in education, the budget address 
said this: 
 

. . . a growing economy requires skilled knowledgeable 
workers . . . 
 
This budget makes a major investment in our children and 
our future and we will do even more as our financial 
situation . . . improve. 
 
By investing in our young people we will build the skills 
and academic excellence they need to fulfil their potential 
for satisfying and prosperous lives, (right here, right here) 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — We’re putting money into universities, Mr. 
Speaker — 200 million in funding for Saskatchewan 
universities. Operating grants to federated colleges are up 9 
million; capital investments up 66 per cent. 
 
How about student aid? We heard from the students and the 
students said we need help. And we gave them help. Bursary 
plan to give students help without adding to their debts in the 
future — up to $3,230 per student with more for students with 
children, increased support for students with children, and tax 
relief for interest paid on student loans. 
 
We also put more money into kindergarten and grade 12 
education, Mr. Speaker. And as Don Wells said, the university 
— that’s the University of Regina president — he was very 
grateful after hearing the provincial budget will pump $19.5 
million more into post-secondary education this year. This 
budget is the most positive I’ve seen for university in 30 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Renaud: — And investing in health care, that was part of 
our plan in the throne speech. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — It was, it was part of our plan and direction, 
and the budget confirms that. And it said in the budget address, 
our commitment to health is stronger today than every before. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about the federal Liberals then? 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Well they don’t put anything in, but we’re 
going to get into that in a minute. Yes, the federal Liberals, I 
think now they put 17 cents . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thirteen cents. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Pardon me, 13 cents on every dollar into 
health care. You know what it used to be? It used to be 50 cents 
of every dollar that we spent on health care in Saskatchewan, 50 
cents came from the federal government. Today 13 cents comes 
from the federal government. 
 
And the member from North Battleford was sitting there saying, 
don’t blame the federal government. You can’t blame them any 
more because they are so good, because they’re our Liberal 
brothers and sisters in Ottawa and you can’t blame them. 
 
Why are they only giving us 13 cents, Mr. Speaker, 13 cents on 
every dollar for health care rather than the 50 cents that they 
used to? He didn’t explain that at all. 
 
But I want to say about what some of the things the budget is 
doing in health care, even though the federal government have 
left us alone. They’ve left us with no federal dollars and we 
have to back-fill all of that. But we’re still going to do some 
things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know in my constituency that we have a renal dialysis 
centre that’s going to be located in the Tisdale hospital. And 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

rural people will have that service. And in Yorkton, there’s 
going to be one in Yorkton as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there’s going to be a new MRI unit in Regina and a CT 
scanner in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. And those are some of 
the things that we’re doing in health care, even though the 
federal government has said no to our request for more funding. 
 
Part of our plan, Mr. Speaker, that we delivered on March 9 in 
our throne speech was investing in highways and transportation. 
And the budget confirmed that as well. The budget in Highways 
is going to be up 10 per cent to $219 million — highest for 
many, many years. The commitment of $2.5 billion over 10 
years is what we’ve committed to roads, highways and 
transportation in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What has the federal government done there, in transportation? 
We have at least a strategy and a plan. The federal government 
has no plan, they have no strategy, and they have no funding. 
Nothing for highways, nothing for health. Mr. Speaker. We’re 
left on our own, but we’ll succeed. 
 
But why the member from North Battleford says, don’t blame 
the federal Liberals, I don’t know, I don’t know. They continue 
to take as much out of this province as they ever have. But do 
they put it back? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And how about investing in children and families. The budget 
said this: the values that led to medicare also underlie our other 
social programs. Saskatchewan people continue to lead the way 
with new solutions to child and family poverty. Our significant 
new investment parallels a bold, innovative approach to 
meeting the needs of children. 
 
And I want to talk a little bit about that, Mr. Speaker, as well, 
because that’s also part of our plan, the Saskatchewan people’s 
plan. It’s not just our plan — it’s the plan of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But the budget called or allowed money for three new programs 
to help people with lower than adequate income from falling to 
dependency on social welfare. The employment supplement 
will encourage low income parents to increase their 
employment by providing a supplement to help with 
child-related work expenses. Applications will be taken by 
telephone and it is expected that 15,000 low income families in 
Saskatchewan will be able to stay at work with this help. 
 
The Saskatchewan Child Benefit will assist parents with the 
cost of raising children and it will assist lower income families 
to remain in the workforce by providing for children’s basic 
needs. As the funding for the National Child Benefit incentive 
increases, funding for the Saskatchewan Child Benefit will 
decrease. No application will be required, as eligibility will be 
determined by income reported to Revenue Canada. 
 
And finally, the family health benefit. People who receive either 
the employment supplement and/or the Saskatchewan Child 
Benefit initiative will receive health benefits that will ensure 
that health-related needs do not force low income families onto 
the welfare system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that’s our way of doing things. It’s not a bus ticket from 

Saskatchewan to Alberta or from Saskatchewan to Manitoba as 
the Conservative governments in those provinces do. No, this is 
a New Democratic way of doing things based on that plan and 
based on the path that the people of Saskatchewan and we 
together have determined is necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — It was a very good budget. And a part of the 
budget of course and part of the Saskatchewan people’s plans 
and why they believe in the New Democratic government is 
because of our balanced approach. We’ve always said that with 
surpluses we’re going to take one-third of those, or 
approximately, and enhance services — like the help for 
children and families. 
 
And we’re going to take one-third of that, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re going to lower taxes. And we continue to do that. And in 
this budget we were able to lower the income tax by 2 per cent. 
Now I know the opposition members will say, well you should 
have done more. And we would have liked to have done more, 
and we will over time. 
 
But the Saskatchewan people know that the plan is a sustainable 
plan and that you can only cut taxes as you can afford them. 
And so they’re pleased that there was at least this help. And we 
were certainly happy that we could provide the lower taxes as 
well. 
 
And paying down debt, Mr. Speaker. One-third of the surpluses, 
as you know, we have always said that would go to pay down 
our debt because the debt is what’s really heavy on our 
shoulders as a government, on our shoulders as a people of 
Saskatchewan, and certainly on our children’s shoulders. 
 
And why is that, Mr. Speaker? Because the larger the debt, the 
larger or more interest that you have to pay, taking monies from 
needed programs like health and social services and education 
and just throwing it away into interest. 
 
And so we’ve said that we have to pay down that debt. The debt 
was created of course by the previous administration, and many 
of them sit over there now and they chirp and they would spend 
more and they would cut the taxes more. And no, they don’t 
call themselves Tories because they want to hide for a little 
while, I think, behind maybe some other name, you know, and 
sort of maybe pop out of the woodwork at the right time. I don’t 
know if there is a right time for them, Mr. Speaker, but I think 
that’s their plan. 
 
But anyway, we’re going to continue to lower that debt, Mr. 
Speaker. And in fact by the year 2002, we are expected to 
reduce that $14.3 billion debt that was there in 1991 to about 
10.9 billion in the year 2002, which will mean a lot less interest 
for the people of Saskatchewan. A lot more then can be spent 
on services like improving roads, health, and education. So 
that’s still part of our plan, Mr. Speaker, and this budget 
certainly addresses that as well. 
 
I want to speak just a moment about the one-time leader of the 
Liberal Party who actually spoke on the budget yesterday, the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone. She spoke on the budget 
yesterday. And I was reading this article not too long ago and it 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

says, “Haverstock politician, but one with soul” and I thought 
that . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Rulings in the 
legislature have been consistent that proper names of sitting 
members are not to be used. And I ask the hon. member for 
Carrot River to proceed on with his speech without using proper 
names of members. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Well anyway, the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone talked about the budget. And I was expecting that 
she also would have learned about, you know, about the debt 
that the province has and the tough decisions that we have to 
make; and that the budget actually is starting on the right track, 
and it’s balanced; and we’re taking a little bit less taxes from 
the people of Saskatchewan, lowering the taxes; and we’re 
increasing services as best we can; and we’re lowering the debt, 
you know. 
 
But no, it wasn’t like that at all. It was the spend more right 
now; it was cut the taxes more right now; it was pay down the 
debt — all right now. But how could you do that? That’s 
impossible because if you do all that, you’re actually going to 
increase the debt. And if you increase the debt, you’ve 
increased the interest that you’re going to pay on that debt, and 
therefore you can’t provide the services that you would have 
wanted to, and/or you’re going to have to . . . well I guess it’d 
be just like the Devine years, and I don’t think none of us want 
that. 
 
And it was interesting when . . . it was really interesting when I 
was listening to that speech, I was thinking about the Liberals 
and about leaders and how many leaders they had. And actually 
I came across a little story that I have to tell you because it’s 
kind of interesting. 
 
One day this man spotted a lamp by the roadside and he picked 
it up and he rubbed it vigorously and a genie appeared. And the 
genie said, I’ll grant you your fondest wish, the genie said. And 
the man thought for a moment and then said, I want a 
spectacular job, a job that no man has ever succeeded — or a 
woman — has ever succeeded at. Poof, said the genie, you’re 
the Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. 
 
So it was kind of a little interesting story I thought, and I 
thought I would share that with you. But I just want to say a 
little bit about why the polls are saying that the NDP are at 57 
per cent and the opposition parties at 20. Again, common sense 
and responsibility and integrity. 
 
When the Minister of Finance delivered the budget, the 
opposition members have the opportunity then to speak to the 
budget. And I listened, and I took my pen and I wrote down the 
comments from both the representative of the new Conservative 
Party and the Liberal Party. And this is the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . yes the old Liberal Party. Well the newer, 
newer Conservative Party, the Saskatchewan Party, this is what 
they said. No meaningful tax cuts in this budget. They say more 
for health care. They say don’t close the Plains Health Centre. 
They said more for highways; they said more for rural roads; 
they said more for farmers. They said more for education and 
they want . . . there was less taxes, I guess — yes, less taxes. 
 

So I listened to that for a moment and then I listened to the 
Liberals. And they got up and said virtually the same thing. 
This was not a good enough tax reduction. They want more for 
health; they want more for highways; they want more money 
for education. Again they said for the second time, less taxes 
and more for infrastructure. 
 
So that’s what I heard from the two official . . . or the two 
opposition parties right after the budget speech. And I thought 
for a minute, and I thought to myself, what are the 
Saskatchewan people thinking right now when a year the 
government present a budget and they understand that this 
government has integrity, common sense, and balance, and that 
they’re trying to do their best with what they have. 
 
And the other party gets up and says, oh but we want more right 
now. We want less taxes right now. You know, the people 
understand, Mr. Speaker, that that’s impossible. So I think 
that’s why the polls are indicating what they are today. 
 
(1630) 
 
The newspaper too, this is the Star-Phoenix, just after the 
budget was presented had this, and I’ll quote. It says, the 
headline is “Budget critics lacking in bite.” And it says this: 
 

In focusing on the minute details of the budget, bickering 
about Cline’s trade-offs on various pressure groups, 
exhortations for more money and criticising the size of the 
personal tax reduction, the opposition appeared at a loss to 
come up with anything more than a knee-jerk reaction. 
 
Today’s NDP budget contained very little for 
Saskatchewan families to be happy about, lamely offered 
Rod Gantefoer of the Saskatchewan Party. It contains no 
meaningful tax relief. It’s built on faulty economic 
assumptions, and once again reaffirms Saskatchewan status 
as a have-not province. 
 
Although Gantefoer had plenty of negative things to say 
about Cline’s spending choices, his party couldn’t offer 
anything better. The lack of anything resembling a 
coherent economic map from his party for the province’s 
economy, didn’t deter Gantefoer from criticizing the size 
of the tax cut or grants to municipalities. 

 
The reaction from the Liberal’s Jack Hillson was little 
better. He said not enough money was allotted to highway 
twinning, education, and health care, all areas the Liberals 
have promised to provide with extra funding along with tax 
cuts for Saskatchewan residents should they get elected. 
 

Well isn’t that interesting, Mr. Speaker? It’s never enough for 
the Liberals, it’s never enough for the Conservatives, but the 
people of Saskatchewan know what integrity and common 
sense is all about. 
 
What today’s article in the paper also tells me, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the people of Saskatchewan do not appreciate a party that 
as part of its policy has what they say, MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) recall. Well, MLA recall. From the same 
people, Mr. Speaker, that moved across the floor to form some 
kind of a new party under a new name, without going to the 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

people in a by-election. The very same people that said that, are 
now asking for recall. And the people of Saskatchewan know 
that that’s not right. 
 
Integrity and common sense, that’s what it’s all about, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why we’re looking forward, us on this side 
of the House, to the next election whenever it might come, a 
year or two down the road. 
 
And do you know what we do, Mr. Speaker? At least that’s 
what I do in my constituency. I have a big map on the wall of 
all the ridings, all the constituencies in Saskatchewan. And I 
take a little colouring pen, and for the seats that are going to be 
NDP, I colour them orange . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
orange colour. 
 
And do you know what happened to Canora-Pelly? I coloured 
that one orange. And do you know what happened to 
Kelvington? I coloured that one orange too. And what happened 
to Saltcoats? I coloured that one orange too. I coloured all the 
little seats orange, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because, you see, the people of Saskatchewan want integrity; 
they want common sense. They want people that when they run 
for them, don’t jump around to other parties, don’t move around 
all over. And this is what they want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I am going to vote with integrity and common sense and I 
will support the budget, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s certainly a 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly this afternoon and make a 
few comments in regards to the recent budget that’s been just 
brought forward by the Minister of Finance and presented to the 
province of Saskatchewan, a budget that I find really lacking in 
substance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
When you take a look at this budget, when you look at it with 
any depth at all, and certainly when you look at and talk to the 
groups around this province who have been following this 
budget with interest, who are looking for something real and 
something meaningful, the budget has a lot to be desired. It 
presents a lot to be desired. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on one hand we can say, well yes 
the government did present another balanced budget. But take a 
look at how the budget is balanced. Take a look at whether or 
not the budget really is truly balanced or just a means of 
juggling the books, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And when I look at the budget today, and I looked through the 
budget presentation, I looked through the numbers, I looked 
through the estimates. Mr. Deputy Speaker, take a careful look. 
And you have to ask yourself, can the minister in his right mind 
stand up and say he’s really presented a balanced budget? Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if the minister didn’t have access to millions of 
dollars of profits through Crown corporations, would he have 
been able to present a balanced budget to this Assembly or to 
the people of this province? 
 
If the Minister of Finance did not have the federal government 

that he could look to and had sent him a welfare cheque for 
almost $300 million, would he have presented a balanced 
budget to this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker? No. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the Minister of Finance would not have 
had assets to sell such as the Husky Oil upgrader, their shares in 
the Husky Oil upgrader, would he have been able to present a 
balance budget to this Legislative Assembly? I doubt it. 
 
And you know, when you start looking at the numbers, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting to note, when you start looking 
at those numbers very carefully, and you recognize if it wasn’t 
for the welfare cheque from that Liberal government in Ottawa, 
if it wasn’t for the fact that this government has picked the 
pockets of every Saskatchewan taxpayer through Crown 
corporations, through rate increases, and ongoing rate increases 
in utility rate hikes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it wasn’t for the 
fact, when you look at the fact that they had assets, and like last 
year they had the assets and chemicals that they were able to 
sell off, this year they have Husky Oil upgrader, you have to 
ask yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s left? What will they 
have next year? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at this budget it’s actually 
a very hollow document. In fact, ask the president of SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) what he 
thought of this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Ask the president 
of SARM what he thought of this budget. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even the Deputy Premier knows 
what the president of SARM thought of this budget, because his 
comments about the Premier and the Premier’s promise and 
what SARM delegates had asked of this provincial government, 
at their convention just recently held in the province in the city 
of Regina, they asked us, this government, to indeed make a 
firm commitment to road construction in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Why do they need that commitment? Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
need that commitment because for one, while the Minister of 
Highways may brag about a few more million dollars available 
in her budget to her to use in the maintenance and construction 
of roads and upgrading of roads in the province of 
Saskatchewan, the fact is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this province is 
still lacking in real, meaningful commitment to highway 
construction and maintenance in this province. 
 
And we all know what’s happening to our roads. And while the 
federal government was willing to come across with a welfare 
cheque to bail the Minister of Finance out, the facts are that that 
welfare cheque still doesn’t cover what they’ve offloaded onto 
the province of Saskatchewan. And as a result of that, the 
offload, the people of Saskatchewan have been asked to dig 
deeper. 
 
I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at it very carefully, 
the offload by the federal government just followed suit the 
offload by the province onto the local tax base through . . . 
whether it’s through education, whether it’s through municipal 
government, whatever means, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The people 
of this province have been asked to dig very deep. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier is right when he thanks 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. He’s right when 
he thanks them for having dug deep to help bring forward a 
balanced budget. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s be careful 
when we talk about a balanced budget. Because it’s very easy to 
present, on the general revenue pool of government spending, a 
balance when you can shift or when you can draw from another 
avenue of government expenditures, of government revenue 
such as the Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at this balanced budget, it 
reminds me of the budget that was presented to the B.C. (British 
Columbia) legislature, I believe it was about a year ago when 
the Premier at the time, the current Premier, Mr. Clark, went to 
the people of B.C. and said their first balanced budget in 
decades, in years, had been presented. They presented what was 
supposedly a balanced budget; they went to the electorate. 
 
No sooner were they elected — and interestingly enough, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when you look at it, they were elected with 
fewer votes and plurality than the opposition Liberals receive 
— but they barely got elected, and all of a sudden, whoops, we 
made a mistake. We missed reading the numbers. We didn’t 
read them very careful. 
 
And I’m afraid that’s where the Minister of Finance is going to 
be today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I hear the minister, I hear 
the Deputy Premier chirping from his seat and I really welcome 
his comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because when you look at 
the budget speech that has been presented here by the Minister 
of Finance, we’re going to have to ask ourselves, and I guess 
the Minister of Finance is probably going to be . . . probably has 
crossed his fingers already hoping he doesn’t have the same 
mistake and face the same problems that the minister in B.C. is 
facing when they all of a sudden were re-elected and found that 
they were short . . . had a major shortfall. 
 
Because we take a careful look at this budget, and what’s this 
budget based on? In many cases it’s based on a lot of numbers 
that you really have to question, especially when you look at oil 
revenue. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, oil plays a major role in this 
province. And here again, I would have to suggest and I would 
. . . Well I’m fearful of giving a lot of accolades. If there are any 
to be given to the Minister of Finance and to the Premier, I 
commend the Premier for having a little bit of foresight when 
he was elected in 1991. 
 
Despite what he was saying they would do when he was in 
opposition and how he was going to tax the oil companies, the 
multinational companies that are major contributors to the tax 
base of this province, despite what they were saying in 
opposition, they had enough foresight to recognize that some of 
the agreements arrived at in the energy sector during the 1980s 
were certainly agreements that they began to realize would be 
fruitful and maybe they should work together with the energy 
companies. 
 
And as a result, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of that, over the 
past number of years this government has benefited from some 
very fine economic means that have arrived at and finances that 
have been arrived at in this province as a result of strong 
economic activity in the oil patch. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, certainly in my area of the province the oil 

patch plays a major role in the economy of our communities. 
Mr. Speaker, as we look at communities like Kipling and 
Moosomin and Wapella, just to name a few and certainly 
Kennedy, right in the locale where I live, Mr. Speaker, we have 
seen major economic activity in our communities as a result of 
an economic boom in the oil industry and in the oil patch. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people in our area are certainly 
pleased to see that the government has finally recognized and 
has been willing to recognize that it’s better to work with the oil 
companies rather than work against them. As a result of 
working with them, Mr. Speaker, we do have a number of 
companies that have set up at least small offices in our 
communities rather than operating totally out of Calgary. And 
yet the major offices continue to reside in Calgary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe when you look at this budget very 
closely you will see that there are certainly some figures that are 
lacking and we have to look down the road. And when we talk 
about balanced budgets . . . and as I indicated earlier, it’s 
interesting to note how the government likes to choose its 
numbers. It likes to pick and choose but it forgets in many cases 
that aren’t — many cases, Mr. Speaker, where they like to 
forget about some of the problems that we’re having in our 
economy. 
 
My colleague, the member from Kindersley, talked today of 
some of the problems and the challenges that may face this 
province even this year in the agricultural sector. And 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker, plays a major role in this province. 
 
In fact if you were to some of the meetings that I’ve been at 
recently in our area, Mr. Speaker, there are residents in many 
communities who are very concerned about what may take 
place in the agricultural sector of this area. Residents that have 
talked to me and are very concerned about the fact that young 
people, the younger generation, are leaving the farms because 
the bottom line is just so fine that there’s nothing left and 
there’s no way for them to really continue to make a living and 
continue to reside on the farm and live in a province where the 
tax burden is so heavy — a tax burden that has been passed on 
to them by the Deputy Premier, by the Minister of Finance. 
 
An Hon. Member: — By the Tories. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And the Deputy Premier says, by the Tories. Well 
I don’t see where it’s the fault of the Tories. Yes, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s interesting to note the finances and the number picking that 
the Deputy Premier talks about. Because you know, Mr. 
Speaker, I think my hon. colleague, the member from 
Kindersley, also reminded us today of where we were back in 
1982 when the government changed, and the fact that . . . and 
that’s what I’m talking about, false finances. It’s fine to talk 
about general revenue pools. What about the Crown 
corporations pool? 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, one area that this government fails to 
acknowledge — failed to acknowledge even in 1982; would not 
acknowledge in 1991; continues not to acknowledge — is 
unfunded pension liabilities. Last spring when the auditor 
presented his report, he pointed out the fact that that unfunded 
pension liability had grown again in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

(1645) 
 
And if you were to take a look back to 1991, Mr. Speaker, you 
would see the unfunded pension liability in this province up 
until last spring had grown by over $700 million, and my guess 
is we’re probably going to see it over 8 or close to $900 million 
by the time this audited statement comes out from the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem with passing that on is, down the road 
somebody has to deal with that. And for the Deputy Premier to 
say here, the Minister of Finance to sit here today and say he’s 
balanced the books, when on the one hand we’ve got debt in the 
Crowns, on the other hand we’ve got an unfunded pension 
liability that continues to grow, is not really being totally honest 
with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are becoming much 
more wiser and that’s what I’m finding out. The people of 
Saskatchewan want to see the overall picture. They’re 
beginning to realize, when the auditor talks about not just the 
general revenue pool, but he brings into account the Crown 
corporations pool, plus the unfunded pension liability, that there 
is a total financial picture when you’ve got those three together. 
If you present one, you’re not really being honest. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why it’s important to present the total 
picture. And while the government likes to brag about . . . and 
likes to pin most of the debt at the feet of the former 
government of Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to 
note when you go and you start going through the numbers, you 
start . . . Go back even to 1982. Out of the 20, almost $22 
billion deficit that the Provincial Auditor was pointing out, the 
NDP can certainly take gratitude in the fact that they have a 
share in almost half of that — almost half of that total debt, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Take a close look at it. Will you take a look at the Crown 
corporations? Take a look at the unfunded pension liability and 
certainly the debt that has grown because of some difficult 
times through the ’80s. We’ve had some good times in the last 
few years, Mr. Speaker, but have we really reduced the debt? 
No we haven’t. 
 
What is the Finance minister thankful for? He’s thankful that 
the people of Saskatchewan were willing to eat higher utility 
rate fees, increases. He was pleased to see that the people of 
Saskatchewan are willing to accept that. And I’m sure he’s 
pleased, like most taxpayers are, with the increase in property 
taxes that we have had to face in the province of Saskatchewan 
since 1991. And one of the areas that most people are really 
pleased in in my area is the educational tax component of that, 
of that property tax. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, you may even be a little aware of that 
as well. I’m not exactly sure, but I think you are a home-owner 
and have an idea of what we’re talking about, and I think all the 
members across the way understand what I’m talking about 
when I talk about property tax increases. 
 
And there isn’t a person that doesn’t complain to me, in my 
constituency, and say it’s time we addressed our whole property 
tax base, and especially the fact that educational taxes and the 

educational component is being put more and more at the feet 
of the property owner in this province. And that is something 
that a lot of people have a hard problem to bear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our caucus doesn’t have a problem with putting 
more money into education. Our caucus doesn’t have a problem 
with trying to make the funds available so that the young people 
of today can prepare themselves for the future and prepare 
themselves for the job opportunities tomorrow which, Mr. 
Speaker, I think if we took a careful look at since 1991, those 
job opportunities have changed significantly. 
 
A gentleman that was speaking last night at the Full Gospel 
banquet that was held in the assembly talked about when he was 
growing up. And he talked about when he completed his high 
school education and his friend saying to him, there’s not much 
point in just getting a Bachelor of Arts and Science degree; 
what are you going to do with that? 
 
So he thought, well yes, what is he going to do? Maybe he’s got 
to pinpoint something. So he decided he’d enter the field of 
education. And as he indicated, when he decided to enter that 
field and when he decided to get his education degree, Mr. 
Speaker, the fact was, when he got his education degree, there 
were a lot of jobs. The job opportunity field was excellent. 
 
Well he applied in the city of Regina at the time and, Mr. 
Speaker, because of the fact of an impending marriage and it 
would be more convenient so his wife could get her education, 
and he was one of a number of applicants, and was fortunate to 
get a job and believed he had been led into this area. 
 
The fact was, Mr. Speaker, in those days, going into education, 
the field of education, was a place where you knew there was a 
real opportunity to get a job. It isn’t there today. When I have 
young people sitting across my desk and asking me if I can help 
them or if I’ve got any suggestions . . . They’re one of 500 
graduates at the University of Regina plus the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) — and the number of graduates 
coming out of there in a certain department; in this case it 
happened to be education — one of 500, and at that time there 
were only 200 jobs available. They’re saying, what am I going 
to do? You know I’ve got student loans; I’ve spent four years or 
five years getting an education; and what are my job 
opportunities? And I think those are some of the questions that 
this government is going to have to answer as we go down the 
road. 
 
It’s not just a matter of presenting a balanced budget. It’s a 
matter of beginning to address some of the real concerns that 
people have in the province of Saskatchewan: concerns like job 
opportunities — real job opportunities; concerns like access to 
quality health care; concerns like the access to education and 
even social services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was interesting. I met with some individuals this 
morning in the community of Moosomin but they come from 
the surrounding area. They’re individuals . . . I believe each and 
every one of them are on social assistance at this time. And to 
their credit, the social assistance department in this province has 
put together a bit of a program trying to educate . . . and they’ve 
hired an individual to sit down with these young men and see if 
they can give them an opportunity to better prepare them to 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1998 

maybe get into the job force and to prepare themselves for the 
job force. 
 
Some of the problems they said they were having was, 
amounted to the fact that when they were in school they never 
were really educated as to how to apply for and prepare 
themselves for the job market and the availability to whatever 
job may be out there, whether it’s a low income job, whether 
it’s a minimum wage job or, Mr. Speaker, whatever the job 
might be. 
 
The fact is, I believe . . . and as I was chatting with them, I 
wonder how many more people in this province as well have 
. . . are sitting even today, this afternoon, would like to be in the 
job force, would like to be in the employed, but find that they 
don’t have all the strengths or all the assets available to them, or 
they haven’t really been prepared to go out into the job market 
to sell themselves to an employer so that they can get 
employment — real and meaningful employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was interesting chatting with them and with 
some of the comments they had. I think they brought some very 
positive comments forward about how we could better prepare 
people to meet the challenges of today. Or to meet the 
challenges of tomorrow. And I’m not exactly sure that the 
budget presented to this Assembly is really doing that. I’m not 
sure that the money that the minister has earmarked to 
education is really going to meet the challenge of preparing the 
young generation of today for the job market of tomorrow. 
Especially as we see the changes in the job opportunities and 
where the changes are going to come. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, I stand here this morning — or this 
afternoon — and as a MLA I’m not, I’m not necessarily one 
individual who totally believes that everyone, once they’ve 
completed their grade 12 education, all head off and go through 
the doors of learning into universities, whether it’s here in 
Saskatchewan or whether they go out of this province. 
 
Why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? I say that because as I look 
around I see the job opportunities are not necessarily all geared 
to a university education. You may get . . . There’s nothing 
wrong with a university education. There’s nothing wrong with 
maybe going and getting a Bachelor of Arts, but I think, Mr. 
Speaker, more and more people are beginning to find that the 
real job opportunities are coming in the technical fields. 
 
And I chatted with a gentleman just at a wildlife banquet a 
couple of weeks ago in Rocanville, a person who had his heart 
set on farming and had his heart set on maintaining the family 
farm and passing it on to his children like his dad has passed it 
on to him. But they arrived at a point in time where that just 
wasn’t possible any more. High interest rates, high expenses, 
low income and low grain prices, low commodity prices, just 
put them in a position where it just was not feasible to maintain 
the family farm. 
 
And he finally had to reluctantly decide that farming couldn’t 
keep them going. He still wanted to maintain the farm, so I 
believe he’s renting out his land and he went and he took a 
welder’s course. And he said, the interesting comment he made 
to me, he said, I could go anywhere right now. With my 
welding certificate I could go anywhere. The job opportunities 

are immense. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s important, when we look at 
putting money into education, that we don’t just earmark it all 
for our major universities but we now start looking at the 
technical institutes such as SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology), and to giving young people 
the opportunity to expand their vision. And in many cases, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not just a matter of getting an education so that 
you can go and work for somebody. This gentleman that I just 
talked about, he’s become his own employer really. He started 
his own business and he’s contracting out his welding 
experience and expertise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we need to look beyond, as we do in 
agriculture, we need to look beyond just getting an education 
and expecting somebody else to prepare the jobs. I think the 
young people of today . . . and I believe we have young people 
with a lot of knowledge and young people with some very great 
ideas and terrific dreams who I believe in the future will show 
us that they have the ability to plan for the future. 
 
And I believe there are a lot of young people who are not 
interested in just going to work for somebody any more, but are 
more interested in seeing what they can do for themselves, what 
they can create for themselves. The job opportunities — maybe 
the little company, whether it’s just a small business that 
employs five to ten people or whether it becomes a business 
that may employ, who knows, 3,200 people. 
 
I talked to a young gentleman in the city on Wednesday I 
believe it was, or on Tuesday, Mr. Speaker. It was very 
interesting. A person who unfortunately is, or fortunately for 
him, is probably about half my age, and I hate to admit that. But 
I look at the business he is now the manager and co-owner of 
and it’s amazing. What it said to me, Mr. Speaker, is this young 
gentleman was not just interested in just going and working for 
somebody. He had a vision of being, and planning, and being 
the owner of, and in this case it happens to be a car dealership, 
one of the largest in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I thought, and you sit in the office and, Mr. Speaker, to be 
very honest with you, you just feel good when you’re talking to 
someone like that. Because they’ve got a vision and they’re 
looking forward to how they can be not only participants in this 
province but how they can also provide . . . and as he indicated 
— I forget the number of employees he had — that he felt good 
about the fact that he was able to create employment for a 
number of people in this province. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, he brought a couple of points forward 
as well that I think that a lot of other people do as well. And 
things that when we look at this budget, the concerns he had is 
the tax structure in the province of Saskatchewan. He had 
concerns with the taxes, the high tax rate we have in this 
province, the amount of tax dollars that leave his business, that 
are taken out of his pocket, that are taken out of his ability to 
provide even more meaningful employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact he said he loved this province and he 
invested in this province, but he would love to see the day when 
there is a fairer tax base in the province of Saskatchewan. He’d 
love to see the day when the rules are more equal and treat 



April 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

people a lot more fairly, treat businesses more fairly so that they 
can provide the meaningful employment. 
 
And this budget really doesn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. When you 
look at this budget, Mr. Speaker, the government is going to 
brag about the increases they put into health care. And they’re 
going to brag about the $88 million — $88.8 million I believe 
— that they put into health care, additional money into health 
care. And they're going to say this is what we’re doing to 
provide more meaningful, accessible health care. And I hear the 
Minister of Health is now bragging from his seat about that $88 
million and unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, what I find interesting, 
that $88 million is not going to address some of the problems. 
 
We had a lady in . . . a couple in this Assembly, I believe 
yesterday, raising some real concerns about their access to 
health care. Take a look at the $88 million, Mr. Speaker. 
Where’s that $88 million going? $20 million into SHIN 
(Saskatchewan Health Information Network); $20 million into 
setting up the computer so that they could provide employment 
for . . . and make sure that Mr. Nystuen — I don’t know if I got 
the name — Nystuen has a job, an NDP patronage appointment, 
Mr. Speaker. Just another job created for an NDP employee or 
an NDP bagman, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t put one red cent into making sure that 
there is an operating table available at the Royal University 
Hospital in Saskatoon that you can put a patient on, and it’s 
going to be standing there when the specialist goes to start his 
operation. It doesn’t put another red cent into making a bed 
available to address the long waiting-lists we have for hip 
replacement or even for heart surgery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when it . . . Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. There’s lots to 
draw on because visiting at the hospitals you run into 
individuals who’ve been on waiting-lists, and I find that very 
interesting. In fact, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. It now being the time of 
adjournment, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow 
morning at 10 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................407 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................407 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................407 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................407 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................407 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................407 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................407 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................407 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................407 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................408 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................408 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................408 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................408 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................408 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................408 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................408 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Multiple Sclerosis Fashion Show 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................408 
 Donation to the Emmett Hall Memorial Foundation 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................409 
 Betaseron Approved for MS Victim 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................409 
 Turtleford Fair Canada’s Best for 1997 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................409 
 Saskatchewan Road Hazards 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................409 
 Saskatoon Cadet Selected for Honour Band 
  Whitmore...................................................................................................................................................................................410 
 B.C. By-election 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................410 
 E & C Quine Resource Centre 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................410 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................410 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................411 
 Crown Corporations’ Foreign Investments 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................412 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................412 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................412 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................413 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................413 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................413 
 Proposed South Saskatchewan River Dam 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................414 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................414 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................415 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................415 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................417 



 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................426 
  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................429 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................433 
 
 
 


