





























































Hansard: March 30, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 327 
 March 30, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this come from the communities 
of Melfort and Tisdale. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from Regina and Candle Lake; Nipawin 
also. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To present petitions as 
well and, Mr. Speaker, this petition deals with the Jack Messer 
severance and the Channel Lake fiasco. And the petitioners who 
signed this petition are from the community of Nipawin. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities, Mr. Speaker, involved, are the community of 
Francis. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 

the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these come from the good people at Leroy, St. Brieux, 
Melfort, and Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise with petitions for 
people in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Oxbow. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Everyone that has signed this petition is from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 
behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan with respect to 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from Glenbain, 
Vanguard, Gravelbourg, and Swift Current. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I also present a petition. The 
prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre by 
enacting legislation to prevent its closure, and by providing 
adequate funding to the Regina Health District centre so 
that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Your petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from Coronach. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1998 

colleagues and bring forward petitions in regards to closure of 
the Plains hospital. This will bring the amount to somewhere 
over 100,000 that have now been presented in this House. 
Prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed the petition are from 
the Maple Creek, Frontier, Eastend, and Shaunavon areas of the 
province. I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains hospital 
may be continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks 
from Limerick, Assiniboia, Crane Valley, and Gravelbourg, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the new week 
we have even more important petitions from the south-west. I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will humbly pray. 
 

These, Mr. Speaker, all come from the Fox Valley and Swift 
Current communities, and I’m happy to present them today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Petitions from citizens of the province petitioning the 
government to provide the necessary funding for the 
twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; to act to save the 
Plains Health Centre; and to cancel any severance 
payments to Jack Messer and to call an independent public 
inquiry. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

Is there a freeze on the leasing of Crown lands in the area 
of the province north of Waskesiu; if so, why is this freeze 
in place; how long has this freeze been in place; and how 
long is it anticipated that the freeze will remain in place? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today when 
we have so many guests here, to introduce some guests who 
have come a long distance to Saskatchewan. In your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker, are four judges from the Ukraine, and I’ll ask 
them to stand when I read their name. 
 
The first is Chief Justice Fedoryshyn of the Supreme Court of 
the Ukraine. And then Chief Justice Tyutyunnyk from the 
Supreme Court. Chief Judge Stryzhak and Chief Judge 
Ischenko, and they’re both from provincial courts of appeal. 
And accompanying them today is Alberta Court of Appeal 
Justice John Bracco, and Judge Senuik of our Provincial Court 
along with some of the guests. 
 
They’re part of an exchange of judges between Canada and the 
Ukraine, and they’ve made a special trip from Ottawa to 
Saskatchewan to discuss with us how our courts work. Let’s all 
give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the legislature a special guest here, an 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from the House of 
New Brunswick. 
 
The MLA is also the Leader of the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) in New Brunswick and her name is Elizabeth Weir. She 
represents the constituency of Saint John Harbour. She has been 
here for a women’s conference that most of the women in our 
caucus and myself attended this weekend, and I’d like to very 
warmly invite everyone to clap for Elizabeth Weir. Please stand 
up. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and to all members of the 
legislature, two guests seated in the west gallery: Michael 
Millar who is presently the director of the Saskatoon Food 
Bank, along with his wife Betty Millar. Just for the information 



March 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

of all assembled, Michael is a former member of Humphrey and 
the Dumptrucks, a well-known Saskatchewan group. And I’m 
pleased that he’s now working as the head of the Food Bank in 
Saskatoon. And Betty Millar is working with the federal 
government and the province, trying to ensure that we have 
computers in our schools. 
 
So welcome to both of you. I know you haven’t been here 
before, and I thought it important that you be introduced. So if 
you could stand so that we would know who you are. Welcome 
to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Recycling Program 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you are aware, this 
government has identified environmental concerns, then acted 
to systematically deal with those environmental problems. The 
people of Saskatchewan have responded with the same 
conscientious enthusiasm. 
 
Joanne Fedyk, executive director of the Saskatchewan Waste 
Reduction Council, says: if you have a program, people will use 
it. Well, Mr. Speaker, environmentally sound, cost-effective 
programs are springing up all over the province. 
 
I would like to inform the House of just one such program. The 
Regional Authority of Carlton Trail, or REACT, have recently 
been recognized by the council for its environmentally friendly 
waste management program. REACT is a Humboldt-based 
program which united 26 municipalities under one system. 
 
In less than a year, REACT has been able to close 23 landfills 
through the use of 19 recycling centres, seven waste transfer 
stations, and a composting program. There are now only two 
landfills in use in the entire region. There has been an 
astounding 60 per cent reduction in the amount of waste going 
to the landfills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, similar projects are under way across the 
province. We are proud to support them and congratulate 
everyone in the REACT area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Award to Member for Athabasca 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this important 
awards day it gives me great pleasure to rise to honour one of 
my colleagues, close friend and colleague, the member for 
Athabasca, who will be in Montreal this week receiving a 
prestigious national award. 
 
There were over 220 nominations made from coast to coast. He 
was successfully chosen as the Saskatchewan region role model 
by the national native role model program. 
 
The member from Athabasca has continually worked toward 
the betterment of communities in northern Saskatchewan. He’s 
a great individual and a credit to the North and an asset to our 

party. He sums up his own philosophy of life in the words: “If 
we were not put on this earth to help one another out in time of 
need, then what are we here for?” 
 
The Liberal member for Athabasca has worked as a newspaper 
reporter and editor, as a programer and a producer for a 
broadcasting corporation, and is president of his own 
communications company, Belanger Inc. 
 
He has dedicated countless hours to volunteering in the North 
and is a renowned athlete. But he has to be most proud of the 
fact that he was three times chosen by the people of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse as their mayor and later as their MLA. During 
his time as mayor he successfully utilized his energies and skills 
to develop one of the best role models for community 
development in northern Saskatchewan. It is an honour to work 
with such a man. I would ask all members of this Assembly to 
join with me in congratulating him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Television Episode Filming in Lumsden 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sesame Park, which 
is the Canadian version of Sesame Street, recently shot an 
episode in Lumsden, which is a friendly town in the beautiful 
Qu’Appelle Valley in my constituency. 
 
Roadhouse Pictures, the company that produces Sesame Park, 
was in Lumsden filming in February. A number of local 
soon-to-be stars showcased their talent. Jody and Shelby 
Clemens were filmed teaching proper horse care. In the second 
shoot, Gord Eberts, his nephew Mickey, and niece Chelsey did 
a scene with talking horses. 
 
Trevor Grant, the director and producer of Sesame Park, said: 
“We decided to film in the Lumsden area because it is a 
gorgeous setting.” The friendly, helpful people of the Lumsden 
area were happy to oblige. Grant also added: 
 

We like to go into small towns, meet the children, and then 
film the ones that want to be in the forefront. The thing that 
I enjoy most about my job is working with children. They 
are spontaneous, funny, and make us laugh all the time, 
and we like watching the joy they get out of doing it. 

 
The young Lumsden stars are slated to appear on CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) in October and I’ll advise 
the House of a more precise date when I have one. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposed Use of Plains Health Centre 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal opposition revealed on Friday that negotiations are 
taking place with SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) to relocate its administrative offices 
to the current site of the Plains hospital. The Minister of 
Finance certainly didn’t deny Friday that a deal was close at 
hand. This government is undoubtedly hoping that this news 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1998 

will dampen efforts to save the Plains. To the contrary, our 
members were contacted by dozens of people over the weekend 
who are very upset that this government places a greater 
priority on office furniture than hospital beds. 
 
With 215 days left until this government plans on closing the 
Plains hospital, it certainly hasn't heard the last of this issue. 
Mr. Speaker, a good government is one that listens. At some 
point before October 31 we hope they will hear the thousands of 
people who are speaking load and clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gladmar Students Provincial Mixed Curling Champs 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is one thing 
to win at the Olympics and we’re all justifiably proud that 
Saskatchewan’s sport of curling was introduced to the world at 
the Olympics by Sandra Schmirler. But we know that the reason 
competition is so keen in Saskatchewan is that we have so many 
excellent curlers, some established and some breathing down 
the necks of the establishment. 
 
A case in point can be found in the town of Gladmar in my 
constituency. The mixed rink of Cody Morrissette, a grade 11 
student at Gladmar, recently won the Saskatchewan High 
School Provincial Championship in Wadena, by defeating in the 
semi-final and final, teams from Watrous and Yorkton. My 
apologies to the ministers of Agriculture and Health. 
 
Cody’s rink consists of Karen Buettner, Jess Melte, and 
Michelle Bloor, all grade 11 or grade 10 students. So they, like 
the Schmirler rink, have the possibility of repeating next year 
and establishing their own dynasty. 
 
I want to congratulate Cody and his rink for their victory and 
for upholding the athletic reputation of the southern part of the 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Evesham Farmer Donates Use of Land to 
Canadian Foodgrains Bank 

 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Gary Beaumont, a 
farmer in the Evesham area of my constituency, has donated the 
use of 225 cultivated acres for a Canadian Foodgrains Bank 
project. Once harvested, the production from this land will be 
donated to the Foodgrain Bank for food and development 
projects. 
 
The local project is to be named the Cotswold Growing Project. 
This project is expected to produce 225 tonnes of food grain. To 
put this in perspective, one tonne of food grain feeds 2,500 
people for one day. Thus, 225 tonnes will feed 562,500 people 
for one day. The Canadian International Development 
association matches most donations in a 4:1 ratio. This means 
the crop from the Cotswold Growing Project will generate 
enough food grains to feed nearly 3 million people for one day. 
 
The Cotswold Growing Project will cost about $12,000. This 
means the more donations of cash, products, inputs and services 
made, the more successful the project will be. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the generosity of 
Gary and Marj Beaumont and wish everyone involved in this 
project a bountiful harvest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry Into Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, for two weeks the 
Saskatchewan Party has been calling on your government to 
cancel Jack Messer’s obscene severance package and fire the 
minister responsible for this mess. Well a poll came out today. 
And what are Saskatchewan people saying? Cancel Jack 
Messer’s severance and fire the minister responsible for this 
mess. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you won’t listen to the Saskatchewan Party, will 
you at least listen to the Saskatchewan people? Will you cancel 
Jack Messer’s obscene severance package and will you fire the 
minister responsible for this mess? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the members 
opposite as it relates to the severance for Mr. Messer, we have 
indicated clearly that we did not expect this to be a politically 
popular thing to do. And that is not why Mr. Milt Fair, with 
legal counsel, decided that the severance should be paid. They 
made the decision without any advice or any control from 
government to pay severance because Mr. Milt Fair, the former 
CEO of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, now the Vice-Chair of 
the SaskPower Corporation, came to this conclusion because it 
was the legally right thing to do. 
 
Now I understand why you want him to turn it into a big 
political issue, but I can say at the end of the day, at the end of 
the day, doing the right legal procedure will in turn be the right 
political decision as well when the results are all in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday we saw quite a 
display from the NDP (New Democratic Party). They found a 
way to keep the Channel Lake cover-up going. It was like 
watching some sort of bizarre NDP yoga class. All those NDP 
members patting themselves on the back with one hand and 
covering themselves with the other. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan people see right through your 
little charade. They know you’re hiding something. They know 
the Crown Corporations Committee is going to be an NDP 
whitewash. They know Jack Messer doesn’t deserve one dime 
of severance. And the former minister responsible should be 
fired. 
 
Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan people know you’re hiding 
something. When are you going to come clean by calling a full 
public inquiry into the millions you lost in Channel Lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, and clearly, on the front page of the Leader-Post 
today, there’s the issue of Channel Lake and the issue of polls 
and the procedures that were followed in terms of Channel 
Lake. And I just want to say that what interests me very much 
was that there was 15 or 16 per cent of the population satisfied 
with paying Messer severance. 
 
I was surprised by that. I was surprised. Because on a political 
basis we knew this was not a popular political thing to do. It’s a 
legal issue. 
 
Now you may argue that if you were here you would make the 
political decision and not the right legal one. I understand that. 
Because when you were part of the Devine administration — 
one, two, three, four — part of the Devine party, that’s how you 
operated. That’s how you operated. 
 
Forget the legal options; look at the political one. But I tell you 
at the end of the day, that’s why we owe $15 billion in this 
province after the eight or nine years of your administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Premier, there was an interesting column on the financial page 
of Saturday’s Leader-Post. It said NDP corruption and 
mismanagement is turning Saskatchewan into a banana 
republic, or Arkansas North. 
 
It asked, and I quote: 

 
So which bogus review process is better? The 
NDP-dominated Crown corporation committee, or the 
NDP-dominated public accounts committee? 
 
Either way, the government will be investigating itself, 
rather than the full, independent inquiry called for by the 
Saskatchewan Party, Jack Messer, and a large number of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 

Mr. Deputy Premier, your little Crown Corporations review is 
as phoney as a $3 bill. You know it and I know it and the 
Saskatchewan people know it. When are you going to do the 
right thing, end this NDP whitewash, and hold a public inquiry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Chair of Public 
Accounts called a committee of the legislature a kangaroo court. 
Today the leader of the Conservative Party says that it’s a 
whitewash. I say to you, you do a great disservice to yourself, to 
other members of the legislature, to members of government, 
talking about your credibility; because it’s your credibility you 
talk about when you talk that way about a committee of the 
legislature, a committee dominated by all members who are 
elected to come here by their peers, their neighbours, their 
friends, to create laws and to work in committees. 
 
And I say if that’s your opinion of the legislature — if that’s 
your opinion of the legislature — you should resign, recall 
yourself, and go back to the farm or wherever you came from 
because you’re not worthy of the job that people sent you here 
to do. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also 
for the Premier. And I know from what happened last week, he 
seems to be getting a little feeble-minded in his old age. But he 
should be able to remember stepping in to save his good friend, 
Jack Messer, from being fired. 
 
Mr. Premier, we have learned that you stepped in to save Jack 
Messer from being fired back in ’94. The member for North 
Battleford indicated it happened again in 1996. That’s probably 
why you sent poor old Doug Anguish packing to the Northwest 
Territories. 
 
Mr. Premier, has your memory come back over the weekend? 
Can you confirm that you stepped in, in the past, to keep Jack 
Messer from being fired? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure that my 
memory is every bit as good as the hon. member, who 
obviously has forgotten in only just a few short, short months 
ago he was sitting as a Conservative, now sits as a Sask Party 
member. So I think I don’t need to worry about my memory 
compared to his memory. 
 
But unlike my memory and your memory, the people of 
Saskatchewan will never forget the fact that you made this dead 
of a deal . . . dead-of-the-night deal with the 
Liberal-Saskatchewan party. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to the main question. In June of 1994, the 
Crown Investments Corporation asked the board of directors of 
every Crown corporation to evaluate their CEO. Standard 
procedure. 
 
I’m informed that the SaskPower board held several in-camera 
meetings, and that many members of the board concluded they 
had some serious issues with the personality and the 
management style of Mr. Messer. In July of 1994 this was told 
to me by Doug Anguish when he was the minister in charge and 
wanted to report and ask my advice on this. I think it’s well 
known that Mr. Messer has had an ability to attract some 
controversy. 
 
After considering all the matters, I indicated to the minister that 
Mr. Messer was doing a good job in terms of debt reduction; 
reorganizing — although it was difficult with respect to the 
unions and others; the corporation was in the black —in a profit 
position; and that the minister should go out and try to work out 
the differences between the board and the CEO in order to make 
sure that the corporation functions and continues to function in 
that direction. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s good to 
see the Premier’s memory has improved a lot since last 
weekend. I would suggest he should sharpen his memory a bit 
more and remember what happened at a past election when the 
people from his constituency caught up with him, as they will 
do again. 
 
When the Premier says he is stepping in to save Jack Messer, it 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1998 

usually has nothing to do with Channel Lake. Well it has 
everything to do with it rather than sound business principles. If 
you had done the right thing and fired Jack Messer years ago, 
you wouldn’t be in the jackpot you are in today. And taxpayers 
wouldn’t be out millions of dollars thanks to Jack Messer and 
NDP incompetence in the Crowns. 
 
Mr. Premier, you said you would check your records to see if 
you stepped in on Jack Messer’s behalf. Have you done that, 
Mr. Premier, and will you be bringing those records along when 
you are called to testify at the Crown Corporation hearings on 
Channel Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, there are no records. But 
what I did do, after the scrum on Friday, is to ask of some of my 
officials the circumstances surrounding the matter back in July 
of 1994, as I reported in the previous question to the member 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Prince Albert Women’s Shelter 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Premier. Mr. Premier, the emergency 
shelter for abused women in North Battleford may be forced to 
close its doors next month because of a funding shortage. 
 
Last year this centre helped about 150 women and 220 children 
escape from an abusive situation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Prince Albert, not North Battleford. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I’m sorry, it is Prince Albert. Do you know 
what their annual budget is? About $300,000, Mr. Premier — 
the same amount that was just given to Jack Messer. 
 
Mr. Premier, there is something very seriously wrong with a 
government that has $300,000 for a buddy but not enough 
money to help women and children that are being in an abusive 
situation. What are you doing to save this shelter in Prince 
Albert? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, just to be clear so there’s 
no misunderstanding. I believe when the member stood up, she 
indicated the shelter in question was in North Battleford. It is 
not, Mr. Speaker. The shelter in question is in Prince Albert. 
 
I want to report to the House that I have just returned from 
Prince Albert just this morning. I have met with my officials in 
Prince Albert; we have discussed the situation facing the 
women’s shelter there. I want to report to the House and assure 
members and the general public that that shelter will continue to 
operate. It will be open May 1, receiving women in difficulty, 
as it has been. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when the NDP decided it wanted to close the Plains hospital, 
the people of Saskatchewan were told that the cost of 
consolidating services would total about $83 million. Soon 
afterward the cost was going to be up around $95 million, and 
at last word the estimated cost of consolidation was $108 
million. That’s $25 million more than first projected. 
 
Will the Minister of Health explain what the total cost of 
shutting down the Plains hospital will be to the taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to answer 
the question this afternoon, to indicate to the member that as the 
development of the Plains Health Centre and the restructuring 
of the two other facilities in Regina to serve southern 
Saskatchewan has been under way, the last information that I 
have is that we are currently around the $95 million on the 
development of the new facility, which is of the General 
Hospital and of the Pasqua Hospital. 
 
The current numbers I don’t have the full knowledge of yet, Mr. 
Speaker, because the project isn’t intended to finish its work 
until the fall of 1998. And when we have that work completely 
done in the province, then I’ll be able to provide to the member 
opposite what the actual accounting and the cost of that facility 
are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
today we’re releasing some of those costs that you should have 
already had. We’re getting them from your department, Mr. 
Minister. You should be on top of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of this massive overrun at taxpayers’ 
expense, a waste of valuable health care dollars, we have yet to 
hear any explanations or apologies from this government. The 
former minister of Health certainly wasn’t willing to admit he 
had a runaway project on his hands. In fact he suggested 33 
times during one media scrum that the project was on time and 
on budget. And I think he remembers that. 
 
Mr. Minister, the project is at least $25 million over budget 
now. Is this because your government is inept or did you simply 
mislead the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important is to 
carefully examine the wordage of the member opposite in terms 
of how he describes the investment in health care in Regina and 
to southern Saskatchewan. 
 
If in fact the member opposite suggests that this government is 
wasting money — and that’s his word — that we’re wasting 
money today in investing in health care for people who live in 
Regina and southern Saskatchewan by adding a brand-new MRI 
(magnetic resonance imaging) which is going to serve the 
people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan; by adding an 
additional CT (computerized axial tomography) scanner that 
will provide the first and the most efficient diagnostic services 
to people in southern Saskatchewan and in Regina; if in fact we 
have a new, and will have a new cardiac area that will be 
serving cardiac patients in the state-of-the-art fashion; if the 



March 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

member opposite suggests for a moment that that’s a waste of 
taxpayers’ money, then I expect, Mr. Member, you are not 
serving the people in your constituency well, you’re not serving 
the people of Saskatchewan very well in opposition, and I say 
to you, you need to examine the wordage when you say that 
we’re wasting money as we invest it in health care for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note 
that on budget day that government stood up and tried to take 
credit for the MRI coming to the Regina area — that was raised 
from private funds. What role did you play? You didn’t even 
play a role. You’re not even aware of your own budget 
documents coming out here. 
 
Mr. Minister, we know there have been delays in construction 
because the General Hospital sits on bog land. The district is in 
the process of constructing a building for doctors’ offices on the 
site of the General Hospital now. 
 
We also know there are discussions to purchase land in the 
vicinity of the General to turn it into a parking lot. What are 
these items going to run up that price tag to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have been on my feet 
now three or four times in response to the members opposite in 
respect to, how are we going to accommodate people from 
outside of Regina when they come to visit the General Hospital 
for a variety of different reasons. And we’ve said that the 
district health board is working at establishing appropriate 
parking and appropriate emergency services so that as the 
ambulatory services come in that we can provide them the 
comprehensive fashion. 
 
Today the member stands up and says, why is it that you’re 
wasting money on how the public are going to access this 
facility? Now how does the member want it? Does the member 
want us to ensure that we supply a broad range of health care 
services to people from Regina, across the province, a 
state-of-the-art services? Or is he saying that what we should be 
doing is we should be abandoning our responsibilities, which is 
what he and his government, what he and his party would do if 
he was ever . . . had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to serve. 
Because they don’t believe in universal medicare; they don’t 
believe . . . they believe in privatization. They don’t believe in 
the democratic process of the board system. They don’t believe 
in medicare, Mr. Speaker. They don’t believe in serving people 
as we do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Crown Corporations Committee investigation into Channel 
Lake fiasco will discover one of two things — either gross 
incompetence, out-and-out fraud, or both. Reports filed with the 
House on March 10 indicate that the lawyers retained by 
SaskPower did not fulfil their retainer agreement with regards 
to the sale of Channel Lake. They did not supply copies of 
documents to SaskPower officials as required. This failure to 

supply SaskPower with certain crucial documents cost 
taxpayers of this province $5.2 million. 
 
My question to the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporations of Saskatchewan) is, will he agree to investigate 
the apparent professional negligence and pursue the possibility 
of a claim against these lawyers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
has raised exactly the kind of questions that should be raised in 
the committee, and I’m sure will be raised starting tomorrow 
when the committee meets for the first time. And I want to say 
again that this is a committee of the legislature with many 
powers to get people to come. We have said that if people need 
to be subpoenaed they will be subpoenaed. People will be 
required to answer all and any questions put. The lawyers 
involved will also be asked to come and answer questions. And 
I think the questions you’re asking here will be very 
appropriately put at the committee meeting starting tomorrow 
morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — A supplementary question to the minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Has the minister received a legal opinion on the 
possibility of suing the Calgary law firm for professional 
negligence and recouping the $5.2 million the taxpayers lost 
over the bungled sale of Channel Lake? And if not, why not, 
and would you not have the best interests of Saskatchewan 
people in heart and look into the possibility that may exist. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite again, 
that is in the mandate of the committee. Mr. Wright, Mr. John 
Wright, the CEO of Crown Investments Corporation, will be 
there. Other individuals who will be able to answer this and 
other questions will be present. I say as well, members of the 
media, the public, it’s an open meeting, an open process, and I 
say to members opposite from the Conservative Party who are 
cynical about the process, they should be there, attend, and they 
will find that these kind of questions are in order and answers 
will be provided. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review Rights for Parents of Special Needs Children 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Education. The 
Education Act, section 148, allows for a process by which 
parents of all students can have immediate access to procedures 
of investigation and mediation of any differences or conflicts 
within a school. However an amendment to the appeal process 
for special education students sets out different rules of appeal 
for their parents. Should these parents disagree with the school, 
they are sent through the very same internal procedure that they 
just went through which resulted in the very decision that they 
are appealing. 
 
Madam Minister, does your government actually believe that 
this procedure is fair and in the best interests of children with 
special needs? 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1998 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would just like to say to the member that she may not recall 
this but there was a time when parents of children of special 
needs had no right to a . . . no right to a review. And what we 
did last year was to give parents a right to review decisions of 
school boards with the exception of two points. 
 
Parents could not ask for a review if they were concerned about 
the actual location of the placement of their child and they 
could not ask for a review if they had already taken their 
concern to the Human Rights Commission. 
 
So I would say that parents are in a much better position now 
because they now do have a right to a review when they didn’t 
in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister. When this 
amendment was introduced, the Saskatchewan Association for 
Community Living and the Children’s Advocate spoke out 
against it, so obvious was its ineffectiveness. And based on the 
list of exemptions to the appeal process that are listed in The 
Education Act and the regulations being put forward by your 
government, there is no conceivable situation in which one 
would be successful having an appeal. 
 
Madam Minister, would you please commit to reviewing this 
piece of legislation, and especially the offensive regulations — 
with which I had met with you last week — that go with it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I said before, prior to 1997 parents did not have a right to a 
review of school board decisions. We had a situation in the 
province where a parent had to take their case to the Human 
Rights Commission. What I thought we were doing with the 
regulations and the legislation was allowing parents to ask for a 
review of their child’s circumstances, particularly in the area of 
special education. 
 
One of the things that school boards were concerned about was 
the notion that they would not be able to place children where 
they thought it appropriate. Parents have a right to review their 
child’s educational programs; they don’t have a right to review 
the placement of their child in a program. 
 
The second point is that they don’t have a right to ask for a 
review if they’ve already taken their concern to the Human 
Rights Commission. I can tell the member, I will look at this 
again to see if we didn’t get it right. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, you know 
both of us spent a lot of years not just working with but working 
for children with special needs. And you’ve stated on many, 
many occasions that integration should be the norm. In fact I 
have some quotations from you. 

 
The restrictions as to the use of appeals make it virtually 
useless to parents with children with disabilities. 

And it isn’t me who’s raising this, Madam Minister. The 
Saskatchewan Association for Community Living has been very 
articulate and very adamant about the implications of this 
particular regulation. 
 
I pose this question to you from them today. Is integrated 
education the norm or not in our province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I will say to the member is 
educational integration is definitely the norm. What I can also 
say to the member is that there are occasions when it is not 
necessarily in the best interest of the child, educationally, to be 
integrated. And so here comes the dilemma between what’s 
educationally appropriate and what is a concern on the part of 
the parent to have their child integrated. 
 
I guess from my point of view, what I would say, that what we 
have to do is ensure that each child has access to an education 
that is appropriate and is going to help them educationally, not 
merely access to a classroom where they may not get the best 
education available to them in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Madam Minister, we are in agreement that 
not all children can be integrated. However integration is stated 
as the norm by you as the Minister of Education. And I think 
that . . . I’m grateful that you’ve indicated that what you’re 
going to do is review this regulation, because this new 
regulation affecting students with disabilities contains some 
truly frightening statements. And I’m going to give a quote: 
 

The right to a review does not apply where the 
disagreement with respect to placement of the child is 
based on . . . 
 

And I’m just as worried about (a) through (e) by the way, but 
I’m going to cite (f), which is: 
 

. . . an allegation of discrimination pursuant to the Human 
Rights Code or the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 

Now, Madam Minister, are you suggesting that the education 
system in this province with respect to students with disabilities 
need not be inconvenienced by the Human Rights Code or, 
heavens, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, the 
review process is set out in the Act. It’s intended to be a review 
by one or more individuals with experience and expertise in 
matters relating to educational or related services for special 
needs students. These individuals aren’t equipped to deal with 
formal allegations of discrimination under the law, and the 
appropriate avenue or venue for those kinds of allegations needs 
to be the Human Rights Commission or the judicial system. 
 
Parents will still have access to mechanisms in the normal way. 
The regulation in question does not in any way limit existing 
parent rights. It just says that if you believe that you’re being 
discriminated against what you need to do is go to the Human 
Rights Commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Establishment of Serious Crime Task Force 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I was pleased 
to join the police chiefs of the cities of Regina and Saskatoon 
and the chief superintendent of the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) to announce the establishment of a serious 
crime task force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to tell this House that the Government 
of Saskatchewan will invest $1 million over two years to 
establish police-based, serious crime units which will operate 
out of Regina and Saskatoon and will focus on organized 
criminal activity. We will work together to put gangs out of 
business in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, organized crime takes many 
forms. It may involve two or more individuals conspiring to 
commit robberies or break-ins; it may also involve large groups 
operating a network for the distribution and sale of illegal 
drugs, or including and moving prostitutes around the province 
and the country. It may also involve Internet crime, money 
laundering, and the distribution of child pornography. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each serious crime unit will be staffed by senior, 
experienced city police working with a designated prosecutor 
and in cooperation with the RCMP. The establishment of the 
serious crime unit means that police officers will be dedicated 
to investigating specific crimes, developing specialized skills 
and contacts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s police services have tremendous 
capacity to gather information within the communities they 
police. And as well, the RCMP have the ability to gather 
information at the national and international level. They also 
have a broad range of specialized and technical resources. 
 
By using the latest methods and technology to gather criminal 
intelligence and by working together in cohesive units, much 
more will be accomplished than would be by each agency 
working on its own. 
 
Designated prosecutors will assist law enforcement personnel 
within each unit to assess the kind and amount of evidence 
necessary to successfully prosecute complex cases involving 
criminal conspiracies. The task force units will also be working 
with the new, RCMP integrated proceeds of crime units. 
Property or cash acquired through criminal activity will be 
seized and becomes the property of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, organized criminal activities cross municipal, 
provincial, and national borders. Investigations require 
dedicated, specialized police officers, coordination between 
police forces, and sustained efforts often over long periods of 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are fair-minded and 
responsible. They believe people should be held accountable for 
their actions and they want us to deal swiftly and effectively 
with those who do not respect the law. 

Safe communities are one of this government’s top priorities. 
Working with police and prosecutors to make this province 
inhospitable to criminal gangs is a key piece of this strategy. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the listing of 
directions that were just indicated are laudable. I don’t think 
there’s anyone in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that would have 
any opposition to that. I think those are some of the areas that 
have been of key concern to people throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
And the first one that’s listed is dealing with drug and sex trade, 
and I think that’s been a concern that’s been ongoing for a long 
time. The criminal gang one has been one that’s been in the 
media more recently, and moving into the central part of 
Canada and Saskatchewan. I think that’s a definite concern 
that’s here as well, as well as some newer types of crime 
dealing with the Internet. 
 
So I think to the extent that those are listed and there’s effort, 
money, put into that, I think that’s very laudable and deserves 
the support of everyone in Saskatchewan. 
 
However we’ve seen other efforts and directions in the past that 
have become very misguided and gone off the tracks very 
seriously. And I would hope that as these efforts are made, that 
will be more successful than in some other things. And I recall 
very recently, if you look at the newspaper where you had a 
series of cars burned, tires slashed, that’s a gang activity. Those 
people end up in some of these other gangs. 
 
If we can’t control the beginnings of that, how are we going to 
control the end of it. And so I have some concerns there. 
 
We recall not that long ago when we had the Oldsmobile gang 
situation and the government side just said, park your cars in 
some other city where it isn’t quite as serious. I hope the 
answers to this are a little bit more successful and we don’t just 
tell a biker gang, well go from one city to another one. That’s 
not good enough. 
 
But as far as the direction and the concern, I think everyone in 
Saskatchewan shares that concern and supports your direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like 
to briefly congratulate the Minister of Justice. I have said on 
many occasions that maintenance of public confidence in our 
system of justice is one of the top priorities of our province and 
we know that that public confidence in our justice system has 
been shaken in this province over the last few years for a 
number of reasons. 
 
I think that the feeling of security and safety by law-abiding 
citizens is paramount to restoring that sense of confidence. 
 
We also know, Mr. Speaker, that modern technology can be 
both a blessing and a threat to our society. We know that 
modern technology unfortunately opens up new avenues for 
criminal activity, and I’m glad to see that that’s being 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1998 

addressed. 
 
We know that the resources and expertise for dealing with some 
of these new forms of criminal activity will not necessarily be 
available to the average police detachment in our province, so 
the establishment of two specialized units within Regina and 
Saskatoon is the obvious way to try and handle that problem, to 
make sure that the expertise and resources are available on a 
centralized basis. 
 
We have been concerned of late with the repeated stories about 
the intention of criminal gangs from outside our province to 
establish branches in Saskatchewan. And I think that the public 
of Saskatchewan will be pleased that the government takes this 
threat seriously and is determined to address it. Thank you. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Distinguished Volunteer Medal Recipients 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order that we 
may proceed to the presentation of the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medals at this time and by leave of the Assembly, I would 
move, seconded by the member from Moosomin: 
 

That this Assembly do now recess to honour the 
distinguished Volunteer Medal recipients. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Before recessing the House, if I can just give 
some very, very, very brief direction. As soon as the House 
recesses, I’ll ask all those who are participants in the ceremony 
themselves, the recipients and the leaders of the caucuses, to 
assemble outside the main door to the Assembly, and the 
ceremony will begin as soon as we can do that. 
 
Therefore I would encourage all hon. members as well as guests 
to just remain seated and we’ll begin the Volunteer Medal 
ceremonies as soon as we can. This House will stand recessed 
until 4 and I’ll ask that the bell be rung at 5 minutes to 4 to 
summons the members to return to the House to begin 
proceedings with introduction of Bills at that time. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 4 p.m. 
 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’m pleased to present the House with a written answer to 
question no. 11, and by leave of the House, also the answers to 
written questions no. 12, 13, 14, and 15. 
 
The Speaker: — The answers are tabled, and does the House 
grant leave to simultaneously provide the answers to questions 
12 through 15? Is leave granted? Leave is granted and questions 
are provided for questions no. 12 through 15. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to resume my comments which I started last Friday, and I won’t 
certainly repeat everything here. 
 
I would like to though again mention the many people behind 
the scenes who make this government operate and bring in the 
budget together, certainly the people in Finance and the people 
in all the other departments that make this institution operate. 
The people in Hansard who work into the wee hours of the 
morning sometimes. Their efforts and work are certainly greatly 
appreciated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — On Friday, Mr. Speaker, I commented 
about the good news in Highways. Some of the other highlights 
— like fifth balanced budget in a row; debt reduction continues 
on; our spending in Health is up again from last year, $1.7 
billion. 
 
So today I’d like to start out about jobs. And jobs are very 
important to our people, both rural and urban, and young and 
old people alike as well. And, Mr. Speaker, last year we can 
very proudly say that we had 13,000 new jobs in Saskatchewan, 
a very important achievement; more people working in the 
province than at any other time in history. 
 
Our economy is healthy. Our retail sales and manufacturing 
shipments are up. Oil drilling is at record levels and wholesale 
trade is up 26 per cent — the highest increase in all of Canada. 
 
This budget does focus on building our local economies. We 
can still do more, doubling investment in regional economic 
development to $6 million, increased support for locally based 
cooperatives, supporting neighbourhood development 
organizations to help revitalize our inner cities. The 
commitment to innovation and research is being continued, a 15 
per cent income tax credit is being provided for research and 
development to help all Saskatchewan industries invest in their 
own future as well as ours. This tax credit is intended to help 
create the climate for investment in innovation. So certainly 
jobs, and particularly for our young people, remain a top 
priority and we will look for another record number of people 
working in Saskatchewan in 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture remains the backbone of the 
Saskatchewan economy and we are very pleased to say that we 
have . . . an additional $14 million will be invested in 
agriculture research, and to keep us competitive with the world. 
And certainly our industry here is a leader in the world. 
Whether it’s developing new varieties of seeds, new equipment 



March 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

for farming, Saskatchewan is the home for that. 
 
And for an example, my neighbour, Jim Halford, and Conserva 
Pac, a zero-till seeder at Indian Head, this past few months he 
has been shipping these air seeders . . . zero-till seeders to 
places like Germany and Australia, not to mention all 
throughout western Canada. And this again is an example of a 
farmer with an idea, and ability to put this, his ideas, to work, 
and exporting it to other countries around the world. 
 
We will also be introducing changes to the deductible for 
horticultural and livestock facilities from 500 to $100, to further 
help Saskatchewan farmers. Other activities such as more 
options for our crop insurance program to provide more options 
and flexibility to farmers are in the works. 
 
And of course we, like everyone else, are very concerned about 
rail-line abandonment, and I can assure you that our Minister of 
Highways is dealing very aptly with this, I guess this challenge. 
Challenge and change are always with us and may not always 
be for the best, but we will be working with landowners, farm 
organizations, and certainly the federal government and the rail 
lines themselves to maintain a network of rail systems to deliver 
our grain. 
 
Probably the best thing we could have for agriculture right now 
is about a 2-inch rain around the third week of April and there’d 
be a lot more optimism out there. But spring is here. Farmers 
are already cleaning seeds, getting equipment ready, and 
making decisions for their upcoming weeks when — if this 
weather continues — there will be lots of activity out on the 
land. And of course for the cattle producers, it’s calving time 
and this is great weather for that as well. 
 
Mining is another important sector in our economy and mining 
remains very important, from potash to uranium, here in 
Saskatchewan. And this budget builds on that strength by 
exempting exploration equipment for use in the mining sector 
from PST (provincial sales tax), and instead offer more 
exploration here in Saskatchewan. 
 
New petroleum research tax incentive will encourage oil and 
gas producers to continue to create new methods of exploration 
and production. And certainly there’s always concern from 
people in rural areas when there is oil and gas activity on their 
land. And I certainly want to compliment the oil and gas 
industry by their cooperation and their ingenuity. For an 
example, directional drilling has greatly reduced the impact on 
land. 
 
And I do know that the petroleum industry is as concerned 
about the land and the environment as we are and we look 
forward to working cooperatively. There’s new research going 
on to show how we can re-establish vegetation, natural 
vegetation, in areas which have been disturbed. And I’m sure 
we’ll see continued progress in this area. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one of our most valuable assets is our 
children and families. And we have $20 million of new money 
for our families, and in particular, our children. The 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit will help 80,000 children and 
that’s a large percentage of the children here in Saskatchewan. 
 

The Saskatchewan employment supplement will top up the 
wages of low income parents to give them a little hand when 
they need it and discourage people from falling off onto the 
welfare system. We wish to keep people working. And again 
the Minister of Social Services and the Premier announced this 
package last week and this is certainly good news for a lot of 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the hon. member on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Stanger: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
introduce to you and through you to the House, a constituent 
and a friend of mine, Mrs. Fern Nielsen, from Turtleford. Fern 
is involved in the Wheat Pool and is here on business meetings, 
but she’s also a great promoter of the community of Turtleford 
and she tells me the bantam kids won the hockey against 
Redvers. So we’re really happy to hear that. 
 
And also the Turtleford fair has been declared — if you can 
imagine — the best country fair in all of Canada. 
 
So she gave me all this good news today, and we welcome her 
here to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A final comment 
on the investments in families package is family health benefits 
will be extended to children in low income working families. 
Again, this is an incentive to help keep people working and 
giving them a helping hand. And we’re very pleased to be able 
to offer this. Certainly everybody wants to have a job and be 
contributing to the economy and this whole package will go a 
long way in doing that. And certainly like to congratulate the 
Social Services minister on this fine job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — For rural Saskatchewan we have some 
good new too, Mr. Speaker. By the end of the year or so, we 
will have 911 emergency phone service in every home, 
business, and farm in Saskatchewan, including Fort 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We are improving the cost-sharing 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1998 

formulas for RCMP policing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We will be reducing costs for RCMP 
services in 100 communities. And in looking after my two 
favourite constituents, the MLA for Weyburn and the MLA for 
Melville, at Fort Qu’Appelle for an example, Mr. Speaker, they 
will pay $69,800 less for RCMP services, and in Milestone, 
$9,200 less for RCMP services. And not to forget my home 
town, Indian Head, it’ll be $15,000 less for RCMP services, and 
at Qu’Appelle, $28,000. 
 
So this is also good news for rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We’re also removing the sales tax from the 
purchase of fire trucks and attached equipment for municipal 
governments. This was a little slow in coming, Mr. Speaker, as 
my home town of Indian Head purchased their truck a couple of 
months ago, so I suspect I’ll probably be hearing from them. 
 
But we think of the volunteer fire departments, Mr. Speaker. 
This day is very appropriate to comment on volunteers, whether 
it be in our fire departments, our local service clubs, what have 
you. And of course we recognized six very distinguished 
individuals here earlier today with the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medal. And we will look forward to next year’s selection for 
this very important exercise as well. 
 
Well education is very important, Mr. Speaker, and good news 
in this area as well. We have increased funding for K to 12 
schools operating grants by over $20 million; increased funding 
for K to 12 school capital grants, $7.3 million; and increased 
funding for post-secondary education by another $18 million. 
So we are helping to expand and improve our education here in 
Saskatchewan, as our children are our future. 
 
Our children and the environment. We have a very good news 
story here as well, Mr. Speaker. Effective April 1, 1998, 
SARCAN will provide a 5 cent deposit refund for juice boxes 
and other cardboard beverage containers that are returned to the 
nearest SARCAN depot. 
 
This is great news. Many schools use the recycling program to 
raise funds for sporting equipment and such like. And when you 
think that over 24 million juice boxes are used in Saskatchewan 
each year, there is certainly a potential to raise considerable 
money through this. 
 
And it’s good for the children; it’s good for the environment; 
and it’s good for jobs because SARCAN will, at a minimum, be 
hiring 10 more people to expand this program, and depending 
upon the success — and we think it will be successful — there 
will be up to 35 new people working in our SARCAN system, 
which is recognized throughout North America as one of the 
best recycling opportunities for the public and which benefits 
the environment and also people with special needs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — For the people that hunt in our province, we 

have good news as well, Mr. Speaker. We have removed the 
$11 big game damage compensation licence fee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — This will be replaced by a new program 
that will compensate landowners that incur crop damage by big 
game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to use this opportunity to thank the hunters 
for their support for the last two years. Thanks to their initiative, 
we got a program started — albeit it wasn’t comprehensive 
enough; it did not raise enough money — but it got the program 
going. And now it will be replaced by a good program, a 
well-funded program jointly funded by the federal government, 
which we very much appreciate. The federal government will 
contribute $12 million to waterfowl damage, $5.8 million to big 
game damage, and the province will contribute $5 million to 
each, waterfowl damage as well as big game damage. 
 
We are also raising the coverage to 85 per cent from 70 per 
cent, and a $200 deductible . . . it’s been lowered to 200 from 
$500, and this too is good news. And the fact that the 
landowners do not have to pay any premiums, I think this will 
be a very popular and successful program because landowners 
preserve the habitat. They provide homes for wildlife and we 
really appreciate that. And I’ll comment a bit more on that a 
little later on. 
 
So again this is good news for everybody concerned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — We have good news in forestry too, Mr. 
Speaker. We will be increasing our spruce budworm spraying 
program by $1.2 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — This spraying program is a biological 
control. It is viewed as a safe exercise in controlling spruce 
budworm which has made major inroads in our forests, 
especially along the east side of the province. And so we will 
continue to do this to enhance and help the forest industry. 
 
Two point five million dollars will be spent on reforestation. 
And as you know, forest harvesting practices in years gone by 
were not very sustainable. We have a large area of the province 
which never was reforested. Last year we planted over 1 million 
seedlings in this backlogged area and we will continue to do 
that again this year. 
 
A current forestry practice require the industry, the companies, 
to reforest on their own. Basically if a tree is cut down, another 
tree is planted. 
 
(1615) 
 
We will continue to fund forest fire-fighting. We budgeted 
twenty-seven and a half million dollars to control forest fires in 
our commercial forest. 
 
And $300,000 will also be spent towards the dreaded Dutch elm 



March 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

disease. And this disease is moving into Saskatchewan, it is 
here. It has made its way across North America from the eastern 
seaboard. And we will be working with communities and with 
the Dutch elm disease committee, Save our Elms committee, in 
trying to control this disease. 
 
We need to only look at our trees in our towns and our cities 
and see how many are elms and to see what the . . . and try to 
visualize what our communities would look like with no elm 
trees left. So we are certainly prepared to do this, and we look 
forward to additional funding as the problem becomes more 
severe. In fact, last year we did top off the spending for Dutch 
elm disease control. 
 
Another area which I’d like to comment on, Mr. Speaker, is our 
representative areas network. Saskatchewan, along with most 
other jurisdictions in the world, is committed to preserving 
biological diversity and representation. And we are certainly 
doing that. 
 
In the last few months we have been able to register over 3 
million acres in our representative areas network. This includes 
a variety of programs. We have our provincial parks, we have 
ecological reserves, and more recently, we are very pleased to 
sign a memorandum of agreement with the PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration) and they have enrolled l.8 
million acres of their provincial pastures. 
 
These are native grasslands where cattle are grazed, and 
certainly the management will not change. Obviously with 
cattle grazing on these areas for a hundred years has not 
impacted the vegetation. We just want them to continue on 
doing what they are. And they too realize our native grasses are 
much more hardy in the long term than introduced species. So 
we’re very pleased to be working with Agriculture in that area. 
 
We have a partnership with Ducks Unlimited Canada. They 
have enrolled over 900,000 acres in our representative areas 
network. The Redberry Lake pelican project, 14,800 acres. This 
is our first aquatic representative area. 
 
In the east side of the province, in the forest regions, we have 
identified 27 new parkland reserves consisting of 189,000 acres. 
So we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. I am 
finding it a little difficult to be able to hear the hon. minister put 
his remarks in the budget debate. And I know that all hon. 
members are finding important things to exchange ideas about, 
and I encourage them to do it in a quieter fashion so that the 
hon. member, the Minister of Environment and Resource 
Management can continue in an unimpeded way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you very much. I’m very pleased 
that the member from Cannington is listening so closely here. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work in our 
representative areas. The vast majority of people appreciate our 
natural heritage and our wildlife, and I might add that historic 
sites, archaeological sites, will also be incorporated in our 
representative areas network. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — A program which we launched a couple of 
months ago, Mr. Speaker, is conservation easements. And this 
has the potential to be very, very successful and popular. 
Conservation easements is a process whereby landowners can 
register some native habitat and agree to have it preserved in 
perpetuity. And in return the individual will get an income tax 
credit. And for those of you who have filled out your federal 
income tax, you’ll note there is a column, ecological sensitive 
area, or something along that line. 
 
For an example, if a landowner signed up a 10-acre wetland and 
it was valued at $100 an acre, but if the wetland was cultivated 
. . . drained and cultivated, it would be valued at $300 an acre, 
the landowner would get the difference which would be $200 
an acre times 10 — $2,000 credit for maintaining that wetland 
on his property. 
 
So we have a potential to work very closely with landowners, 
and because it’s a federally driven program, people in 
downtown Vancouver and Toronto will be helping rural people 
protect habitat and we look forward to great successes here. 
We’ve already got several landowners that have signed up some 
property. 
 
These easements will transfer with the title. Again this is very 
important to people. Many landowners are getting old, like 
myself, and sometimes our children will not take over the farm, 
and when you sell to a stranger, perhaps the first thing that 
happens is the bulldozer moves in and the habitat is destroyed. 
 
Because the easements will go with the property, Mr. Speaker, 
the new landowner will not be allowed to destroy this habitat so 
that our children can come home from the cities on weekends 
and go walking in the prairie at this time of the year looking for 
crocuses. And we want them to be able to do that, and certainly 
our grandchildren as well. 
 
So this is a very good news program again for rural 
Saskatchewan and really all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Although not directly related to our budget, 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to just comment on the controversial 
gun control legislation. The federal government has spent 
hundreds of millions of dollars on this program so far and 
virtually has not registered a single long arm. 
 
And as you probably know, the side-arms and handguns have 
had to be registered since 1940. But gun control, it’s not a very 
good term because we here in Saskatchewan, we’re well aware 
of gun control and the responsible use of firearms for many 
years. We began our hunter safety program in 1960. At that 
time, we experienced over 100 firearm accidents each year. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, 37 or so years later, we experienced less 
than five accidents and no fatalities in recent years. 
 
We believe in firearm safety, responsible use of firearms and 
also responsible storage of firearms. Our volunteers, again, 
volunteers with the emphasis on volunteers in Saskatchewan, 
have trained well over 160,000 people in the safe use of 
handling and storage of firearms, and we will continue to do 
that despite the off-track basis which Ottawa seems to be set on 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1998 

going here. 
 
We went to court along with Ontario, Manitoba, Alberta, and 
the two Territories, so it’s not just Saskatchewan that views this 
piece of legislation as unworthy and useless, but it’s many other 
jurisdictions. 
 
The court ruling has not come down but we will continue to try 
to bring some sense to and have responsible gun control, a 
responsible use of firearms continued here in Saskatchewan and 
the rest of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my closing comments, Saskatchewan continues 
to be the best place in the world to live. We are in the best 
country and Saskatchewan is the best province to live in, and 
this is largely due to volunteers such as those that we 
recognized today. But it’s also a sense of pride and commitment 
and enthusiasm, the ability to face challenges and take on new 
challenges, and I fully agree that Saskatchewan is the best place 
in the world to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — And, Mr. Speaker, part of our budget 
package clearly points out — again if the member from 
Cannington could especially note this —the Saskatchewan 
people pay the lowest overall taxes and household charges of 
anywhere in Canada. And we are very proud of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — So, Mr. Speaker, again I would thank you 
for the opportunity to comment on this very good news budget, 
and we look forward to continued debate. And I will certainly 
be supporting the budget at the time of the vote. And thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It surely is of 
great pleasure to be able today to speak in response to our 
government’s 1998-99 budget, our fifth consecutive balanced 
budget presented by our government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, we are continuing . . . 
continuing our strategy of investing in people, creating more 
growth, more jobs; providing greater benefits to the people of 
Saskatchewan in recognition of the sacrifices that they have 
made to balance our budgets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a moment also to talk to my 
constituents from Weyburn-Big Muddy. This is a constituency 
that I’m very, very proud to represent — a constituency 
consisting of the city of Weyburn; many, many towns and 
villages; many farms. It is a constituency in which of course 
farming is the backbone. And of course the city of Weyburn is 
the largest grain handling point in all of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — It’s a constituency that has oil and gas, 

which is extremely, extremely important part to that 
constituency and to our whole province. As a matter of fact this 
June we had the largest economic development energy 
announcement, in the CO2 project in the Weyburn-Estevan area, 
of anywhere in Saskatchewan — $1.2 billion project announced 
for our area. Good news for Weyburn and Big Muddy, good 
news for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But the other thing that’s very rich, that our constituency is rich 
in, is in the people. The people there, we have farmers, we have 
small-business people, we have people that believe in the 
voluntarism that we also saw today in the Assembly. They 
believe in entrepreneurship, but they also believe in 
cooperatives. They believe in a balance of public and private 
enterprise. 
 
I’m very proud to represent this constituency because the 
people there have met many, many challenges. And we’ve seen 
how they’ve met those challenges in the way of adding the 
Little Red Bus Line as a way to provide transportation to many 
of their communities. In order to change in some of the kinds of 
things that . . . (inaudible) . . . with some of the health centres, 
we’re now seeing a health centre that is providing many, many 
services in Bengough, Radville, and Pangman, and still have 
physician services in each of those areas, which I know the 
opposition thought would not happen. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they make the best pies down there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — And they bake the best pies and jams 
also. We have very good, very good business there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Prize winning Kentucky Fried Chicken. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, the prize winning Kentucky Fried 
Chicken, that’s right, also in Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
(1630) 
 
An Hon. Member: — All in Canada. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — That’s right. That’s right. 
 
In volunteerism, we have wonderful efforts in sports, in culture, 
in dinner theatres, in figure-skating; for youth groups, for 
special needs people, for seniors. Everybody is part of the 
community. The churches are very, very active and involved in 
our constituency. 
 
Today when we were valuing voluntarism, the idea of 
community and caring, it was very nice today to have two 
people here in the . . . witnessing that, from Weyburn. Judy 
Buzowetsky was one of the award recipients last year and she 
was here. And she exemplifies the type of people that come 
from my constituency and right across Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the most important things in representing my 
constituency — that I believe — is accountability. And I’ve 
always believed that, and when I first decided to run, that it’s 
very important for an elected person to be accountable and to 
believe in a two-way communication. 
 
And it’s one of the things I want to again congratulate my 



March 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

constituents on, is that I’ve had a very good working 
relationship with the local governments, with health boards, 
with education boards, and with the constituents right across 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. And I’ve really valued their input and 
their direction and the concerns that they may raise to me. 
 
I need to provide the information of what our government is 
doing to my constituency, and I need to listen to their concerns 
in order that our government can be directed in making the best 
policies and programs for our constituency, but also for our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — This fall I did a number of 
accountability meetings, and in the winter, before leading up to 
our budget. We also did a householder in which we asked 
people to respond on what they thought our government’s 
priorities should be and what we should be doing with any 
surplus funds. 
 
The results of those meetings and the results of the coupons that 
I received back said that the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
wanted a balanced approach. They wanted to see some debt 
reduction. They wanted to see tax cuts. And they also wanted to 
see service enhancements. 
 
And the percentages did almost work out to a third, a third, a 
third. They were very close. That’s balance. And that’s what 
our budget has delivered, is that balanced approach. 
 
When we asked them about taxes, what did they ask for? They 
said, well if it’s sustainable, we’d like to see reduction both in 
provincial sales tax or with income tax. And last year’s budget 
we were able to deliver a 2 per cent reduction in the sales tax. 
This year in our budget we’ve been able to reduce income tax 
by 2 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — The people of Weyburn-Big Muddy, 
when we ask what kind of services and what programs were 
important to them, health care certainly was a top priority, 
which has been a top priority of our budget and of our 
government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Most money ever. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — That’s right. The most money ever — 
$1.7 billion in health care. 
 
Education was another priority. Another, the second priority of 
our government, in which we again enhanced funding to both K 
to 12 and post-secondary. 
 
They saw education tied in with job training, and we’re very 
pleased to see that we got training strategies in order to meet the 
needs of the economic development and the growth that we’re 
seeing right across this province. 
 
Highways and roads, transportation issues, a top priority for our 
constituents. And then community safety, and other Social 
Services issues. And I was so pleased to see that the people of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy were wanting the same kinds of things in 
which our budget has been able to deliver upon. 
 
And so that’s why I’m so pleased today to be able to rise and 
speak in support of our budget this year. 
 
Now when we talk about the tax cuts, I’d already mentioned the 
two percentage on the provincial sales tax last year, the 2 per 
cent on personal income tax this year, but there were other tax 
incentives also, incentives to help with job growth, and those 
were important too. We saw incentives that will help in the 
mining industry, incentives to the gas and oil sector, incentives 
for the film and video industry — and that’s important because 
jobs and economic growth is very, very important for us to 
continue. 
 
We also saw grants in lieu being brought in which helped 
relieve some of the taxation levels for our urban governments 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
Every tax cut that we do has to be sustainable. It’s a dividend 
that’s payable on the hard work and the sacrifice by the people 
of Saskatchewan, and our tax cuts are here to stay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — And as I was saying, investing in people, 
that means jobs and economic development. We’ve doubled our 
investment to our regional economic development authorities, 
and I certainly heard that was good news in Weyburn. 
 
We’ve increased our support to locally based cooperatives, 
another good news story. We’re supporting neighbourhood 
development organizations to help revitalize inner cities. And 
we’re investing $5 million to the northern development fund to 
help the ongoing diversification of the North. 
 
As my colleague, the minister from Indian Head-Milestone has 
said, we’re also doing good news things in this budget for the 
environment, and for our communities, in being able to expand 
the spruce budworming spraying an additional million dollars to 
safeguard our forests, which is certainly part of a job strategy. 
 
Another good strategy that helps is recycling, which I know 
Weyburn is very, very proactive on, and the number of other 
communities in Weyburn-Big Muddy. I’m very, very pleased 
the students were to see that there was increased funding for 
SARCAN recycling and that we’d expanded our recycling 
program to include juice boxes and other cardboard containers 
— extremely positive move. 
 
All of these things help to build jobs, economic growth, within 
Saskatchewan. There was $14 million added to encourage 
agriculture research into a new animal vaccine, ag-biotech, 
modern dry-land farming methods — definitely initiatives that 
we need for growth of agriculture industry in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And more new jobs too. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — More new jobs, exactly. And the other 
really big piece, I thought, that was very good news for the 
agriculture community, is that we lowered the annual deductible 
on building materials for horticultural and livestock facilities, 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1998 

which we introduced last year, but we’ve now reduced it from 
$500 to $100. So this again will help Saskatchewan farmers 
grow and develop in those areas. 
 
More jobs. We’re doing very well on jobs. And as I said earlier, 
we provided tax incentives for the expansion of the mining 
industry, for the oil and gas industry, for the film industry. 
These are all good news for economic growth, for building jobs 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
In order though to have good jobs we also have to make sure we 
invest very wisely in our education, and we’ve done that by this 
budget. We’ve increased spending to both the K to 12 budget 
and the post-secondary budget. In K to 12 we’ve increased 
foundation operating grants and we’ve also increased the capital 
fund so that buildings can be either renovated or new buildings 
are needed . . . 
 
In post-secondary we added $9 million to operating grants for 
universities and federated colleges for a total of $181 million. 
And we will invest $23 million — a 66 per cent increase — in 
capital funding for post-secondary institutions to begin the 
process of upgrading their buildings and their facilities. 
 
But one of the most important initiatives that we introduced in 
our budget is that we will increase student aid by raising 
assistance limits to account for increased educational costs. But 
we will also join the federal government in providing tax relief 
on student loan interest, benefiting 29,000 students and 
supporting their investment in their own future. But in addition 
we will refocus the debt relief program to provide upfront 
bursaries for qualified students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, we 
will be doing this now, not in the new millennium. We are 
focused now for the future of our students in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, this budget will invest 
$136 million in job skills and training. That’s supporting 7,100 
people in adult basic education; training 2,800 apprenticeships; 
and bring 4,600 people into JobStart, Future Skills, quick skills, 
and other training programs. 
 
We will continue to work with our partners in business, in 
labour, in education, to make sure that we have the skilled 
workers for the high-tech, the high-paying jobs in our growing 
global economy. 
 
Quality public education is certainly something dear to my 
heart. As a teacher, as a parent, I know it’s absolutely vital. And 
today, it was interesting, I had the opportunity to be in a school 
in Regina — Judge Bryant — today. My daughter is actually 
interning there and she was teaching the students on 
government. And it was so very interesting for the students to 
talk about what governments do. 
 
And one of the things one student said was, we don’t really like 
paying taxes; we hear our parents don’t like paying taxes. And 
so we thought about that for awhile. We said, well if we didn’t 

pay taxes maybe you’d have to pay tuition to go to 
kindergarten. Seems like one province had that idea in our fine 
country. That was one of those . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, I think it was our neighbour in Alberta. 
 
And so the kids started discussing this and they said . . . I said, 
well maybe there’d be a tuition and you know maybe it’d be 
$2,000, maybe it’d be $5,000, to go to school. And they said no, 
no that’s not what we want; that wouldn’t be fair because those 
people that don’t have enough money wouldn’t be able to have 
education. And you know, they very quickly even said, you 
know that’s why health care in this province is so good, because 
again, no matter if you’re rich or poor, those services are 
available. 
 
And so the grade 7 students in that school today understood 
what good government is about. About balance, that you need 
some taxation in order to provide good services. And you need 
to pay down the debt. We even talked about debt. They 
understood it very, very well, of what the important tool 
government is in providing a better life for their community and 
for the people in this province. 
 
Now the thing that I’m getting to now is another key area for 
our budget, is investing in children, in families, in our 
communities. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I am 
very most proud of with our budget is the series of 
announcements that we’ve been able to make on the initiative 
called “building independence: investing in our families.” I was 
so proud of our Premier and our Minister of Social Services as 
they announced this program. As the Minister of Social 
Services has said, it’s turning welfare on its head. 
 
These measures represent a huge step towards ensuring that 
every Saskatchewan child can build a productive life on the 
solid foundations of a secure childhood. These measures 
represent a helping hand to Saskatchewan parents who are 
working to give their children the very best start in life that is 
possible for them to give. And these initiatives stem from our 
basic Saskatchewan values of caring, of community, and 
cooperation; and from a desire of Saskatchewan people to give 
the best possible choices to their children, for every child in this 
great province. 
 
“Building independence: investing in families”, it has six 
components all aimed at helping Saskatchewan children and 
families. The Saskatchewan employment supplement will be 
available to provide assistance to 19,000 families, to help low 
income working people stay in the workforce. This supplement 
will ensure that their children are better off when their parents 
are working rather than on welfare. 
 
Second, the Saskatchewan Child Benefit is part of the first new 
national social program in 30 years — initiated from 
Saskatchewan. It will provide help to 80,000 children in 40,000 
families. This child benefit will help parents provide their 
children with a decent shelter, good food, and a foundation for 
future success. For each of these 80,000 children, the child 
benefit will help fill their childhood with good memories; 
opportunities to grow to their potential. 
 
Third part of this program — we’re extending additional health 
benefits to another 23,000 families. So that’s 46,000 children. 



March 30, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

Right now the sad reality is that if parents leave welfare even to 
enter the workplace, their children lose health benefits, and 
that’s no longer now in Saskatchewan. That’s no more. Parents 
will not be forced to stay on welfare in order to ensure that their 
children can receive dental care or eye glasses. 
 
An Hon. Member: — July. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Right, July of this year. Again we’re not 
going to wait for the new millennium to put our programs into 
place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — These three new initiatives build on the 
good work already begun with three other initiatives — the 
provincial training allowance, the Youth Futures pilot project, 
and strengthened program accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am so proud of our government introducing 
these changes because truly building independence is the 
Saskatchewan way. Investing in families is the Saskatchewan 
way, and it’s about helping tens of thousands of children in our 
great province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve touched on now, 
economic development, on training and education, on social 
programs, but another great part still of our budget is in health 
care. It’s one of the issues again that comes up at many and 
many of my meetings and people do sometimes raise concerns. 
I work closely with the health district in my area and I know 
there’s a lot of good programing going on. And they were so 
pleased that this budget stabilized funding, and that they can 
continue to develop strong home care services, strong 
community services, good long-term care facilities, and to work 
on acute care and emergency service in our area. It is the things 
that matter. 
 
(1645) 
 
One point seven billion dollars in health care, the biggest 
increase to our health care budget this . . . was in our budget 
was to health care, $88 million. We did listen to people. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I believe what’s going to happen in Regina with 
the new General Hospital and its expansion and the Pasqua 
Hospital, we will have the best acute care service that this 
province can offer to all of southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, there’s other things in our 
budget that help keep our communities safe: the 911, an 
important announcement in our budget; added funding for 
police services to our local governments right across this 
province. That’s right, we’ve got increased funding to my home 
town, but I know to Radville and other communities also that’s 
been the case. And actually when I say Radville, I would like to 
actually just give a warm welcome to Radville because this is 
the first time . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Hon. members will be aware that 

electronic devices are not permitted in the Assembly when the 
House is entertaining business, and I will ask the hon. member, 
whoever’s cellular phone is ringing, to remove it from the 
House immediately. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was just 
saying, the town of Radville, I was . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How about cellular phones as a topic? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Actually that’s a good point too. A lot of 
things to talk about here today. But in the town of Radville I 
was very, very pleased that they have been also now connected 
to our Legislative Assembly. So I welcome the constituents that 
are able to watch the proceedings in Radville, Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Actually when we hear this 
comment about cellular service, that’s always an issue still in 
my riding. And we have got a lot of good cellular service across 
our constituency, and we’re actually adding another cell tower 
at Pangman to expand the service in my constituency. 
 
I know that’s still a concern for some other communities, but as 
we can afford to do these things, we’re able to expand cellular 
service right across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, there’s another major issue 
that people have had concerns about in our budget and that 
certainly is highways and transportation. As the minister 
responsible for that, I want to take some time to talk about those 
issues. 
 
I believe what we have done with highways and transportation 
is address the issue by putting a long-term strategy in place. We 
have committed over 10 years, starting last year, with a 
transportation strategy paper. But we’ve also committed to $2.5 
billion in added funding to Highways and Transportation. 
 
And we’re dedicated to build roads and transportation 
infrastructure for today and for tomorrow. We know that 
farmers, manufacturers, processors, miners, loggers must rely 
on our transportation system to get our resources and their 
products to market. 
 
We know that our roads and our highways are our lifeline 
between our communities, our farms, our schools, our health 
centres, and our businesses. 
 
We know that our roads and our highways bring jobs and 
opportunities for our students, our youth, our business people 
through tourism and other economic activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last spring we introduced a transportation strategy, 
Investing in Transportation, and we are well into implementing 
that strategy. One of the keys to our strategy is the commitment 
to shared decision making. We have implemented that 
commitment by fostering the development of a concept we call 
area transportation planning. We readily acknowledge that local 
people are more familiar with local needs and are therefore in a 
better position to determine priorities based on those needs. 
 
Part of my challenge is to heighten that knowledge and 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 1998 

understanding at the local level, of the many changes that are 
taking place in transportation. That heightened awareness will 
enable everyone to better participate in informed decision 
making. Mr. Speaker, area transportation planning is proving to 
be a very effective mechanism to involve local people in the 
transportation system planning and the decision-making 
process. 
 
We now have five area transportation planning committees up 
and running in virtually all areas of the province, and two more 
committees are in their formative stages. And I’m excited by 
the enthusiasm, the interest being shown by the people. There’s 
volunteers from all walks of life working together to form and 
operate these committees. And as it turns out, area 
transportation committees are a catalyst for community action 
and for community change. 
 
An example of this was the action taken recently by hundreds of 
grain producers in west-central Saskatchewan. CN’s (Canadian 
National) desire to abandon two rail lines there, in the area 
known as block 19, motivated more than 500 producers to 
organize and load producer cars — more than 80 cars in one 
day early last December — to demonstrate their commitment to 
keeping grain on their local branch lines. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was there and I met with those producers, 
as was the minister from Intergovernmental Affairs, was also in 
that area that day. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I bet Ken Krawetz was there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — No, I didn’t see any other members of 
the opposition there. The action is a major statement of the 
concern that producers have to the federal government about 
changes that they made in the Canadian transportation Act in 
1996. These changes are not producer friendly and do not 
ensure the best returns for the producers. 
 
As a result of the action of those producers that day, I spoke 
directly with Mr. Paul Tellier, the CEO of the Canadian 
National Railways, to express our government’s concern with 
their abandonment process. Abandoning track in the year of a 
major grain transportation review is shameless. It’s not 
conscionable and should not be happening. 
 
I met with CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) officials. I’ve 
written to the federal Minister of Transport about these same 
concerns. I’ve discussed the issue with the grain companies. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve raised it in a meeting with Mr. Justice 
Willard Estey as he began his work on the grain review. 
 
The topic of immediate concern to grain producers is the future 
of our grain transportation and handling system. And as you 
know, the whole issue of grain transportation right now is in a 
turmoil primarily as a result of the actions by the federal 
government. 
 
First, those federal Liberal government eliminated the Crow 
benefit costing Saskatchewan farmers annually in this province 
$400 million — $400 million in lost returns. This means the 
loss of the Crow benefit is costing each of our producers — if 
we average it out — about $8,000 a year, $8,000 in less money 
to every producer in this province. 

But then on top of it all, they not only take the Crow benefit 
out, they did changes to the Canadian transportation Act. 
Changes to regulations governing railways have led directly to 
the acceleration of branch line abandonment and grain elevator 
consolidation. As a matter of fact, the 1996 changes to the 
Canadian transportation Act essentially gave the railways a 
blank cheque to do whatever they wanted. 
 
Now I’m told that the federal government felt it was the 
railway’s turn to get favourable treatment. And there’s no doubt 
that’s what’s happened. 
 
It’s painfully obvious that Ottawa made these changes with 
little, if any, thought of the consequences to Saskatchewan, to 
western Canada, and they have shown even less political will to 
deal with them now that they’ve caused a crisis in rural 
Saskatchewan — a crisis of ever-increasing costs for our 
producers; a crisis of ever-increasing damage to our roads and 
our highway system as a result of increased traffic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is unconscionable to pull out the Crow benefit, 
to deregulate, and not to know what the plan is in place. 
 
So I commend them — they finally do a review. But while 
they’re doing the review, the railways are going right ahead and 
abandoning track all across this province. 
 
And I call on our opposition members to have some conscience, 
to have some caring about rural Saskatchewan and join us in 
our pleas to the federal government to slow down the 
abandonment in rural Saskatchewan because they are not only 
abandoning branch lines, they’re abandoning communities and 
people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, I now move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................327 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................327 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................328 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................328 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................328 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................328 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................328 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................328 
  Stanger ...............................................................................................................................................................................328, 337 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................328 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................328 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Recycling Program 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................329 
 National Award to Member for Athabasca 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................329 
 Television Episode Filming in Lumsden 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................329 
 Proposed Use of Plains Health Centre 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................329 
 Gladmar Students Provincial Mixed Curling Champs 
  Bradley.......................................................................................................................................................................................330 
 Evesham Farmer Donates Use of Land to Canadian Food Grains Bank 
  Murrell.......................................................................................................................................................................................330 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry Into Channel Lake 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................330 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................330 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................331 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................331 
 Funding for Prince Albert Women’s Shelter 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................332 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................332 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................332 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................332 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................333 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................333 
 Review Rights for Parents of Special Needs Children 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................333 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................334 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Establishment of Serious Crime Task Force 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................335 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................335 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................335 
MOTIONS 
 Distinguished Volunteer Medal Recipients 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................336 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................336 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................336 
  Bradley.......................................................................................................................................................................................340 
VOLUNTEER MEDAL PRESENTATION..............................................................................................................Back of Hansard 
 


