





























































Hansard: March 25, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 261 
 March 25, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from the 
community of Englefeld. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. 
 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find out 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Melfort, 
Saskatoon, and Pathlow areas of the province. I so submit. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these come from the good people at Carlyle and Manor. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Milestone. 

Ms. Draude: — I also have a petition to present today: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From Arcola, Kipling, and Windthorst. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 
behalf of citizens of Melville and Kipling: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to demand that the chairperson 
of the Public Accounts Committee immediately call a 
meeting of the committee to inquire into the Channel Lake 
affair or else resign her position as chairperson. 
 

I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition signed by a 
number of residents of the city of Regina: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to demand that the chairperson 
of the Public Accounts Committee immediately call a 
meeting of the committee to inquire into the Channel Lake 
affair or else resign from her position as chairperson. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too bring 
forward petitions regarding this issue. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to demand that the chairperson 
of the Public Accounts Committee immediately call a 
meeting of the committee to inquire into the Channel Lake 
affair or else resign from her position as chairperson. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of concerned citizens of the province. And 
the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to demand that the chairperson 
of the Public Accounts Committee immediately call a 
meeting of the committee to inquire into the Channel Lake 
affair or else resign from her position as chairperson. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Chaplain and Moose Jaw. I so present. 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1998 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also will rise to 
present a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to demand that the chairperson 
of the Public Accounts Committee immediately call a 
meeting of the committee to inquire about the Channel 
Lake affair or else resign from the position of chairperson. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Hudson Bay. I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
today to present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to demand that the chairperson 
of the Public Accounts Committee immediately call a 
meeting of the committee to inquire into the Channel Lake 
affair or else resign from her position as chairperson. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good folks in 
Assiniboia and Rockglen. I so present. 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
happy today to present petitions on behalf of the Saskatchewan 
people on yet another important issue: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project with or without federal assistance. 

 
I’m happy to present these on behalf of the people, mainly from 
the community of Lancer, Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Clerk:  According to order a petition regarding the Plains 
Health Centre presented on March 24 has been reviewed. 
Pursuant to rule 12(7) it is found to be irregular and therefore 
cannot be read and received. According to order the following 
petitions have been reviewed, and are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly 
regarding the funding of the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; acting to save the Plains Health Centre; and 
cancelling of severance payments to Jack Messer and the 
calling of a public inquiry into Channel Lake. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 18 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: as the proposed dam on the 
South Saskatchewan River west of the town of Leader 
would greatly improve the irrigated crop diversification of 

Saskatchewan farmers in the area and provide 
much-needed water for expansion of industry as well as 
livestock operations, as well as to provide a crossing for 
the railroad and the highway traffic and a new source of 
cheap electricity, have you met with representatives of the 
Meridian Water Management Association or the Medicine 
Hat Chamber of Commerce to discuss this matter; what 
were the results of those meetings? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask all the 
members of the Assembly . . . seated behind the bar on the third 
party is a gentleman who served this province very diligently, 
very well for some 11 years, from 1956 until 1967, and he’s 
come here this afternoon to join and be with us, with his former 
colleagues and some of the newer members of this Assembly. 
And I would ask all of you to please welcome him back to this 
Assembly — Wilf Gardiner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
introduce a lady again in your gallery today that was here last 
week. Paulette Lochbaum has come back with some very happy 
results from our lobbying on her behalf, which we’ll talk about 
later in the House, and I would ask members here today to give 
her a nice warm welcome on our behalf. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce to the House today a 
group of 23 public servants who are on tour here at the 
Legislative Assembly. They are from the departments of 
Justice, Agriculture and Food, Education, Energy and Mines, 
and Highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know, we sit and debate government 
policy in this Chamber, but these are the people who implement 
and produce those policies for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And by welcoming this group here today I would like, 
through them, to indicate to them and to all their colleagues, 
how much we in this House support the work that they are 
doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please have all members join me in welcoming 
this group of public servants. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much. On behalf of the 
member from Elphinstone, I would like to welcome 18 students 
from Herchmer School in Regina, with their teacher, Mr. Aaron 
L. Anderson, Mr. Peters, and Mr. Nichol. 
 
And I’ll just say that it’s part of the parliamentary tradition that 
both sides of the House express their opinions strongly to each 
other. So I hope you will take our antics in that vein. Thanks for 
coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Imperial Oil Mixed Curling in Tisdale 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
past weekend I had the pleasure of attending the Imperial Oil 
Provincial Mixed Curling in Tisdale. It was a showcase of 
excitement filled with immense talent. 
 
These are some of the most rewarding opportunities for an 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), and Carole and I 
enjoyed the opportunity very much. Rural Saskatchewan 
remains dedicated to community involvement and this weekend 
was no exception. 
 
Congratulations to the home town team of Wes Cowlishaw, 
Jodi Bruce, Jason Hankins and Barb Marleau. They were 
successful in advancing to the finals in a four-way tie. 
 
Capturing the provincial title was the Greg Anholt rink of 
Saskatoon. The Anholt foursome will now advance to the 
national title bid in Victoria, B.C. (British Columbia), January 
9, 10 and 11, 1999. I would like to congratulate all the 
participants in this weekend’s event, Mr. Speaker. They deserve 
to be congratulated for a spectacular performance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agricultural Transportation System 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
pay tribute to the spirit of farmers and the people of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the last number of years the federal government has, first 
of all, pulled millions of dollars out of their economies by 
abandonment of the Crow benefit. They have given up all their 
duties in regulating the railroads and then . . . and putting a 
block in the way of wholesale abandonment. And to make 
matters worse, they refuse to invest in the infrastructure that’s 
important to get grain to market, therefore leaving the farmers 
and their governments — locally and provincially — 
responsible for this travesty. 
 
The people of the west-central area — through the West Central 
Road and Rail Committee — say that’s not good enough, and 
they’ve started to plan and fight back. I want to pay tribute to 
the thousand, roughly 1,000 farmers who came out to meetings 
in Beechy and Eatonia and Elrose over the last couple of days 
to say that they want their own hand in planning their future. 
And they stated it strongly to federal people, to the CNR 
(Canadian National Railway Company), and to all people 
involved in the business. 
 
I want to say that Saskatchewan has taken the lead in 
encouraging the western provinces to take a common approach 
to the Estey Commission in order to say that this system has to 
be designed in a way that supports farmers and their 
communities. And I want to say that the thousand people that 
came out support the view of Saskatchewan and all people in 
Saskatchewan, that the . . . that agriculture is central and their 
transportation system is essential for our province to prosper. 
 

I ask all parties in this House to join me in congratulating the 
farmers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Bone Scan Machine 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I 
introduced this House to Paulette Lochbaum, who joins us 
today in your gallery. Paulette approached the Liberal 
opposition after being told that you have to wait a month and a 
half to get a bone scan before she could even start receiving 
treatment for her cancer. 
 
Amazingly, one day after we raised this issue in the House there 
was a cancellation and Paulette had the bone scan done. 
Furthermore — that is good news, Mr. Speaker — furthermore, 
when she arrived at the Pasqua Hospital for treatment, the staff 
indicated that because we raised this issue they were authorized 
to purchase another bone scan machine here in Regina. This 
issue demonstrates how effective an opposition party can be 
when it listens to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
While Paulette was able to receive her treatment and we’re 
happy about that, I do feel for other cancer victims who are 
forced to endure your unacceptable waiting periods and the 
estimated 6,600 people who occupy waiting-lists with other 
various ailments. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nova Scotia Provincial Election 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday was 
quite an interesting day in Canadian politics and I am reminded, 
in Nova Scotia, that they at one point lent us here in 
Saskatchewan a very great gift, one person named Allan 
Blakeney. I am very pleased to tell you that today I am quite 
certain Allan Blakeney is smiling in Halifax, that the people of 
Nova Scotia are smiling, because they have a strong NDP (New 
Democratic Party) caucus there. 
 
The Liberals, as Liberals are known to do, often mislead and 
have a tendency to over-exaggerate. At one point they ran an ad 
saying: “Nova Scotia can’t afford the NDP”; talked about 
Ontario; talked about B.C. — guess who they forgot to talk 
about? They forgot to talk about Saskatchewan. Fortunately, 
our friends in the NDP there ran a full page ad saying: “Why 
won’t the Liberals tell the full story?” I mean we could ask that 
any time here. We often do. 
 
Here’s what the NDP have achieved for the ordinary people of 
Saskatchewan and it lists it off. It ends by saying: “This time, 
vote NDP.” Well, Mr. Speaker, they voted NDP this time; 
they’ll vote NDP next time; they will vote NDP the time after 
that. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Public Accounts Petition Drive 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, we have some serious issues to 
handle here in this legislature, and the Liberal opposition has 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1998 

launched a petition drive demanding that the chairperson of 
Public Accounts Committee call a meeting of the committee or 
resign from the position. Our petition reads, and I quote from a 
public document, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The chairperson of the committee, Saskatchewan Party 
MLA June Draude, is refusing to call a meeting of the 
committee and has been concealing important information 
about this matter. 

 
On February 16, a Tory member from Melfort-Tisdale told the 
Public Accounts Committee, and I quote: 
 

The issues raised by Mr. Hillson are valid, a very good 
example of why the committee has to function in a timely 
manner. 

 
In agreement with her colleague, the Tory Chairman went on to 
say: 
 

This committee has a mandate that’s very strong, and we 
have an obligation to the people that elected us to make 
sure that we’re doing our job correctly. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if the Tory Chairman believes that these issues 
should be dealt with in Public Accounts, why is she refusing to 
call a meeting of the committee. If the Tory chairperson 
believes that the committee has a strong mandate and that 
members have an obligation to the people of Saskatchewan, 
why is she stonewalling efforts to get to the bottom of Channel 
Lake? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Tories blocked our efforts to get to the bottom 
of this issue in Public Accounts on nine separate occasions, and 
once again they are standing in the way of clearing up this 
mess. It is important that we dive into the Channel Lake issue 
next Tuesday as planned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Renal Dialysis Services Expand 
 

Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a very . . . I 
am very pleased to inform this Assembly of an announcement 
made yesterday by the Hon. Minister of Health. Renal dialysis 
has been expanded to the East Central Health District to 
improve access for residents of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The East Central and Regina Health Districts will jointly 
develop a Yorkton satellite. Out-patients will be able to access 
the services at the Yorkton Regional Health Centre while being 
supervised by specialists in Regina. 
 
Renal dialysis services will also be available at Tisdale 
Hospital, Mr. Speaker, in my home town in the very near future. 
The development of that service in the north-east will be a 
collaborative effort between Pasquia Health District, North 
Central Health District, North-East Health District, and the 
existing in-centre dialysis service in the Saskatoon district. 
Prince Albert and Lloydminster also have renal dialysis 
satellites. 
 
Last week’s good news, the budget contained an additional 

$370,000 to establish the two new sites as part of the 
government’s total new investment in health of $88 million. 
This illustrates that our government is both committed to the 
highest quality of health care possible and that we are 
responsible to the needs of all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, days 
will soon turn to weeks that this House has been unable to get to 
its work, thanks to the actions of the Tories. Those responsible 
are the worst kind of Tories too, because they are too ashamed 
to call themselves Tories. While the legislature has been held up 
before on matters of principle involving public safety or the sale 
of hundreds of millions worth of public assets, that’s not the 
issue here. The real issue here is the Tory Party’s lack of 
sincerity. 
 
A few weeks ago Channel Lake wasn’t even important enough 
to rush to the top of the Public Accounts Committee’s agenda. 
The Tories even voted nine times against moving it to the top of 
the agenda. Now they figure they can score points and they 
want an expensive public inquiry. There’s no sincerity in those 
actions, Mr. Speaker. They just want to try and score points and 
waste our tax dollars doing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the exception of renewed blessings from 
Grant Devine and Grant Schmidt, nothing’s changed since the 
’80s for this group. To help them remember that Saskatchewan 
will not tolerate Tory waste, I prepared a few invoices and I’ll 
send them to the Tory members. In the envelope they’ll find 
they’ve won the Oscar yet again for wasting taxpayers’ dollars, 
but instead of a statue it’s a $28,000 bill for each day they’ve 
wasted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe they can dip into that secret Tory trust fund 
to pay us back. No matter how much of our money they waste, 
the Tories are clearly never "tory" for anything they do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Doctor Member of Goodwill Mission 
to South Asian Countries 

 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, this week the Governor General 
of Canada is on a goodwill mission to south Asian countries. 
And on this goodwill mission Team Canada will consist of 
prominent Canadians of East Indian ancestry or Pakistani 
ancestry. Among them, Dr. Ali Rajput of Saskatoon, who is 
professor and head of neurology at Royal University Hospital, 
who was selected because of his worldwide reputation in 
fighting Parkinson’s disease. 
 
Among his accomplishments, Dr. Rajput has been awarded the 
Order of Canada, and last year additionally had the honour of 
being asked by the World Heath Organization in Geneva to 
serve as one of a select number of eminent medical consultants 
for their global health planning. 
 



March 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

Dr. Rajput and the rest of the Canadian team will meet with 
heads of state and prominent members of the business 
community to solidify relations and promote goodwill. And I 
know as he visits, Dr. Rajput will continue his life’s work of 
alleviating the sufferings of those who suffer from Parkinson’s 
disease. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower Gas Supply Contract 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). Mr. Minister, every 
day more facts come up about the dirty deal in Channel Lake in 
spite of your best efforts to cover them up. 
 
Now we learn that the deal wasn’t worth 15 or $20 million, it 
was, in fact, worth $300 million. DEML (Direct Energy 
Marketing Limited), the company that ripped you off for $5 
million, got a secret, untendered deal worth $300 million. 
Unbelievable! — 300 million untendered, Mr. Minister. 
 
I have a simple question. Why? Why did you give this DEML 
company this sweetheart deal? Why weren’t other companies 
given a chance to bid? Why would you award a $300 million, 
10-year contract without calling for tenders, Mr. Minister? 
Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in the document that 
we tabled over two weeks ago, this issue is spelled out as one of 
the arrangements that the Deloitte Touche report dealt with in 
some detail. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is, where 
have these members been for two weeks — for two weeks — 
on this issue. 
 
Today they stand in the House because the Leader-Post, the 
Leader-Post, in its wisdom — and with respect to the 
Leader-Post — chose to do a story about the report, in the 
Deloitte Touche report about the deal, the 10-year contract with 
DEML. And today the Conservatives decide they have found a 
secret out of the report — two and a half weeks later. Two and a 
half weeks later, after the members of the Liberal Party, the 
public, have been talking about this issue for two weeks. 
 
Sir, if you were in the House instead of out campaigning, you 
would know about this issue, that it had been dealt with in the 
Assembly many days. Come to order. Come here and work. Get 
off this idea of being on strike. Tell your desk mate to call 
Public Accounts and this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
lost $5 million out of a $20 million deal with DEML. How 
much of a bath are you taking or are we taking on the $300 
million deal? Did anyone over there bother to read the contract 
before you signed it? 
 

Mr. Minister, why didn’t you give other companies a chance to 
bid? Why wasn’t SaskEnergy given a chance to bid? Poor old 
Ron Clark’s office is just down the street from Jack Messer and 
no one even phoned him. Why? 
 
You were handing out a $300 million contract. You had an 
obligation to make sure that the best possible deal was resulted 
in, and the only way to do that is to call for tenders. Mr. 
Minister, you are responsible. Answer the question: why did 
you give a $300 million contract without calling for tenders? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this is one of the 
issues that when we looked at Channel Lake, we wanted the 
answers to. We commissioned Deloitte Touche. The report has 
been in the House for two and a half weeks, my friend. It’s been 
here for two and a half weeks. 
 
We have said and agreed with other people who say we want an 
inquiry into how this all happened. We’ve challenged your desk 
mate to call the committee, the inquiry, so we can find the 
answers. We want to call Mr. Portigal before the committee and 
ask him these very questions. 
 
The nonsense of your question. If you would have been here the 
last few days you would know we’ve been calling for you to 
call the committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The minister will 
know very well that it is improper in the course of debate in this 
House to draw attention as a part of that debate to a member’s 
presence or absence in the House, and I’ll ask him to avoid that 
reference and to wrap up his response very quickly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the 
members opposite, this: there is a responsibility of elected 
members to do the work on behalf of the people they’re elected 
to do. One thing your caucus has responsibility for is Public 
Accounts. You have failed to call that committee to do its work, 
and I say to you you’ve failed miserably in your job as an 
MLA. How can you stand here and say you want to lead the 
official opposition in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s obvious that 
the minister won’t answer so I’ll have to do it for him. You 
gave out a $300 million, untendered contract to keep your 
political deadline. You had to ram through this deal by March 
31 to try to cover up the $8 million trading losses that were 
going on. It was a secret, untendered, fix-up job to cover up all 
the illegal trading activity SaskPower was doing in Channel 
Lake. 
 
You know it; and what’s worse, all the ministers who were 
there knew it. So talk about living up to your responsibility. It 
says so right in the CIC report that the ministers knew what was 
going on. Jack Messer said the minister knew what was going 
on. 
 
Mr. Minister, live up to your responsibility and fire these 
clowns. 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite, who pretends to be overly excited about an issue that 
we reported to the House two and a half weeks ago, that we’ve 
been debating in the House for two and a half weeks, wanting to 
set up an inquiry chaired by members of your committee, which 
you have refused to do. 
 
So in light of the fact that you’ve refused to do the work of 
Public Accounts, we have now established that the proper 
process — as we said in the report — the other option is to go 
to Crown Corporations Committee. And on March 31 we intend 
to start work of the inquiry here in the Assembly, and I hope 
that all members — all members — will come and do their 
work at that committee, having refused to do it here, refused to 
do it in Public Accounts — come to Crown Corporations 
Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
everyone in Saskatchewan except you NDP and your patronage 
people and your wholly owned subsidiary Liberal hacks know 
that the only way to get to the bottom of this is an independent 
public inquiry. Everyone knows that. It’s time that you came 
clean on these issues instead of with the cover-up. DEML had 
you over the barrel. You had no way out except awarding them 
this great, sweetheart contract. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know that it was a sweetheart contract. Are 
you prepared to release the 10-year supply contract, in its 
entirety, to this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to the 
members opposite. Other members of the Assembly, 
government members, Liberal members, independent members, 
have known about this issue because it’s in the report that I 
released two and a half weeks ago. We’ve been debating it. 
How can you stand here and be all excited as if you found 
something new, when we’ve been debating it for two and a half 
weeks and calling for the committee to come and work on it? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now I’ll ask for 
the cooperation of the hon. members of the official opposition. 
Order. Order, on both sides. Now I was quite capable of being 
able to hear the question being put. The courtesy extended by 
the House was most acceptable and I’ll ask for the House’s 
cooperation in extending the same courtesy to the minister in 
providing a response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the members 
opposite that one of the duties of MLAs is working here in the 
Assembly, but also when you’re elected, and there can be no 
proud or more honourable profession than putting your name on 
a ballot, to be chosen by your friends and neighbours to come 
here. To do what? To pass laws that your community will live 
by. That’s an important duty. 
 
The other responsibility is, is carrying on the work of the 
Assembly and the work of committees. And you say that a 
judge — with all of respect to the judge — has a better 
understanding of the needs of the public than you do. I do not 
believe that to be true. 
 

The role of MLAs is an honourable profession and one that is 
fundamental to democracy. By calling a committee of the 
legislature a kangaroo court, you have done a great disservice to 
the democratic process. And I say that is truly unfortunate, truly 
unfortunate, to say nothing about a judicial inquiry. 
 
To say that Public Accounts is a kangaroo court is an . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Teacher Contract Bargaining 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Education. Madam Minister, school trustees and the 
provincial government began bi-level bargaining in 1972. In the 
26 years since then the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association has refused to sign three teachers’ contracts, 
including the last two contracts negotiated under your 
leadership. 
 
Madam Minister, the bilateral bargaining arrangement was 
based on a trust relationship, a partnership between trustees and 
government. But under your stewardship a wedge has been 
driven between your government and school trustees. The trust 
relationship has been broken. 
 
Madam Minister, what are you doing to begin to repair the 
broken trust between your NDP government and school boards? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
welcome the fact that we’re now getting down to the business 
of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the members will know, we successfully 
concluded a collective agreement with Saskatchewan’s 12,000 
teachers this past week, and we signed the collective agreement 
for the next couple of years on Tuesday. That collective 
agreement was signed by the Government of Saskatchewan and 
the teachers. 
 
Now as we will all know, the government decided in December 
of 1997 to conclude our arrangements with the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association after nine meetings where we tried 
to come to some sort of consensus over a mandate. 
 
Unfortunately after nine meetings and having spent a great deal 
of time discussing our differences, we just couldn’t come to a 
consensus and the government chose to conclude our 
arrangement with the school trustees in order to get on with the 
business of concluding a collective agreement with 
Saskatchewan’s 12,000 teachers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural School Closures 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, your government’s lack of 
leadership and vision is forcing rural school boards to make 
difficult decisions. Yesterday, your lack of vision forced the 



March 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

Yorkdale School Division to make two extremely tough 
decisions. The board decided to close MacNutt School and 
eliminate grades 10 through 12 at Theodore. 
 
Now what is the plan for students who attended those schools? 
Most will be bussed into Yorkton; many having to travel over 
60 kilometres or more one way. Is that the NDP vision for 
education in rural Saskatchewan — bus students for one and a 
half to two hours one way to school every day? What is the next 
step, Madam Minister? Are you going to close down all the 
schools in Moose Jaw and bus them 60 kilometres to Regina? 
 
Madam Minister, when is the NDP going to stop its policy of 
simply shutting down rural schools? When will you start to look 
to innovative solutions like distance education through 
SaskTel? Madam Minister, what is your plan for rural 
Saskatchewan? When will you begin to show some leadership 
and innovation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question. As the member will know, as the 
former chairperson of a school division in this province and as 
the former Chair of the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association whom I understand did close schools in rural 
Saskatchewan, I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that the number 
of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair is having 
difficulty being able to hear the answer being provided because 
of interruptions on both sides of the House, and I’ll ask the 
House to extend the courtesy to the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I would say to the member is that since 1970 to present, 
there have 356 school closures in this province. Schools were 
closed in the ‘80s when we were increasing educational 
funding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would say to the member that I’ve concluded, after looking at 
this issue very carefully, that one of the reasons why schools are 
closing in some parts of Saskatchewan is because of enrolment 
decline, Mr. Speaker. I would say it’s a demographic shift, and I 
would say to the member that I suspect that he closed his school 
because of enrolment decline. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Board Deficits 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today is 
for the minister of sickness and health. Yesterday the Liberal 
opposition revealed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now when all hon. 
members will recognize — and I know the Leader of the Third 
Party will — that when addressing questions in question period, 
they’re addressed to members of the Executive Council in the 
context of their responsibilities and should be addressed that 
way in putting the question. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. My question today is 
for the Minister of Health. Yesterday the Liberal opposition 
revealed that the Regina District Health Board faces a $5 

million funding shortfall. 
 
We have also told this House that Saskatoon faces a $5 million 
deficit in the coming year and as much as $13 million the 
following year. 
 
The East Central District is about $2.4 million into the red — a 
situation board members have described as a crisis. 
 
And the sky is falling in on the Living Sky District, which is 
battling a $1.5 million shortfall in money. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you doing to help these and other 
cash-starved districts which have already been cut to the 
financial bone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to advise the member opposite that as of this morning — 
and I know he raised with me yesterday — as of this morning I 
had the opportunity to speak with the members from the Regina 
Health District. And we explored what sorts of avenues what 
might be available to them into the future in order that they 
might be able to sustain and maintain the level of services that 
they have today. 
 
And in conjunction with the district health board and the 
Department of Health, will ensure that they’ll continue to 
provide services to the people of Regina and to the district in a 
way in which we’ve been accustomed to receiving those 
services. 
 
The member opposite also talks about the importance of adding 
additional funding to the health system. I want to say to the 
member opposite that today we’ve spent $1.72 billion in health 
care in this province. It’s a larger expenditure that we provide 
into the health system ever in the history of our province. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we have not 
received one penny, one penny from the federal government in 
assisting us to deliver health care services in this province — of 
which the member opposite is a cousin of, and does nothing to 
support us in getting additional federal funding to help with the 
development of health care services in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is finger 
pointing at somebody else that’s responsible for the problems 
that our health districts are facing, continues. There is no hope 
for these people with answers such as the minister has just 
given us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister promised there will be no further bed 
closures and that no more front-line care-givers will be 
eliminated. In fact he indicated yesterday in this House that any 
further bed closures would be inappropriate. In spite of the 
promise, the Living Sky district faces one of two options to cut 
costs — the elimination of 39 hospital and long-term care beds 
in Watrous and Lanigan, or the elimination of 41 hospital and 
long-term care beds in Watrous, Lanigan and Wynyard. Mr. 
Minister, you promised no more bed closures yet this is exactly 
what faces the people in the Living Sky district. What are you 
going to do to live up to the promises that you made? Health 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1998 

care in our cities in already in a state of a crisis and are you 
going to continue cutting health care in our smaller 
communities as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to take 
the member to a piece of work that has just been completed in 
the province by HSURC (Health Services Utilization and 
Research Commission). And they released their report this 
morning or yesterday during the SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) of which I had an 
opportunity to address this morning. 
 
And what HSURC said after considerable research, and they 
did some research involving 780 Saskatchewan patients, and 
this is what they said. They said that they found over 
one-quarter of the hospital beds used to provide non-acute care 
could be . . . could have been delivered in a much less costly 
fashion. They went on to say that the study results that were 
released at the annual conference say that by continuing to use 
hospitals as the site of choice for convalescents, we’re not 
allowing home care to do its intended work. And went on to say 
that our finding suggests that we’re using hospitals as a costly 
substitute to home care. 
 
So when you ask me the question, Mr. Speaker, as to — or the 
member opposite — as it relates to whether or not we have 
other options to provide services in the provinces today, outside 
of hospitals, the answer is that we do. The answer is that it is 
home care. And we are putting a hundred and sixteen per cent 
more dollars today in home care than we did in 1991-92 and 
that’s our option. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Next question. 
 

Northern Ambulance Service 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On December 19, 
1997 at approximately 8:30 in the morning, Harold Aubichon 
and Tony Stewart were involved in a two-vehicle accident on 
the Canoe Lake Road in northern Saskatchewan. This is not the 
first time that this road has claimed lives and was the scene of 
serious accidents. 
 
Both of the accident victims had undetermined injuries and at 
least for four hours stayed in their vehicles and were finally 
freed from these vehicles. And after the serious accident, Mr. 
Aubichon was finally transported to Ile-a-la-Crosse hospital, 
not by road ambulance, not by rescue vehicle, nor by air 
ambulance, but by taxi-cab. 
 
My question to the Minister of Health: is a taxi-cab the 
appropriate emergency care transportation method that should 
be used to transport critically injured or critically ill patients? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, across the province in the 
past three years we have added significant funding to road 
ambulance services, and as well we’ve added the new aircraft to 
assist us with air ambulance travel across the province. We’ve 
been able to do that. 
 
Now if the member opposite is suggesting for a minute that 

there are parts of the province that aren’t adequately covered 
and that we should be involved in enhancing services in those 
areas, I want to say to the member opposite that those 
discussions are currently under way. 
 
We’ve just completed a signing agreement with the two 
northern municipal . . . with the two northern health districts, 
who today are working closely with the Department of Health 
to work at enriching the level of services that we want to 
provide to people who live in the northern part of the province. 
 
If the question is are we doing a full, adequate job today and 
ensuring that people of northern Saskatchewan get the types of 
services that we think they need, the answer is that we’ve not 
achieved that. Are we working towards achieving that in 
partnership with the health district? The answer is that we are, 
and we’ll continue to work with the two districts, and we’ll 
continue to enhance services to northern communities, as we 
have in the southern part of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Needless to say, 
Mr. Aubichon has survived the accident and recovery is a long 
journey that he’ll have to make. The sad note of this story is 
that Mr. Stewart died in the air ambulance on the way to a 
Saskatoon hospital. 
 
There is no doubt that air ambulance service is crucial to the 
quick transportation of critically ill or injured patients from the 
North to Saskatoon’s hospitals. But this injury and death should 
not be in vain and response to emergencies of this nature could 
be vastly improved if a road ambulance service was made 
available to compliment the current air ambulance service. 
 
And I ask the Minister of Health, will he stand up today in the 
Assembly and make a provincial commitment for the people of 
the North, to finally and quickly provide them with a qualified 
and proper road ambulance service? Will the minister do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to ensure 
the member opposite that the working relationship and the 
development of health services in northern Saskatchewan we’re 
working on collectively with the two district health boards that 
are there and the Department of Health. And as we improve on 
our services in northern Saskatchewan we will see enrichments. 
We will see enrichments in the ambulatory services to northern 
people. 
 
But I think the member needs to stand up and/or put his pen to 
paper and write a letter to his friends in Ottawa. And to his 
friends in Ottawa he needs to say, how is it that in 
Saskatchewan we’ve seen a reduction of health care funding 
from the agreement around the medicare . . . around the 
medicare plan for funding we’ve lost to the province, that has 
gone from 50 per cent, which was cost-shared with the federal 
government, to today to 13 per cent on the dollar, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think the member needs to put his pen to paper and ask 
how that has happened, because today in this province we cover 
uninsured services 100 per cent — which are ambulatory 
services, home care services. And the member from 



March 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

Cumberland needs to stand up and make that statement and put 
his pen to paper and assist us in getting some additional federal 
funding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The problem that 
we have, Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve had in the provincial scene 
for the last 20 years, we’ve had provincial Progressive 
Conservative governments in power, we’ve had a New 
Democratic government in power, but we have not had our 
federal cousins in power for the past 20 years. So the problem is 
we simply can’t slough it off and say, talk to your federal 
Liberal cousins. 
 
The fact of the matter, the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, this 
is a provincial responsibility, and we have not had ambulance 
services in northern Saskatchewan for the past 20-some years, 
and we’ve had a consecutive New Democratic government and 
still no action. 
 
When can the people of northern Saskatchewan expect a decent 
road ambulance to compliment the air ambulance service for the 
injured and critically ill people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the 
member opposite has identified an issue that is extremely 
important to us in the way in which we prepare our discussions 
and work with our federal partners, because today the federal 
government pays for a large portion of the air ambulance 
services that come out of the North. And we’ve said through 
our relationships with the two new districts, that we need to 
enhance those services and improve them and grow them. And 
that’s currently what we’re doing. 
 
Now at a recent conference, Mr. Speaker, the summer of ’97, 
the federal Minister of Health stood up at the Canadian Medical 
Association and he said the provinces have had to reduce their 
level of services because of federal cut-backs from Mr. Allan 
Rock. He makes the statements, Liberals make the statement. 
And the member opposite, who is a cousin to Mr. Rock, gets up 
in this House today and says that he in fact wants the provincial 
government to assume all of those responsibilities. 
 
When will it be that the member from Athabasca and his 
Liberal cousins will stand up and make a position for the 
province of Saskatchewan to assist us with getting additional 
funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 201 — The Crown Corporations Disclosure Act, 
1998 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the first 
reading of Bill No. 201, The Crown Corporations Disclosure 
Act, 1998 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 202 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 
1998 (Foreign Investment Prohibitions) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill 
No. 202, The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998 
(Foreign Investment Prohibitions) be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 203 — The Government Accountability Act 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move first reading 
of Bill No. 203, The Government Accountability Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 205 — The Crown Corporations Rate 
Review Act, 1998 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of Bill 205, The Crown Corporations Rate Review Act, 
1998 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 285 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Blaine Lake) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill 
No. 285, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of 
Blaine Lake) be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:22 p.m. until 2:32 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Krawetz D’Autremont Boyd 
Draude Gantefoer Heppner 
 

Nays — 26 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 
MacKinnon Shillington Atkinson 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Goulet Upshall Kowalsky 
Teichrob Koenker Trew 
Lorje Cline Hamilton 
Stanger Kasperski Ward 
Murray Jess Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 

Bill No. 286 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Borden) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill No. 286, The Channel Lake Indemnification 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1998 

Act (Village of Borden) be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:34 p.m. until 2:44 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz D’Autremont Boyd 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 24 
 
Flavel Wiens MacKinnon 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Goulet Upshall Kowalsky 
Teichrob Koenker Trew 
Renaud Lorje Cline 
Hamilton Sonntag Wall 
Kasperski Ward Jess 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 
 

Bill No. 287 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Bounty) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of Bill No. 287, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Bounty) be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:46 p.m. until 2:56 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 4 
 
D’Autremont Boyd Gantefoer 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 21 
 
Flavel Wiens MacKinnon 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Upshall Kowalsky Teichrob 
Koenker Renaud Lorje 
Cline Hamilton Sonntag 
Kasperski Murray Jess 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 
 

Bill No. 288 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Bracken) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of a Bill No. 288, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Village of Bracken) be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:58 p.m. until 3:08 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 4 
 
D’Autremont Boyd Gantefoer 
Heppner   
 

Nays — 17 
 
Flavel Wiens MacKinnon 
Lingenfelter Tchorzewski Johnson 
Whitmore Goulet Kowalsky 
Teichrob Hamilton Sonntag 
Kasperski Jess Langford 
Murrell Belanger  
 

Bill No. 289 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Bradwell) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill 
No. 289, The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of 
Bradwell) be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:10 p.m. until 3:20 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Toth D’Autremont Boyd 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 19 
 
Flavel Wiens MacKinnon 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Kowalsky Teichrob Koenker 
Renaud Lorje Sonntag 
Wall Kasperski Jess 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
Belanger   
 

Bill No. 290 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Bredenbury) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of a Bill No. 290, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Town of Bredenbury) be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:22 p.m. until 3:32 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Toth D’Autremont Boyd 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays —21 
 
Flavel Wiens MacKinnon 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Goulet Upshall Kowalsky 
Teichrob Koenker Renaud 



March 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

Lorje Hamilton Sonntag 
Wall Kasperski Jess 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 

Bill No. 291 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Briercrest) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of Bill No. 291, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Village of Briercrest) be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:34 p.m. until 3:44 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Toth D’Autremont Boyd 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 20 
 
Wiens MacKinnon Tchorzewski 
Johnson Goulet Upshall 
Kowalsky Teichrob Trew 
Renaud Lorje Hamilton 
Sonntag Wall Kasperski 
Ward Jess Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 

Bill No. 292 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Town of Broadview) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of the Bill No. 292, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Town of Broadview) be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:46 p.m. until 3:56 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Toth D’Autremont Boyd 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 22 
 
Wiens MacKinnon Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Upshall Kowalsky Teichrob 
Koenker Trew Renaud 
Lorje Hamilton Stanger 
Sonntag Wall Kasperski 
Ward Langford Murrell 
Thomson   
 
 

Bill No. 293 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Brock) 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of Bill No. 293, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Village of Brock) be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:58 p.m. until 4:08 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Toth D’Autremont Boyd 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 21 
 
Wiens MacKinnon Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Upshall Kowalsky Teichrob 
Koenker Trew Renaud 
Lorje Stanger Wall 
Kasperski Ward Jess 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 
 

Bill No. 294 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Broderick) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of Bill No. 294, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Village of Broderick) be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:10 p.m. until 4:20 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 3 
 
Toth D’Autremont Gantefoer 
 

Nays — 18 
 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Upshall Kowalsky Teichrob 
Koenker Trew Renaud 
Lorje Hamilton Stanger 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 
 

Bill No. 424 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Clavet) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
first reading of a Bill No. 424, The Channel Lake 
Indemnification Act (Village of Clavet) be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:24 p.m. until 4:34 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1998 

Yeas — 5 
 
Toth D’Autremont Boyd 
Gantefoer Heppner  

 
Nays — 18 

 
Wiens Johnson Whitmore 
Goulet Upshall Kowalsky 
Koenker Trew Lorje 
Hamilton Stanger Wall 
Kasperski Ward Jess 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
 

Bill No. 425 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Village of Climax) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill, No. 425, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Village of Climax) be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:36 p.m. until 4:46 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Toth D’Autremont Boyd 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 16 
 
Wiens Johnson Goulet 
Upshall Kowalsky Koenker 
Trew Renaud Lorje 
Hamilton Stanger Wall 
Kasperski Jess Langford 
Thomson   
 

Bill No. 426 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act 
(Resort Village of Cochin) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill No. 426, The Channel Lake Indemnification 
Act (Resort Village of Cochin) be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:48 p.m. until 4:58. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Toth D’Autremont Boyd 
Gantefoer Heppner  
 

Nays — 16 
 
Flavel Wiens Johnson 
Goulet Upshall Kowalsky 

Koenker Trew Renaud 
Hamilton Stanger Wall 
Kasperski Jess Langford 
Thomson   
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m.



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................261 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................262 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................262 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................262 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................262 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................262 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................262 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................262 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................262 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................262 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Imperial Oil Mixed Curling in Tisdale 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................263 
 Agricultural Transportation System 
  Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................263 
 New Bone Scan Machine 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................263 
 Nova Scotia Provincial Election 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................263 
 Public Accounts Petition Drive 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................263 
 Renal Dialysis Services Expand 
  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................264 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................264 
 Saskatoon Doctor Member of Goodwill Mission to South Asian Countries 
  Koenker .....................................................................................................................................................................................264 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskPower Gas Supply Contract 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................265 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................265 
 Teacher Contract Bargaining 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................266 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................266 
 Rural School Closures 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................266 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................267 
 Health Board Deficits 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................267 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................267 
 Northern Ambulance Service 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................268 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................268 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 201 — The Crown Corporations Disclosure Act, 1998 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................269 
 Bill No. 202 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1998 (Foreign Investment Prohibitions) 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................269 
 Bill No. 203 — The Government Accountability Act 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................269 



 

 Bill No. 205 — The Crown Corporations Rate Review Act, 1998 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................269 
 Bill No. 285 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Blaine Lake) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................269 
 Bill No. 286 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Borden) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................269 
 Bill No. 287 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Bounty) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................270 
 Bill No. 288 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Bracken) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................270 
 Bill No. 289 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Bradwell) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................270 
 Bill No. 290 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Bredenbury) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................270 
 Bill No. 291 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Briercrest) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................271 
 Bill No. 292 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Town of Broadview) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................271 
 Bill No. 293 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Brock) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................271 
 Bill No. 294 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Broderick) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................271 
 Bill No. 424 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Clavet) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................271 
 Bill No. 425 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Climax) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................272 
 Bill No. 426 — The Channel Lake Indemnification Act (Village of Cochin) 
  Gantefoer (Recorded division).................................................................................................................................................272 
 
 


