





























































Hansard: May 19, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1199 
 May 19, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the 
communities of Steelman and Lampman. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Oxbow, Carnduff, and Glen 
Ewen areas of the south-east, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To present petitions as 
well and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitions are signed by individuals from the 
communities of Oxbow and Alameda. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Lampman and 

Torquay. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition. These are signed by people from numerous 
communities across Saskatchewan and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
impending closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Oxbow, Frobisher, and Alameda. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review of the health crisis we are currently 
experiencing. 
 

People who have signed this petition are from Regina, Oxbow, 
and Esterhazy. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon to present 
petitions on the issue of high power costs in the North: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to address the issue of reducing 
the high costs of power rates in the North. 
 

Your petitioners this afternoon all come from the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, including one Beckie Belanger. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to stand 
and present a petition in reference to the high cost of power 
rates in northern Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to address the issue of reducing 
the high cost of power rates in the North. 
 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse, and we even have our mayor 
and our administrator signed the form. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members will be aware of course, and I 
now recognize it’s happened twice in succession, that in 
introducing petitions it’s not proper to identify the petitioners. 
But the rules do provide for identifying the locations of the 
petitioners. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Kincaid, Mankota, Frontier, and Gravelbourg. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in bringing forward petitions in the people’s 
efforts to prevent and stop the closure of the Plains hospital. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition here today 
are all from the community of Aneroid. I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again on behalf of citizens seeking justice for men and women 
who have lost their spouses in work-related accidents. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows, widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 

And the petitioners who have signed this for today, Mr. 
Speaker, come from Pilot Butte and the Regina area of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the long 
weekend I’ve received more petitions from the south-west, and 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the communities, Mr. Speaker, of Fox Valley, Golden 
Prairie, and I do believe Maple Creek as well. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order a petition regarding the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre presented on May 15 has been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) is found to be irregular and 
therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed, 
and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning on the following 
matters: to put a halt to all plans of closure of the Plains 
Health Centre; to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; to act to save the Plains Health Centre; to call an 
independent public inquiry surrounding Channel Lake; and 
to put a moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege at 
this time to present the sixth report of the Sanding Committee 
on Crown Corporations which is as follows: 
 
Your committee, in examining the matters of the acquisition, 
management, and sale of Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd. by 
SaskPower, and the payments to Mr. John R. Messer when he 
ceased to serve as president of SaskPower, has concluded that 
expert assistance is required in order for this committee to fully 
carry out its terms of reference. 
 
Your committee recommends therefore, that the Assembly do 
authorize the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations to 
enter into a contract with an oil and gas industry expert who 
shall be directed to do the following: 
 
(1) Provide an opinion on whether the 15 per cent discount rate 
used by SaskPower to determine the value of Channel Lake 
Petroleum was appropriate, given the market-place at the time 
of the sale of the company; and, 
 
(2) If the 15 per cent discount rate was not appropriate, provide 
an opinion as to what discount rate should have been used, 
given the market-place for gas properties at the time of the sale 
of the Channel Lake Petroleum. 
 
I do now present my report and I move, seconded by the 
member for Regina Coronation Park: 
 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature, His 
Excellency Dr. Seyed Adeli, who is the Ambassador of Iran. 
I’ve just finished hosting a luncheon with Dr. Seyed Adeli and 
he is very interested in Saskatchewan. It’s his first trip here. 
 
He’ll be meeting with the Deputy Premier, officials from STEP 
(Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc.), the Sask 
Wheat Pool, University of Regina. He’s going up to Saskatoon 
to meet with people there and students at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Tomorrow the Minister of Agriculture will be hosting a 
luncheon with him here, I think, at the legislature. We’re 
basically very pleased to have such good weather and we’ve 
enjoyed a very good visit so far and we hope that he will come 
back to Saskatchewan again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s also my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, 18 students from Marion McVeety School in Regina 
Lakeview. They’re all in grade 4, and they’re accompanied by 
their teacher, Mrs. King, as well as with our caucus researcher, 
Donna Shire, who has a son in that class. Welcome to the 
legislature and I look forward to meeting with you after the 
question period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure and 
privilege today to introduce to you and to members of the 
Assembly, an individual seated in your gallery, one of North 
America’s most celebrated musicians. Calvin Vollrath holds the 
title of Grand North American Fiddle Champion. And I want 
Calvin to stand up and be recognized. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Calvin has 21 
internationally distributed albums to his credit and his touring 
schedule includes over 250 engagements to date, worldwide. 
His name appears among the player credits on CDs (compact 
disc) of many of North America’s finest recording artists. 
 
I say as well that Calvin is also the dean of the Emma Lake 
music camp sponsored each year by the Saskatchewan Cultural 
Exchange Society, and I know he will be attending this year’s 
function, which runs from June 15 to July 9. 
 
I want to say, Calvin, congratulations on your record in the 
music industry and thank you for your work on behalf of 
Canada at an international level. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Lost Boy Found with Help from Police and Volunteers 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
take a minute to reflect on the story of two-year-old Tyren 
Bennett, who was lost on Sunday night for 10 hours before he 
was returned to his grateful parents. Thankfully we only saw 
this event through the eyes of the media, because one can only 
imagine the fear and desperation experienced by this young 
child and his parents, Rhonda and Terry. I can’t image the fear 
that your baby was all alone and possibly in great danger. 
 
It is clear that Terry and Rhonda are very courageous people, 
but they weren’t alone, Mr. Speaker. This is not only a story of 
great courage, but unbelievable community spirit. Not long 
after Tyren went missing, a force of 600 policemen and 
volunteers gathered and searched throughout the night, never 
resting until the young child was found. At 4:30 a.m., the police 
and volunteers found the cold and frightened toddler walking 
out of a gravel pit 2 miles from where he had started. 
 
Every time disaster occurs, we hear of communities coming 
together when their neighbours are in need. This pitch in and 
roll up your sleeve mentality is what makes Saskatchewan such 
an incredible place to live, and it is a big reason why young 
Tyren Bennett was returned safely to his mom and dad. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure Rhonda and Terry are thanking their 
lucky stars today that they live in such a great province with 
such great neighbours. On their behalf, I would like to officially 
thank all who sacrificed the eve of Victoria Day to save this 
young boy’s life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Aboriginal Awareness Week 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, this week is Aboriginal 
Awareness Week from of course the 19th today to the 22nd. 
The theme this year is, emerging economic power of aboriginal 
peoples. 
 
As we look into northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have 
about $150 million worth of contracts and wages mainly by 
Metis and Indian entrepreneurs. As we look in the mining sector 
alone, Chief Harry Cook and the Kitsaki Development 
Corporation — $33 million worth of contracts in mining and 
also winning a national award. 
 
In regards to the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, we’ve seen the 
work in regards to the forestry industry — over 700 jobs 
created, about 2,000 into the future. We’re looking at 
development, Mr. Speaker, not only with the forestry sector in 
the west side, but also in the central side with Montreal Lake 
Band, Peter Ballantyne, as well as La Ronge, working in 
partnership with Weyerhaueser on a new, high-tech saw mill. 
 
Metis entrepreneurs in the area of mining development. We’re 
also seeing the development and evolution of the Clarence 
Campeau fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think as we approach the 21st century, we’re 



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

looking for a bright future as Metis and Indian entrepreneurs 
fight in regards to their spot and partnership with others in the 
economic field. I think the next century holds good for first 
nations and Metis people. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today on 
behalf of the Liberal caucus to also acknowledge Aboriginal 
Awareness Week and to say that it’s indeed a long time coming 
in which we sit back and we watch the accomplishments and 
the successes of the aboriginal people of Saskatchewan, be it in 
the East, West, South, or the North as well. 
 
I think that we have a long ways to go to appreciate the 
incredible amount of work being done by the aboriginal people, 
the renaissance of the aboriginal people, so to speak. And 
there’s a lot further steps to be taken. There are many aboriginal 
communities in north, east, west, and southern Saskatchewan 
that have incredible housing problems, incredible highways 
problems, and health care problems, employment problems, and 
we do have a long ways to go. 
 
So certainly standing up here today acknowledging Aboriginal 
Awareness Week, I tell the Assembly clearly today that we 
have a lot of work to do. And I’m very proud to say that as a 
Liberal caucus, we recognize and appreciate and most certainly 
respect this week, and doing our best to work towards a 
common solution when dealing with the aboriginal people. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Acknowledging Achievements of Young Athletes 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know the positive 
influence team sports can have on young people — learning to 
work as part of a team, developing coordination, making 
friends, and getting exercise can all be part of the experience of 
playing a team sport. 
 
I want to acknowledge the effort and achievements of two 
groups of young athletes from my constituency. The first is a 
group of female hockey standouts. The Swift Current trio of 
Nicole Schultz, Chelsey Funk, and Ricki Lee recently 
completed a successful hockey season with the Eston midget 
girls team which competed in the Northern Saskatchewan 
Female League. The girls were part of a team that won the 
provincial midget B championship, the league title, and the ice 
tournament in Calgary. 
 
The second team I would like to congratulate on their success is 
the SouthWest Vipers volleyball team. These young men 
captured a silver medal at the 1998 midget boys volleyball 
championship final. The win allows the team to advance to the 
midget Western Canadian Open National Championships in 
Calgary, which were held from May 16 to 18. The members of 
the team are: Shan Poff, Eric Anderson, Cole Armstrong, Ryan 
Carleton, Scott Hunter, Gerod Wiens, Jeremy Reimer, Lee 
Wolfater, and Russ Neudorf. I would like to offer 

congratulations to all these young athletes and good luck in 
their future endeavours. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tribute to Leader, Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
happy today to rise in my place to pay tribute to Leader, 
Saskatchewan — a town in my constituency that has shown 
leadership for all of our province in terms of self-sustaining, job 
creation roles and the things that make a community grow. 
 
In Leader, Saskatchewan, the people found that they didn’t have 
a secondary industry that was going to back up the agricultural 
community around them, and so they decided to do things for 
themselves. They started off by building an inland terminal, 
which is well under way, Mr. Speaker, and they’re doing quite 
well with it. The local people got together with the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and they’re putting that up. 
 
They thought that they needed something that would generate 
more income, and so they went for a hog industry approach and 
they’ve sold out all of their shares in a new hog enterprise. And 
they’re about ready to get that off the ground. 
 
Micada industries of course, has been there for quite awhile, 
building hopper bottoms and bins, and they of course are 
expanding all the time and are doing well. 
 
The community thought, Mr. Speaker, that tourism would be a 
good thing to add to a rounded community, and so they started 
off a new golf course which will attract people. That, along with 
the Smith barn and the local attractions that they’ve had before, 
are of course, are going to bring in a lot of people. 
 
And they boast to have the biggest mule deer and the nicest 
meadowlark in all of south-west Saskatchewan and in all of the 
world. They of course are monuments at each of the town, that 
welcome people. 
 
With all of this and a new water line that the town has built in 
order to bring water from the South Saskatchewan River, the 
community will flourish as an oasis in what otherwise might 
have been a desert. And they have boasted 30 new jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spiritwood Students Win Youth Business Awards 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two Spiritwood 
High School students recently won awards at the youth business 
excellence awards in North Battleford. 
 
Miranda Hyndman placed first in the individual business 
category, while Christine Voss placed second for her efforts. 
Miranda won $400 while Christine won $200. The students 
originally came up with business plans for school assignments. 
The students’ teacher, Todd Berg, accompanied the students to 
North Battleford and accepted an award worth $200 on the 
school’s behalf. This is the second year that students from 
Spiritwood High School have received awards. 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

I want to congratulate Miranda and Christine for their work, and 
the teachers at the Spiritwood High School for finding creative 
ways for encouraging their students to learn. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cuban model of Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As reported a few 
days ago in the Toronto Star, communist Cuba is looking to red 
NDP (New Democratic Party)-run Saskatchewan for their 
model as they slowly move away from the communist form of 
government, where freedom of speech for citizens does not 
exist and private enterprise is outlawed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they look to Saskatchewan, where freedom of 
speech for government back-benchers also does not exist, and 
private enterprise is allowed, but most certainly not encouraged. 
I guess it’s only fair that the Cubans take some of 
Saskatchewan’s economic ideas, as the Premier has certainly 
taken some ideas from them, in terms of democracy right here 
in the legislature, by muzzling his own MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) from speaking their minds. 
 
The Cubans are also looking at Saskatchewan’s Crown 
corporations as a management style for their own state-run 
enterprises. Now that’s an interesting development, Mr. 
Speaker. Castro may have survived the Bay of Pigs, but when 
the Cuban people begin to see their tax dollars thrown away in 
Guyana and sink to the bottom of their version of Channel 
Lake, I think it could all be over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people will no longer stand for a leader who 
has been around since the 1960s, has survived several 
opponents trying to topple him from power, and who deals with 
dissent in his ranks with an iron fist. But enough about the 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to celebrate the birth of this new-found 
revolutionary arrangement between Cuba and Saskatchewan, 
I’m sending over a token to the Premier, the closest thing we 
could find to a Cuban cigar for under three bucks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Drag-line being Constructed 
 

Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Construction has 
started on a new drag-line for the Estevan Coal Corporation. 
The new drag-line is expected to be operational at the Shand 
mines by January 1, 2000. 
 
There could be as many as 40 jobs created during the 
construction phase of the drag-line. The process for hiring 
welders is now under way and parts for the drag-line have been 
arriving since March. 
 
The $65 million drag-line is the first of its kind in North 
America. However, the model has been successfully used in 
Australia. Plans for the drag-line have been in place since 1986, 
when Estevan Coal was first contracted to supply coal for 
SaskPower. 
 

At present, Estevan Coal operates two other drag-lines, one at 
Boundary dam and the other one at the Bienfait mine. The new 
drag-line will allow Estevan Coal to reduce the number of hours 
of the Boundary dam drag-line being used, and the drag-line at 
the Bienfait mine will be moved to other locations to uncover 
new coal reserves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mining industry is very important to my 
constituency. And these upgrades by the Estevan Coal company 
ensure that the coal industry will continue to contribute to the 
economic welfare of the Estevan area for years to come. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Additional Hiring of Nurses 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, the political 
pressure is on and a by-election is looming and the Minister of 
Health has cynically found another $9 million to hire nurses. 
 
Of course that’s less than one-tenth of the hundred million 
dollars SaskPower is planning to spend on computers. It’s just a 
tiny fraction of the hundreds of millions of dollars sitting in the 
Liquor and Gaming slush fund. But of course this is not a health 
decision. This is not a financial decision. It’s a political decision 
designed to buy a seat for Judy Junor and the NDP. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you only making this announcement 
now, on the eve of the Saskatoon by-election? Why wasn’t this 
announcement made months ago, before the health system 
reached the crisis situation it is in today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
guess that the people across the way can’t stand good news. 
They can’t stand good news. And I say to the member opposite, 
and said on many occasions, that over the last 10 months, I’ve 
been travelling the province extensively, have visited all of the 
health districts now, and have in this year’s budget, in our 
allocation, provided additional enrichments for staffing. 
 
In the $1.72 billion this year, we put additional funding in for 
home care nurses or staff, put additional money in for long-term 
care people. And a couple of weeks ago, or four weeks ago 
when I was at the convention of the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses, I said on that date that by the middle of May, by the 
middle of May we would be making an announcement on 
additional health care staff for the province. 
 
Now if the member opposite and his leader are feeling some of 
the political pressure and want to publicize this as a political 
debate, he should be standing up and saying this is a good thing 
for all Saskatchewan people, irrespective of whether or not his 
leader supports it or doesn’t support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, a 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

briefing note on today’s announcement suggests that this money 
is available partly because of the hepatitis C settlement. That 
appears to suggest that you aren’t spending as much on hepatitis 
C victims as you thought you might have to so you can afford a 
few more nurses. Isn’t that a nice choice? Hepatitis C victims or 
nurses? 
 
You have a $100 million for new computers at SaskPower. You 
have hundreds of millions of dollars stashed away in your 
Liquor and Gaming slush fund for next year’s election. But in 
health care you’re choosing between hepatitis C victims and 
nurses. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you defend this kind of cynical, 
politically motivated decision? Why are you choosing between 
hepatitis C victims and nurses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the 
member opposite needs to get a new researcher, because his 
researcher today, who’s running for this party in the Eastview 
by-election, if he’s providing this kind of information, it’s 
totally, totally inaccurate. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, in Canada today we’ve put 
$1.1 billion into a compensation package for hepatitis C 
victims. There has been no decision on whether or not that 
package would be accepted. It’s in front of the courts today. 
And Saskatchewan’s position is, is that we make that 
contribution. And you should understand that. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, we have in this province put $1.72 
billion into the health care system — 1.72. And today we put an 
additional $9 million in to support front-line workers, and what 
does the member do? He stands up and criticizes the future 
injection of additional staff of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
How do you want this, Mr. Member? Do you want us to support 
front-line workers in the province or do you want to politicize 
this in a different fashion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, today’s 
announcement reminds me of the unfair hepatitis C package in 
another way. Some people get help; others get left out in the 
cold. 
 
The NDP health crisis has spread like a cancer through every 
corner of this province. Yet about 20 health districts will get 
absolutely nothing out of this morning’s announcement. In 
many of these areas nurses are being told they cannot take 
vacation days this year. Is that your solution to overworked 
nursing staff in rural areas? 
 
Mr. Minister, you are picking winners and losers in the health 
system, just like you’ve picked winners and losers in the 
hepatitis C package. Of course it’s because the NDP is making 
a political decision to protect its urban base in Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you ignoring rural areas? Why are so 
many health districts being left out in the cold? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that in this year’s budget, if he were to pay 
attention to it, he would see that we’ve injected $30 million to 
all health districts across the province. And to the district of 
which you represent, there has been an additional increase to 
your district as well, Mr. Member. And in our budget this year 
we provided additional funding for your people in your district 
to provide additional staffing for home care and long-term care. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that you should pay attention 
to the fact that when we’re putting $9 million into the health 
care system today, it’s going to provide enrichments to those 
areas where we are providing specialized services, so that 
people from your constituency can get those specialized 
services closer to home; so that people in my district can get 
those services in the larger community centres like Saskatoon 
and Regina. 
 
If you’re against health care reform, if you’re against the system 
of growing more specialized . . . or for growing more front-line 
workers, you should stand up, have Mr. Melenchuk stand up, 
and say he does not support front-line workers in this province. 
I beg you to say that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Metis Hunting Rights 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs and Aboriginal 
Affairs. 
 
Mr. Minister, at the beginning of last week you signed an order 
in council giving Clem Chartier and the Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan $62,500 for research and policy planning. That 
represents the first instalment of $250,000 annual grant. 
 
By the end of the week, Clem Chartier was talking about 
shooting conservation officers. Even though he has now backed 
away from those statements, Mr. Chartier continues to 
encourage his members to ignore provincial hunting laws. 
 
Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan people are very concerned about 
this situation and they’re going to be doubly concerned to learn 
that you are giving the MNS (Metis Nation of Saskatchewan) a 
quarter of a million dollars — money that could be used to fight 
the province on this issue. Mr. Minister, what are you doing to 
resolve this situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I’ll take this question for the minister 
responsible. Members will know that the Metis Nation has been 
an organization representing the Metis people in this province 
for many, many years — probably for 30 or so years. And 
during most of that period, apart from a time when Jim Sinclair 
insulted Grant Devine on national television, they have enjoyed 
a measure of support from the Saskatchewan government. 
 
And we believe in that. We think that they are doing very 
valuable work with their communities, and therefore in our 
budgets are included funds for the support of the work of the 
Metis Nation. We’re proud to do that; we think it’s appropriate. 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

I think that Mr. Chartier explained his remarks that were 
reported in the paper. I think he made it clear that he was 
replying to sort of a side issue and certainly didn’t mean to say 
what the newspaper reports quoted him as saying. 
 
So I think that we’re quite pleased with the fact that we’re 
supporting the work of the Metis Nation in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — While the minister may be supporting 
those remarks, I’m not sure that the people of Saskatchewan do. 
The people of Saskatchewan want two assurances. 
 
We want to know if you intend to uphold the provincial hunting 
laws and take the necessary steps to protect conservation 
officers. We also want to know that the quarter million dollar 
grant is not going to be used to fight the province on the issue 
of Metis hunting rights. 
 
Mr. Minister, this grant is supposed to be used to enhance 
relations between the Metis Nation and the government. In the 
light of the recent comments by Mr. Chartier, are you now 
concerned about the state of those relationships? Should this 
funding be withdrawn until this issue is resolved and the Metis 
leadership agrees to follow provincial hunting laws? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the member 
was in the House last week when the minister responded to a 
very similar question. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I asked the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — In fact the member says he asked the 
question, so he knows the answer to it. He’s asking it again for 
some kind of effect. 
 
And the money that the Metis Nation gets is according to a 
budget. It’s a clear understanding between the government and 
the Metis organization as to how the money will be spent. 
 
And no part of that, no part of that, Mr. Speaker, was included 
to fight any kind of prosecutions. So I think there is no fear that 
the money will be misspent in the way that the member 
suggests. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister of SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Minister, this morning Mike Hurst of Milner Fenerty law 
firm of Calgary admitted he didn’t do his job in acting as legal 
counsel on the Channel Lake sale. He said, and I quote: 
 

. . . I am aware of the criticisms for my failure . . . (and I 
repeat) . . . my failure to directly forward to Mr. Kram, 
copies of all draft documents . . . I acknowledge those 
oversights. 
 

That’s, I repeat again, Mr. Minister: “I acknowledge those 

oversights.” 
 
He’s admitting he didn’t do his job. Yet SaskPower paid Mike 
Hurst and his law firm more than $42,000 for those services. 
Mr. Minister, Milner Fenerty was hired, in part, to send 
SaskPower copies of all the drafts of Channel Lake sale 
agreements, but the Milner Fenerty lawyer admits he didn’t do 
what he was hired to do. 
 
Mr. Minister, what specific action has SaskPower taken to 
recover all or part of the legal fees it paid to Milner Fenerty? 
And when are you going to start doing your job and try to 
recover some of the money you lost in this botched deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated over 
two months ago to the Assembly when we released the Deloitte 
Touche report, we said that the Channel Lake arrangement, 
obviously there were things done, if we had to do it over again, 
that should have been done differently. We said that very 
clearly over two months ago and referred it to the committee 
which is now dealing with this issue. 
 
But I want to say to members opposite, Mr. Speaker, though, 
and to all members of the committee, is to remind them of what 
Mr. Priel said again today about these kind of accusations and 
what you wouldn’t do with the various people who come as 
witnesses before the committee. And he said, and I paraphrase 
his comments to say: it doesn’t take much observation to 
recognize that members of the media take copious quantities of 
notes as these kinds of discussions are going on. 
 
He said as well: and we had a gentleman appearing before us 
this morning who was a well-respected member of the Alberta 
bar. He also said to you and through the members of the 
committee to you, he said you may decide when all the 
evidence is in that there is nothing to refer to anyone. And to 
have this kind of discussion and leaving it hang, is not really 
fair to the people you are calling before you. And I strongly 
urge you not to get into this kind of discussion until you have 
come to the conclusions that your process requires you to come 
to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Logging Development 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All . . . (inaudible) 
. . . Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan should be heard. 
That includes the treaty people, that includes the non-aboriginal 
people, and that certainly includes the Metis people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this question goes out to the Minister of Northern 
Affairs or the Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management). And I quote from an article that 
has a headline, “Northern town moves to block planned logging 
development.” 
 
Mr. Minister, I quote further from the article: 
 

The northern hamlet of Missinipe is fighting to stop the 
provincial government from selling timber rights to a large 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

section of the Churchill River basin. 
 

Another quote: 
 

. . . community members saying any future logging 
projects must be stopped and the fact that the community 
was not told was “unacceptable.” 
 

And another quote: 
 

Missinipe town officials are rallying the support of 
trappers, outfitters, cabin owners, recreational users, 
residents and land owners to make their voices heard and 
possibly stop any development of the land. 
 

Mr. Minister, will you listen to the people that are talking about 
these very important issues facing the hamlet of Missinipe and 
the forestry surrounding that particular community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, we are proceeding with a 
major development in northern Saskatchewan in different 
aspects, and before we do a development, we do a consultation. 
When we look at it, Mr. Speaker, we’re at the very first phase 
of the request for a proposal. A proposal has gone out; we get 
feedback from people. There’ll be people who will be for and 
against a particular issue. Right now, we will be going at the 
first phase. They’ll be a second and a third phase to that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From the letters 
that we’re getting, from the response we’re getting, people in 
that area feel that they are not consulted. And for the minister to 
stand up and say there is consultations happening, the question 
that I have is, what type of consultation is he referring to? 
 
And I refer to another statement in the article, Mr. Speaker. One 
of the persons involved with ecotourism, which also has some 
incredible benefit to Saskatchewan, and he quotes . . . and this 
is John Slobodzian, he owns Canadian Ways Canoeing, he says: 
 

“It will be called Canadian Waste if we let people log this 
area.” 
 
He said if loggers or developers move into the area and 
start clearing away the trees, the tranquil piece of “heaven” 
will be destroyed. 
 
Sure there are parts of our country that should be left 
sacred. I believe Churchill is one of them. 

 
Mr. Minister, the people are crying out very loud to make sure 
that you understand that their needs, their livelihood, and the 
forests around them need protection. Will you give us that 
commitment today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, of course in regards to the 
whole issue of consultation, we will be getting the feedback 

from the people. We are hearing from the member today and we 
will be getting the feedback from the people as time goes on. 
 
We are looking at a very interesting contradiction in this sense, 
Mr. Speaker, because as you look at Missinipe, right across 
from the village is also Grandmother’s Bay, you know, where 
we built the famous road to. And in there is owned . . . it’s part 
of Lac La Ronge Indian Band. Part of the interest in the forestry 
development will be Lac La Ronge Indian Band; and I’m pretty 
sure that a developer which includes . . . in partnership with La 
Ronge Indian Band, will make sure that it’s done in sustainable 
economic development fashion. So that is information for the 
member to know. 
 
But we’re only at the first phase in regards to the proposal 
having gone out, and this is the feedback we’ll be getting from 
people from the North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Additional Hiring of Nurses 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, at today’s press conference 
announcing the hiring of extra nurses, the media asked officials 
from different health care organizations what part they played 
in the decision to hire 200 additional nurses. Well contrary to 
what government members opposite say about prior 
consultations, Brian Rourke from SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) indicated that his 
organization wasn’t consulted about today’s announcement. 
Rosalee Longmore, the president of the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses, says her organization wasn’t consulted. I made calls to 
health board officials in some rural districts who indicated they 
weren’t consulted. 
 
Mr. Minister, just who was consulted? And how did you arrive 
at the figure of 200? Did you just pull it out of thin air? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier in 
response to the members opposite from the Saskatchewan Party, 
and I say the same thing to you, that over the last 10 months 
I’ve had the opportunity to visit all of the health districts in the 
province now, or nearly all of the health districts in the 
province. And in my travels and discussions with each of those 
health districts, I have also had the opportunity to meet with the 
unions and the organizations who are responsible for managing 
their own staff. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that on all of those occasions 
that I met with them, they said to me that they’re experiencing 
the same pressures that we tried to . . . and identified today, and 
that is that the level of acuity at the floor level is extensive and 
they want to see more people working in the field. That’s the 
information that’s been provided to me consistently across the 
last 10 months. 
 
At the SAHO . . . At the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
convention not more than four weeks ago, the nurses there 
stood up and said, we want to have new employees on the floor 
today. Today is what they said. So for you to say that there has 
not been a discussion or a consultation is simply inaccurate. 
And I say to the member opposite that that process has been 
going on over the last 10 months and will continue. 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP, facing tremendous 
public pressure, has taken a step in the right direction on the 
issue of beefing up front-line care. But what about the other 
side of the equation? This government has yet to acknowledge 
the bed crisis that continues to plague the city of Regina and 
other areas. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve slashed almost a thousand acute care beds 
since coming to power. Isn’t it time you step in, acknowledge 
that you also made a mistake by slashing too many beds, and 
correct this mistake as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to take the 
answer on behalf of the government because this question 
dramatically highlights and illustrates the difference between 
the Liberals in Saskatchewan and in Ottawa — in Ottawa they 
slashed $7 billion in health care — and our position on health 
care renewal. 
 
That’s exactly what the difference in the issue here is all about. 
And this issue is this, Mr. Speaker, what Dr. Melenchuk and the 
Liberals want is to spend the money on bricks and mortar. And 
what we’ve been told by the people of Saskatchewan, by 
listening to them is, spend the money on improving the quality 
of care and service to the people by making sure you have 
front-line people available to provide that service. 
 
That’s exactly what we’ve done. We’ve listened and we’ve 
acted and you should be applauding us and supporting us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition has 
revealed in this House that the Regina Health District faces a $5 
million funding shortfall and anticipates a $1.9 million 
operating deficit this year. In Saskatoon the situation is even 
worse — a $5 million deficit and as much as 13 million in the 
red next year. 
 
Mr. Minister, what measures are you taking to ensure that the 
funding to provide additional nursing staff in these two cities 
actually goes to provide additional front-line staff, and is not 
simply put towards addressing huge deficits facing both of these 
districts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health 
has answered this question already to the members of the Tory 
Saskatchewan Party. Those positions will be allocated to 
front-line nurses giving front-line care, compassion, all their 
professional support, to people who are ill and in need. That is 
the commitment of the Department of Health. And that’s 
exactly what’s going to happen with respect to this money. But 
I want to say again this questioning by the Liberal Party 
highlights very decidedly what the problem is between the 
Liberals in Saskatchewan and in Ottawa; $7 billion you took 
away from the health care system in Canada — $7 billion. 
 
And your leader said on November 25, 1996 to the CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), talking about 

inefficiencies where he could find $1.3 billion, and when asked 
well where? He said, well health care. And when Mr. Maragos 
said tell us where, he said, I don’t know because I don’t have 
the numbers. And when Mr. Maragos said, well if you don’t 
know that how can you say that it finds inefficiencies in health 
care? He said, he doesn’t know that either. And then he said, 
because I know where the inefficiencies in the system are, 
because he’s a doctor. 
 
And you tell us, as I take my place, where are you going to find 
the money to keep the $120 million at the Plains open, more 
money for the nurses, find the inefficiencies totalling $1.3 
billion? If you can square that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Next question. Next 
question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Prostitution 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice and I would hope that the 
Minister of Justice is the person that replies. 
 
On May 7, Mr. Minister, we all know that 13 Saskatchewan 
men pleaded guilty to communicating for the purpose of 
prostitution in Saskatoon Provincial Court. These men were 
charged after a city police undercover sweep last month. Crown 
prosecutor, Leslie Sullivan, stated that and I quote, “The Crown 
feels strongly that if these men were not there then perhaps 
these young women would be off the streets.” 
 
Each john, Mr. Minister, received a fine of $500 and a stern 
reprimand from the judge. No one, Mr. Minister, no one 
believes that a $500 fine and a verbal slap on the wrist is an 
adequate deterrent to johns. Mr. Minister, will you acknowledge 
that current penalties for johns are totally inadequate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Exploitation of children by adults is 
clearly something that we all hold reprehensible . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. minister will recognize rule 
28 requires that questions be asked and answers be provided 
through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The end of that sentence was going to 
include Mr. Speaker. It’s that dramatic word construction which 
I think that the Speaker knows all about. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
very clear that children and young adults who are exploited by 
men are something that we do not tolerate in our community. 
And we are involved with a very comprehensive program in 
this government that’s dealing with many different aspects. 
 
The specific question asked today relates to the Criminal Code, 
and practically we are one of 12 voices, together with the 
federal government, when it talks about dealing with some of 
the things around the Criminal Code. And we have continued to 
work with the federal Minister of Justice around some of these 
issues. But it’s very clear that all of us across the country need 
to use all of the skills that we have to get rid of this terrible 
problem. 
 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Foster Parent Recruitment 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
about a week ago the Minister of Municipal Government took 
notice on my behalf of a question from the Leader of the 
Opposition. I’d like to respond today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that question, as you’ll recall, concerned an ad 
that appeared in the Regina Leader-Post for foster parent 
recruitment, and the Leader of the Opposition asked if this is a 
new procedure and does it indicate that we are experiencing 
shortages of foster homes. 
 
I want to report to the House, Mr. Speaker, that this is not in 
any way a new procedure. We regularly use the classified 
section to recruit foster parents, along with other brochure 
mailings, along with notices. Probably our most effective 
recruitment tool will be referrals from other foster families. We 
do advertise. We advertise generically and we advertise 
specifically for foster parents in the classifieds and I have 
examples if the member is interested. 
 
I do want to conclude by saying though, Mr. Speaker, that we 
are always, always interested in securing healthy, happy 
families who will open their doors and their homes and their 
love for children with special needs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 57  The Education Amendment Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 modifiant la loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 57, The Education Amendment Act, 1998 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 5 — National Highways Program 
 

Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Moved by myself, the 
MLA for Redberry Lake: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government to assume 
its federal responsibility by initiating and contributing in a 
real way to a national highways program, thus removing 
from Canada the stigma of being the only industrialized 
country in the western world not to have such a program. 

 
And that’s seconded by the hon. member . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Okay, that will be moved at the end of my 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to have everyone in this Assembly 

support this motion, as it is just basic logic — logic that was 
well understood by the fathers of Confederation over 130 years 
ago. In fact while the highway of that day was a dream of a 
ribbon of steel from coast to coast, it was still a national 
highway system. 
 
Why the Liberal politicians in Ottawa are now so far behind, so 
reactionary in their thinking that they are over a hundred years 
behind, no one really knows. The transportation of goods and 
services across our nation, especially here in land-locked 
Saskatchewan, is our very lifeline. 
 
The total trade per capita is higher in Saskatchewan than in any 
other jurisdiction in the entire world. And that trade relies on 
transportation — trade that can be ground to a halt by the lack 
of support by Ottawa’s Liberal government. 
 
The lack of a national transportation policy, combined with a 
lack of commitment for health care from Ottawa, is far more 
serious than just the movement of goods and services. It is 
literally in danger of splitting up this great nation. A national 
government without a national commitment is the beginning of 
the end. 
 
Last year we completed approximately 95 kilometres of 
Yellowhead Highway in my constituency — and it is a 
beautiful road — of which the cost was shared with the federal 
government. But now the federal government in its wisdom cut 
all the funding to the Yellowhead and the Trans-Canada 
Highway. Any and all construction will be at the provincial 
expense in 1998. Just think about that. Not to mention the main 
area of my interest, being from the North-west, the completion 
of the Yellowhead from the Battlefords to Marshall is of top 
priority and it will be completed by the provincial government 
as soon as possible. However if Ottawa paid its share, it would 
be done in half the time. 
 
This is also true of the Trans-Canada Highway. Just imagine, a 
Trans-Canada Highway. Just the name implies that it’s a link 
across our nation. Strange as it may seem, we in Saskatchewan 
think that that should mean that the Liberals in Ottawa should 
help fund this project. But no, not only lack of support for 
highways, but also a complete failure of support for 
Saskatchewan people by allowing the railways to redraw the 
map of Saskatchewan. 
 
For years some of us fought a losing battle to retain the Crow's 
Nest Pass freight rate agreement, a system that assured us as 
farmers, a reasonable charge for moving grain and a network 
that covered the entire province. That is the best system to 
move grain — roll it out on the steel. But not any more. 
Ottawa, or rather the Liberal government in Ottawa, killed the 
Crow and killed hundreds of rural communities with those 
changes, also badly injuring many Saskatchewan roads. 
 
This is a direct transfer of costs to municipalities and to the 
province. With the Crow gone, not only have the roads suffered 
but so did the farmers. Our cost for freight and handling takes 
close to, if not more than, one-third of the value of the grain 
shipped. This is a major concern for all Saskatchewan people, 
as we not only have less farm income, but also certainly net 
less disposable income to spend in local businesses, and also 
less taxable income, as Ottawa has seen fit to throw 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

Saskatchewan producers to the railway wolves. 
 
I had the opportunity to attend the Northwest Corridor 
Development Corporation inaugural conference last week, for 
the Minister of Highways and Transportation. And I am pleased 
to say that by working together, some progress can be made. 
Opportunities to increase the usage of the port of Prince Rupert 
to ensure its long-term viability, and impediments to achieving 
this goal, were addressed at the conference. Speakers stressed 
the need for industry, governments, and other stakeholders to 
develop cooperative strategies to expand exports of grain, coal, 
lumber, and other products to Prince Rupert. 
 
Other economic development opportunities related to tourism, 
passenger rail and cruise service, value added activities, and 
service industries were also addressed. Canadian National and 
B.C. (British Columbia) Rail announced at the conference that 
they had signed an interchange agreement to facilitate the 
movement of grain from the Peace River region of B.C. to 
Prince Rupert. 
 
Approximately 100,000 tonnes of grain originated in the Peace 
River country can potentially be interchanged between the two 
railways at Dawson Creek, B.C. under this agreement. Just 
imagine expansion of that into this area where we supply 55 per 
cent of the grain that is shipped through Rupert. This will 
increase the catchment area for Prince Rupert by eliminating the 
freight rate differential between Prince Rupert and Vancouver 
for these volumes. 
 
Now I would like to quote from the speech given on March 24 
at the western Canadian roadbuilders and heavy construction 
association convention by our Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. And I quote: 
 
(1430) 
 

When I think about our highways and where we are today, 
I can’t help but think of the federal government and the 
role it has to play. And when I start to project what the 
future may look like, the role of the federal government 
again looms large on the horizon. 
 
Because of our large geographic area, relatively small 
population, and diverse economy, over the past 40 years 
Saskatchewan has had to build one of the largest networks 
of roads and highways of any jurisdiction in North 
America. 
 
Up until 10 or 15 years ago, the system was easily handling 
our transportation needs. Now our once reliable 
transportation system is under extreme stress. In fact 
Saskatchewan highways are under so much stress we are at 
a crossroads so to speak. Not only must we make 
extremely expensive decisions on increased maintenance 
and resurfacing, but due to heavier and heavier volumes of 
local and interprovincial traffic, we must make expensive 
decisions on major upgrading, including the completion of 
twinning two of our national highways. 
 
The stress of freight being transferred to the highways 
system from the rail system is a significant part of the 
problem, with impacts estimated in the hundreds of 

millions of dollars. In a province with only a million 
people, this is an enormous challenge and a daunting task 
for all levels of government. 
 
A great deal of this stress is a direct result of the federal 
government’s legislative changes. The elimination of the 
Crow benefit grain transportation subsidy has cost 
Saskatchewan grain producers about $400 million in lost 
returns each year. Changes to federal regulations governing 
railways have led directly to the acceleration of branch line 
abandonment and grain elevator consolidation. 
 
We’ve already lost more than 3,400 kilometres of rail 
branch lines, and we could lose another 3,000 kilometres in 
the next five to ten years. And we’ve gone from 2,500 
individual grain elevators in 1972 down to about 650 this 
year. 
 
Grain industry players say we’ll end up with about 70 to 
100 grain delivery points, in total, within the next few 
years. The number of heavy truck grain trips will increase 
tremendously as more trucks haul more grain longer 
distances to the growing network of inland terminals. 
 
As a direct result of these developments, grain producers 
are paying higher freight costs, and road impact costs for 
provincial and local governments have soared. We estimate 
road and highway impact costs alone for the provincial 
government and municipal governments will increase by 
tens of millions of dollars per year over the next five years 
as more branch lines are abandoned and elevator 
consolidation continues. 
 
In return, Saskatchewan is only receiving 24 million, 
spread over four years, in compensation from the federal 
government to upgrade our provincial highways impacted 
by the change in grain haul patterns. It is painfully obvious 
that the federal government made these changes with little 
if any thought of the consequences, and unfortunately 
Ottawa has shown even less will to deal with them. 
 
I’m not against change and I’m not against progress. But 
what I prefer is organized and managed change, not 
instantaneous, overnight change. If the federal government 
would have developed a well-thought-out transition period 
over a manageable time frame, the transportation system 
could have also been planned and managed. Instead today 
we have rapid, if not rampaging, branch line abandonment 
and elevator rationalization. Plus we have the devastating 
results that are following for many communities and 
businesses in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
In conclusion, I hope I have conveyed the message that 
transportation is a priority for our government, and with 
one of the largest per capita road networks in the known 
universe, highways and roads are a key component of our 
transportation priority. We increased our spending on 
highways and roads by about $40 million in ’97 and ’98 
fiscal year, not including the 20 million provided to local 
government through the Department of Municipal 
Government. This year we increased our spending by 
another 20 million, a continuation of a commitment to 
spend a total of 2.5 billion by the year 2007 to improve our 



1210 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

roads and highways. 
 

I want you to know I take that commitment very seriously 
and am determined to provide the residents of 
Saskatchewan with a transportation system that meets their 
needs. In Saskatchewan, transportation is the backbone of 
our economy. Rail is the vital link in our ability to 
transport grain, and roads are an essential economic and 
cultural lifeline. 
 
If the federal government would accept their share of 
responsibility in providing a national highways program, 
not to mention rail neglect, we might well keep this 
country together yet. 

 
And I would like to take this opportunity to move the motion, 
which reads: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government to assume 
its federal responsibility by initiating and contributing in a 
real way to a national highways program, thus removing 
from Canada the stigma of being the only industrialized 
country in the western world not to have such a program. 
 

And that is seconded by the hon. member from Carrot River 
Valley. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
stand in this House and second the motion from the member 
from Redberry in regards to a national highways program for 
the country of Canada and particularly the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all I would like to sort of overview or give you an idea, 
or the people of Saskatchewan an idea, of what our road system 
is really like. The asset is about $7 billion, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
11,700 kilometres of standard pavements in the province of 
Saskatchewan. There are 8,700 kilometres of thin membrane 
surfaces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now those surfaces are very thin blacktop on top of a poor 
structure, built probably in the ’50s and ’60s for a much 
different time, Mr. Speaker — not for hauling grain with large 
trucks, but a more dust free situation for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan to get from community to 
community. 
 
You have to remember, Mr. Speaker, we have a large land base. 
We have not a lot of people; we’re a little over a million people. 
Mind you, the population is certainly growing since this 
government came to power, but it still is a relatively small 
population, and the basic income . . . the basic industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan, of course, is agriculture. 
 
There are about 5,700 kilometres, Mr. Speaker, of gravelled 
surfaces under the Saskatchewan Department of Highways and 
Transportation. There are 185,000 kilometres of roads and 
highways and that would circle the earth four and half times, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the amount of roads in the province of 
Saskatchewan — four and half times around the equator. That’s 
the amount of roads that we have in Saskatchewan. 

Our government, Mr. Speaker, has committed $219 million this 
year, in this year’s budget, to upgrade our roads. And this isn’t 
of course . . . not counting any monies that are given to 
municipalities to help with their road situation. 
 
I want to speak a little bit about twinning, Mr. Speaker, because 
the national highways programs certainly was instigated with 
the idea of twinning and the concept of a national highways 
program, a situation where there is a network across the country 
that links all the provinces together. And this hopefully would 
be funded by all levels of government. 
 
So in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have Highway No. 1, 
which is 655 kilometres long. And I hope the members of the 
opposition Liberals and the opposition Conservatives are 
listening to this. Of that length, Mr. Speaker, there are 373 
kilometres already four-laned, and it’s a divided highway. 
There’s a balance of a 113-kilometre section from west of Gull 
Lake to the Alberta border, about 71 miles, 113 kilometres. And 
there’s about 173 kilometres, about 108 miles, from Indian 
Head to the Manitoba border. 
 
Now the cost of completing that twinning is $49 million. That’s 
the section from Gull Lake to the Alberta border — about $49 
million, Mr. Speaker. And in this budget our government had to 
take the bull by the horns so to speak and start the twinning — 
because of course the lack of interest by the federal Liberals — 
and we have done that. We are going to twin 27 kilometres in 
that area this year. 
 
On the other side, Mr. Speaker, on the Manitoba side, it would 
cost about, oh somewhere in that 50 million . . . $58 million to 
twin that area. In total, to complete the twinning of No. 1, it’s 
about $132 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re going to begin on the east side as well and we’re 
going to start, again because we have to take the bull by the 
horns, because the federal government are not interested in 
helping western Canada, Saskatchewan in particular. They do 
put a little money you know into roads, but most of that you 
find in New Brunswick, I think, with Mr. Young over there. I 
believe he’s working on some roads over there, but certainly 
there’s not much done in the province of Saskatchewan when 
you talk about the federal government. 
 
So we’re going to take the bull by the horns and we’re going to 
start twinning in the Indian Head to Manitoba border area, Mr. 
Speaker, 21 kilometres. It’s not a lot, but it’s a beginning. And 
we do have a commitment that over 15 years, without the 
federal government’s help, we are going to complete the 
twinning of Highways No. 1 and 16 in this province over the 
next 15 years. 
 
And the members opposite will yell, well yes, 15 years, that’s 
so long. Well we’ll get into that in a little bit, Mr. Speaker, to 
why it’s going to take so long. But if the federal government 
contributed just a little bit, let’s say 50 cent dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, we could do that in half the time — seven years, eight 
years, we could have all the twinning completed in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what we call a national 
highways program. 
 
In 1987 all governments across Canada and the federal 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

government decided on what the national highways network 
should be — which highways should be included in each 
province and how that should be funded. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, it kind of just died there and now the only thing we get 
from the federal government is maybe the odd ad hoc programs. 
 
Now some other changes that we need to talk about, Mr. 
Speaker, because our transportation system is certainly 
changing, is the federal government’s passing of Bill 101, 
which is the Canada Transportation Act. And this . . . why is 
this Bill so important to Saskatchewan. Well of course we haul 
a lot of grain from the province of Saskatchewan and we export 
probably the majority of that grain, and that goes to our ports 
and then of course to the countries that purchase our 
high-quality grain from the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well the federal government in its wisdom made changes to the 
Canada Transportation Act which is now railway friendly. So 
that means the railways can abandon lines at their will with 
very, very little notification and very little chance for input from 
the public or other governments. So they can pretty well 
abandon at will and that’s exactly what they’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker. So of the 6,600 miles of line in Saskatchewan, 3,600 
miles, Mr. Speaker, are grain dependent. And of that, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe already there has been a majority . . . a lot of 
the dependent lines now abandoned, and more going to be 
abandoned. 
 
At the system’s peak in 1972, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had 
14,560 kilometres of rail line. To date, about 3,400 kilometres 
have been already abandoned. The federal government changes 
to the Canada Transportation Act have given both CN 
(Canadian National) and CP (Canadian Pacific) increased 
flexibility to abandon branch lines at their whim. There’s about 
another, oh, 1,140 kilometres that have been identified for 
abandonment in CN and CP’s three-year plans. 
 
(1445) 
 
It is estimated, Mr. Speaker, that up to 3,000 kilometres of grain 
dependent branch lines could be lost in the next five or ten 
years, resulting in hundreds . . . 6 or 700 railway jobs. But not 
that so much — even though how important that is — is the 
damage to our road system, Mr. Speaker, and what it’s going to 
do to our roads. 
 
And because of these changes made unilaterally by the federal 
government, did they come and help with the road damage? No, 
they erased that from their mind. They say this new Bill C-101 
is going to be railway friendly so that the railways become 
healthy, and certainly they are. They’re making hundreds of 
millions of dollars of profit and becoming very healthy on the 
backs of the producers, and our road system, as it deteriorates. 
 
Are the railways going to pay for that damage? No, they’re not 
going to pay for that damage. You know who’s going to pay for 
that damage, Mr. Speaker? It’s going to be the farmers in the 
province of Saskatchewan that are going to pay for that damage. 
 
So what the federal government did is take away the costs from 
the railways. They took away the Crow benefit and now we pay 
about, oh, probably 300 per cent more for shipping our grain to 
port. Well they’re allowing the railways to take a section of that 

savings, but who’s going to pay? 
 
All they did, Mr. Speaker, is transfer the costs from the farmers 
of Saskatchewan and . . . to the farmers of Saskatchewan from 
the railways, allowing the railways to make more money and 
the farmers less, damaging our roads, and with no compensation 
hardly whatsoever. 
 
When they took away the Crow though, Mr. Speaker, what they 
did is this . . . The value probably in the $7 billion range, I 
would say of the Crow; the Crow, that’s what it was valued at, 
about 320 million in farmers’ pockets to ship their grain to 
market each and every year. So a value of about $7 billion was 
the estimate at that time. Well the federal government decided 
they’re going to give the farmers of Saskatchewan about 1.6 . . . 
or farmers of western Canada about $1.6 billion, and they did 
that over a few years. They gave them some money so that the 
farmers wouldn’t complain so much about losing the Crow. 
 
And then what they did with the provinces and the 
municipalities is they give them this little, little wee bits of 
money, like about $84 million over four years, and they said, 
well this will do, this will fix your roads. And then we’ll wash 
our hands of this situation and you guys can do it on your own 
now. 
 
And you know how much $84 million goes when you talk about 
building roads? When you talk about twinning, for example, it’s 
about $460,000 per kilometre. So you can see, when you do 
about two and a half kilometres, that’s about a million dollars. 
And that’s what it cost. So you know what $84 million does 
over four years. It does absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I noticed when I was talking to the mayor of Cumberland 
House, he would like his road fixed over there. There’s 93 
kilometres and the estimated cost of fixing that road to 
Cumberland House, and that’s not even depending on grain, is 
about $20 million. So you know how far the $84 million that 
the federal government gave both to the RMs (rural 
municipality) and to the province to help with roads is going to 
go. It’s certainly not sufficient. It’s not sufficient at all. 
 
Well what can be done? What can we do if we work together? 
Now we’ll take a little look at the ad hoc programs that were 
started a few years back, probably in about 1991-92. There was 
a program where the federal government put in 50 cents and the 
province put in 50 cents and we were able to do some twinning. 
 
We twinned from Saskatoon to North Battleford — that’s just 
completed now. We completed sections of No. 7, for instance, 
Saskatoon to the Pike Lake turn-off. We’re in fact twinning 
now. We twinned Warman to Saskatoon. We’re twinning 
Martensville to Saskatoon. Certainly there has been some work 
done, and as soon as the federal government comes up with a 
few dollars, we certainly will work. 
 
But ad hoc — there’s nothing on a permanent basis, something 
that governments can plan with. Saskatchewan, you know, we 
come up with a transportation strategy. The federal government 
hasn’t got any. 
 
So you’re sort of guessing and trying to do your best to protect 
your road system and protect the producers and protect the 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

people that use our transportation system, but always without 
that national transportation system or national highways 
program. You’re kind of doing it on your own and you’re not 
really sure what changes the federal government will make in 
the future that will destroy your plans. So we’re going to 
continue to work on that. 
 
Some of the other things that we’re doing is the trucking 
partnership, which involves partnerships with the trucking 
companies and the Department of Highways where they share 
in road repairs or some economic benefit for them. 
 
We’re also investing in area planning, because right now about 
6 per cent of the highway road network takes about 70 per cent 
of the traffic. Certainly the RMs are the same. They have 
certain roads that take the majority of the traffic. They have 
other roads that take less. 
 
And they have to plan better, Mr. Speaker. They have to 
certainly plan better with the limited resources that we have in 
this province to fix roads. So that’s what they’re going to do. So 
area committees are going to start looking at what are the 
priorities in their area. Taking a look at their need for grain 
transportation, taking a look at the need for . . . the tourism 
needs in the area. 
 
And there are other needs that a specific area may have that 
another area may not. For instance, oil industry in the 
south-west compared to the forest industry in the north-east 
where I’m from, Mr. Speaker. So those are the things that area 
transportation committees can do. 
 
Also within the department, Mr. Speaker, is a short-line unit, a 
group of people that work with local communities, local 
organizations, to help determine if in fact a short-line railway 
would be successful, would be economically viable, would be 
used by the producers, thus taking some of the stress off the 
roads and leaving it on the track where it should be. 
 
These are the kinds of things that the area transportation 
committee can do. They can call up the unit in the Department 
of Highways, certainly willing to go out there and work with 
them to find out if indeed a short-line unit would be viable. But 
as long as the federal government have Bill C-101, and they’re 
very reluctant to make any changes to C-101, it’s very hard for 
us to put together short-line railways in this province. 
 
And I would hope that the federal government will look at Bill 
C-101, make the necessary changes. We debated that in the 
House last week. And I would hope that they would make those 
changes so that short-lines are in fact . . . have an opportunity to 
be successful in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m going to move on now, Mr. Speaker, for a minute and talk a 
little bit about who should pay for our roads. And I noticed the 
member from Wood River, the member from Wood River, he 
said this, and I hope that the member from North Battleford will 
listen and maybe explain to the member from Wood River his 
statement and how true it is. 
 
And this was from the Kindersley Clarion and it was dated 
March 26, 1997. And this is what he said to Roy Bailey’s 
request that the federal government take its responsibility in 

paying for some of the national highways network, and this is 
what the member from Wood River said: 
 

I did. I have publicly stated that I’d hoped there would 
have been a national highways plan in the past federal 
budget. I have raised the issue with both federal minister, 
Ralph Goodale, and Finance minister, Paul Martin. Once 
the fiscal situation our federal government has faced is 
brought under control the way it has here in Saskatchewan, 
then that level of government should direct a large portion 
of the tax collected to where it was intended, our highways. 

 
Now I wonder if the Liberals over there could remind the 
member from Wood River of his statement and maybe he can 
join with us and ask again for — I don’t know how many times 
we’ve asked the federal government — if they would support us 
in the national highways program. He knows. The Liberal 
government over there knows that the federal government have 
a responsibility. Well hopefully they will come forward and we 
will be able to share in that. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan Party over there, they demand that we 
spend more money on roads all the time. It’s the old Tory 
spend, spend, spend. It doesn’t matter where the money comes 
from. They believe that money grows on trees, Mr. Speaker, if 
you can imagine that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They don’t like trees. They want to cut 
all them down. 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Well they want to cut them down too. But 
anyway, they believe that money grows on trees and that we 
should have money for this, and money for that. And it doesn’t 
matter what the federal government pulls, we should find it 
right here in the province of Saskatchewan and just spend, 
spend, spend — fix every road right now. That’s what the 
Saskatchewan Party says. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker, that those people over there 
. . . some of those people sitting over there when the 
Conservative Party was in power in this province, they 
overspent by a billion dollars a year — exactly what they would 
do if they ever formed government. Thank goodness the 
Saskatchewan people will not allow that to happen. But I’ll tell 
you that they would do the very same thing. And they spent a 
billion dollars a year more than what they had coming in. 
 
And you know they created a debt of $15 billion in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And do you know that we pay today 
$760 million in interest each and every year. And you know 
what $760 million would have done this year, Mr. Speaker? We 
would have been able to twin Gull Lake to the Alberta border, 
how many times? If it’s about 50 million to twin, if you had 
$750 million extra, I don’t know, that’s quite a few times. You 
could twin that piece of highway that many times, Mr. Speaker 
— 15 times. Every year you could twin that section of highway. 
You could go over and over and then you could rip it up and do 
it again, and rip it up and do it again. You could do it 15 times. 
And that’s what the Saskatchewan Party, the Conservative 
Party, believes. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s exactly the way it used to be. 
 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

Mr. Renaud: — Exactly. They would spend. They would 
spend, spend, spend. They would create debt, and instead of 
building roads and fixing roads, we would be paying interest on 
our debt. Shameful. It’s shameful. 
 
Well what are we going to do, Mr. Speaker? I announced a few 
things that the Department of Highways are already doing, but I 
want to read you another . . . a little bit from a news release that 
was dated March 13 — or May 13, pardon me — and it’s from 
the Investment Dealers Association of Canada, and this is what 
it says: 
 

The Saskatchewan economy is on track to its sixth 
consecutive year of expansion due in large part to 
admirable government management of provincial finances. 
 

Exactly the opposite of those members across there, Mr. 
Speaker, exactly the opposite. And it goes on, Mr. Speaker, and 
it says: 
 

The most indebted provincial economy in the country six 
years ago has now reduced the debt burden to the 
provincial average. In fact the government’s debt to GDP 
ratio has dropped sharply from 56.1 per cent earlier this 
decade to 34 per cent in the fiscal 1997-98. This is a 22.1 
per cent drop. That drop is double that of the next best 
provincial performance. 
 

And it goes on, Mr. Speaker, to say: 
 

Following an estimated 3 per cent advance in 1997, the 
Saskatchewan economy is expected to grow a solid 2.7 per 
cent this year led by strong domestic demand. Last year’s 2 
per cent cut in the provincial sales tax, combined with low 
unemployment rates reflecting the province’s strong 
economic conditions, will continue to buoy positive 
consumer sentiment. 
 

And this is what it’s all about, Mr. Speaker. We will twin those 
roads certainly. It’ll take us 15 years. It’s a go-slow approach, 
absolutely. It’s not like the Saskatchewan Party, the old Tories, 
where they want to spend everything right now — borrow it, 
borrow it, create debt, and then of course everything goes for 
interest. 
 
No, it’s exactly the opposite of that, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 
go-slow approach. Go as you can afford it. 
 
And that’s exactly why the Investment Dealers Association of 
Canada are supporting our province’s and this government’s 
financial plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Renaud: — I want to make one more point before I allow 
the debate to go to somewhere else. I want to make the . . . I 
want to say a little bit about fuel tax, because I get it often, and I 
know the Saskatchewan Party, the newer, the new Conservative 
Party, and the Liberal Party will say, spend all the money on 
fuel tax that you collect in the province on roads. Well this is 
fine; in a perfect situation hopefully you would be able to do 
that. 
 

We collected about 300 million, $299 million in fuel tax in 
’96-97. Right now we’re spending about 219 million, 220 
million, on roads; that’s not counting of course the money that 
goes to RMs for roads. But you know we’re not quite there yet, 
but as I mentioned earlier, sort of the go-slow approach, and we 
will make it there eventually. We do have a commitment of 
$2.5 billion on roads over the next 10 years and we will do that, 
and we will fix our roads to the best of our ability. 
 
But how about the federal government, the federal Liberals, Mr. 
Speaker, how about them. What do you think they get in fuel 
tax? Well I believe, if my notes are correct, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
about $6 billion each year that the federal government gets from 
fuel tax — $6 billion. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now they do spend a little bit in New Brunswick. I understand 
that Mr. Young is over there and I can understand that, but how 
about Saskatchewan? I mean the members from the Liberal 
Party, some of them jumped over to the Conservative Party and 
will certainly still defend some of what the Liberal government 
does because they still feel that link, I think, that sort of, that tie. 
Between those two parties, Mr. Speaker, it never seems to 
leave. I mean you’re a Liberal-Conservative or a 
Liberal-Conservative. I mean it just doesn’t really matter, the 
policies are exactly the same. 
 
But I wonder why, if the federal government takes in $6 billion, 
why they would not come forward, especially now. They 
balanced their budget and they say they’re going to have a 
balanced budget. Well let’s make that commitment today. The 
federal government should make that commitment today to a 
national highways program, sharing with each of the provinces 
to improve our national highways network. It would allow each 
province to have more money to help with other roads. 
 
And also if the federal government would just look at Bill 
C-101 and change the Transportation Act so that it’s producer 
friendly, so that it’s short-line rail friendly, it would be a great 
benefit to the farmers, to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to be able to get up and talk on this subject today and I 
agree with some of the things that the member for Carrot River 
Valley said, although very few. But I do agree with the number 
of the things that the member from Redberry started off with, 
talking about the federal government not accepting the 
responsibility they have towards highways. And I agree with 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I would just like to quote a couple of lines out of a letter that I 
received from David Collenette after I wrote to him asking him 
to support the twinning of both ends of No. 1 Highway. 
 
And here’s some of the responses he had. And I found them 
somewhat interesting. He goes on to talk about the money that 
they have put into Saskatchewan in the last couple of years 
under the Canada-Saskatchewan Strategic Highway 
Improvement Program, but then he goes on to say: 



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

All levels of government are faced with difficult 
priority-setting decisions that balance the needs of health 
care, education, and other essential social programs against 
the ever increasing need to replace and improve 
deteriorating infrastructure. 

 
Well that’s fine, but we have to remember that this is the same 
federal government that cut over 7 billion out of health care in 
this country. So we have a hard time accepting some of the 
things they say as real. 
 
He goes on to say: 
 

If and when funding becomes available at a federal level, 
the competition for new funds will be intense. I will need a 
strong argument to convince my cabinet colleagues that the 
federal government should contribute financially on a 
national scale to a sector under provincial jurisdiction. 
 

I think what he is saying here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
people like Mr. Goodale are going to have to get off their little 
pulpits there and support him in asking for money for 
Saskatchewan. And I think part of our problem here is that Mr. 
Goodale, although he has done a lot to hurt the farmers of this 
province, has done absolutely nothing for the rest of this 
province because he’s the only sitting federal member the 
Liberals have out here. He’s done absolutely nothing in 
supporting the needs of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the third party, I know they get up and say, oh we need this 
in the health care and we need this in the twinning, but they 
may be better off if they turn to their counterpart and their 
federal cousin, Mr. Goodale, and ask him just for once to do 
something for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The one thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I was glad to see in the 
budget, that there was money for twinning of the No. 1 
Highway, a small portion at each end. But I think my concern 
with that is that this was not extra money. This is money taken 
out of the existing budget, put into the No. 1 Highway, which is 
needed, but it’s also going to short-change secondary highways 
that are in terrible shape out there and needed the full funding. 
 
The member for Carrot River Valley, if I remember right, last 
year made this big hullabaloo and announcement about two and 
a half billion dollars over the next 10 years — 250 million a 
year. 
 
Now in first sight that sounded wonderful, but we should have 
known, as usual, this government talks a big show but does 
absolutely nothing to back it up. Two hundred and fifty million 
a year and what did that government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, put 
into highways? A hundred and ninety-eight million last year. 
This is year two, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what are we putting 
in this year? Two hundred and eighteen million. 
 
Now if my numbers figure . . . just work out right, and I hope 
my calculator is better . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Now this is . . . I 
presume that this is early in this particular debate, because 
obviously there’s a great deal of interest from a number of 
members. For the moment the member for Saltcoats has the 

floor. Order. The member for Saltcoats has the floor and we 
should do him the honour of hearing his remarks before I 
recognize the next speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to hear there’s so much interest in what I have to say. 
 
As I was saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope my calculator 
works better than the Leader of the Third Party, and I think it 
does. But if I add up the shortfall that this government has, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in the first two years under their new 250 
million a year program, they’re already $80 million short of 
what they said they were going to spend. 
 
Now the minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, answers in question . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
concern is, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I’ve asked the Minister 
of Highways this same question — is that if you’re already $80 
million behind in your commitment over the next 10, 15 years, 
when are we going to catch up? And I believe her answer was, 
well in the last couple of years of the program. 
 
Well that’s an impossibility, to say that at this point, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Because as we know, that government will be 
nowhere to be found in 8, 10, or 15 years. They’ll be part of 
history in this province, as was Tommy Douglas. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to touch on a group that 
come out last week, I believe it was, and they’re CRASH for 
short, and they’re Canadians for Responsible and Safe 
Highways. And some of their concerns was over the one truck 
with two full 48- and 53-foot trailers on our single-lane 
highways. 
 
And I think to some degree I share their concern, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Because the number of accidents we see in this 
province over the last 3, 4, 5 years, to me seems to be on the 
increase drastically. Seems every time you turn around there’s a 
fatality on the highways. It seems that there’s a semi-trailer of 
one kind or another involved. And I guess what these people are 
saying actually, what we’re doing is opening it up possibly to 
make it more unsafe than it already is. 
 
Some of the other things that these people were talking about, 
and the gentleman that was speaking on their behalf was Mr. 
Evans, and he said that Saskatchewan also allows truckers to 
work up to 112 hours a week compared to the national limit of 
60 hours a week. 
 
By allowing giant trucks on two-lane roads in the charge of 
people who must be amassing serious sleep debt, this province 
is laying claim to the most lax trucking safety regime in Canada 
and the United States. And I may be inclined to agree with him, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They go on to talk about some of the statistics and they again 
head their statistics by saying, Saskatchewan has the most lax 
truck safety standards in Canada and the U.S. (United States). 
And they’ve got here, maximum truck lengths in Saskatchewan 
is 124 to 131 feet. And the average for Canada is 82 and the 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

average for the U.S. is 82. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are 
just about double that. 
 
Maximum hours once again for a trucker, that he can work in a 
week, 112 in Saskatchewan, 60 in Canada, and 60 in the U.S. 
on average. Fatality rates for collisions involving large trucks 
— and this is per 100,000 people, Mr. Deputy Speaker — is 
2.66 in Saskatchewan and yet the Canadian average is 1.95 and 
the American average is 1.83. So maybe these lax regulations 
are starting to show through. 
 
We’ve had an accident, Mr. Speaker, in the last couple of weeks 
in my constituency where three fatalities . . . that I knew very 
well these people, and again, once again it was a semi involved, 
through no fault whatsoever of the driver, but I think what it has 
to do with is the number of semis on the road, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. In this case it was snowing and blowing, but a matter 
of two or three seconds difference and probably this accident 
wouldn’t have happened. But I think because of the large 
number of semis on the highways, this is why we’re starting to 
see more and more fatalities. 
 
Some of the other issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk 
on today is the funding that this province has taken part in over 
the last seven years that this government has been in power. 
And I’d like to just go through the numbers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Total Highways and Transportation budget in ’91-92 was 
208.953 million; ’92-93, 164.922 million — we can see the 
drop there; ’93-94, 180.7 million; ’94-95, 177.578 million, and 
we have compared all this to when they came to power and it 
was 208 million; ’95-96, 169.484 million, we took a drop again, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker; ’96-97, 170 million; we’re still a way 
down from what it was, from what it was when this government 
came to power; ’97-98 was the first year of the program that I 
talked about before, when the member for Carrot River Valley 
made such a big fuss about the money he was going to spend 
under his tutelage, was 198 million, a shortfall of $52 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we just cannot believe one word that this 
government says in their announcements. I hope the 
announcement to do with more nurses today is not the same. I 
hope it has a little credence and we actually see the nurses — 
this wasn’t just to elect Judy Junor in the Saskatoon by-election. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this issue is a very important issue but I 
also feel that the subject that we were talking on in last week’s 
private members’ debate was also very, very important and I 
don’t believe we got to the end of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 
with that, I would like to finish my remarks on this subject. 
 
I would like to at this time move a superseding motion, moved 
by myself and seconded by the member from Moosomin: 
 

That the Assembly do now proceed to item 4 under private 
members’ public Bills and orders, adjourned debates, in the 
orders of the day. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. A superseding 
motion is in order. 

The division bells rang from 3:13 p.m. until 3:23 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 

Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays — 23 
 

Van Mulligen Tchorzewski Johnson 
Whitmore Upshall Kowalsky 
Calvert Koenker Renaud 
Lorje Nilson Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Langford Thomson Hillson 
Aldridge Belanger  
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well as so 
often happens with this administration, what is at first blush a 
good idea has unfortunately some very sinister undercurrents. 
 
We all know that there are some terrible pressures on our road 
system. We all know that this is a national problem, and we all 
know that changes in grain transportation are going to increase 
the pressures on grain transportation. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what disturbs me so terribly about 
this motion is that again we have a motion before us taking a 
provincial responsibility for highways and says, why doesn’t 
Ottawa do something? No mention, no mention, no mention 
that the provincial government also has a responsibility and also 
can be doing something. 
 
Now we have lobbied the federal government, and will continue 
to do so, on the need for federal participation in our highway 
system. But how can we vote in favour of a motion which 
makes no mention whatsoever of the fact that our provincial 
government also has a responsibility? 
 
Well, and how have they discharged that responsibility? 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Order. Obviously 
I was right when the previous speaker started speaking. There’s 
a great deal of interest in this debate. I simply ask all hon. 
members to wait your turn and it will surely come. And you 
will have the opportunity to proceed as currently the hon. 
member for North Battleford has. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, sir. How is the province 
discharging that responsibility, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well 
they’re discharging it by spending less on roads today than they 
were 10 years ago. We’re actually losing ground. Ten years ago 
we spent more on highways than we do today, and that’s before 
inflation. If we include inflation, if we include . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Then of course two years ago we had a grand 
announcement from the provincial government, a grand 
announcement that in the next 10 years they were going to 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

spend 2.5 billion — 250 million in each of the next 10 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Wonderful announcement. 
Congratulations. But in the intervening two years we haven’t 
come anywhere close to the promised 250 million in either of 
the two years. Now are they going to be spending 300 million a 
year from here on in to catch up? I don’t know. 
 
The member from Lloydminster says, give us time. 
 
Well the way I see it, we have lost so much ground in the last 
decade, by the time we actually catch up and take highways 
seriously, Lloydminster will probably have voted to secede to 
Alberta. 
 
You have promised 250 million a year for the next 10 years. 
You have now missed the first two years. How much longer 
will this be allowed to continue before you take it seriously? 
 
(1530) 
 
Well the member for Redberry was with me a couple of weeks 
ago when we had the sod turning for the inland terminal at 
North Battleford — $11 million investment by Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool. 
 
Today, as I understand his speech, he was critical of that 
construction and opposed to it. I thought two weeks ago he was 
in favour of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool building this 
beautiful new facility in North Battleford. Today I gather he’s 
opposed to this happening. 
 
There are changes, and these changes do put pressures on our 
highway system which all levels of government will have to 
address, including the federal government. But for us to pass 
this motion, for us to pass this motion in effect says that our 
provincial government has no responsibility in the matter, that 
would be a travesty, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for us to pass this 
motion and absolve the Government of Saskatchewan of all 
responsibility for this province’s highway network. 
 
Well the federal government did fortunately pay one-half of the 
twinning costs from Saskatoon to North Battleford, and we 
hope that they will pay for the one-half from North Battleford to 
Lloydminster. That is desperately needed. We had another three 
fatalities again this spring. 
 
But in this terrible lack of responsibility, this denial of 
responsibility we see in the speech from the member for 
Redberry and the member for Carrot River, I want to point out 
some of the things that the Government of Saskatchewan could 
do if they take seriously the province’s highways, and if they 
think that we have a provincial government to do anything other 
than write letters to Ottawa. 
 
I mean that’s the basic question here, isn’t it. Not just on 
transportation — on health, on everything. Why do we have a 
provincial government? Well we have a provincial government 
to send letters to Ottawa. That’s why we’ve got them. That’s all 
they’re good for. That’s their mission in life. That’s how they 
discharge their responsibilities. 

Well we tend to think that a provincial government can and 
should do more. 
 
What are some of the things that they could be doing? Well in 
my own constituency there is the issue of the entrance to North 
Battleford. We have finished the twinning to North Battleford. 
Unfortunately, when we finished the twinning to North 
Battleford with federal money, we did not address the issue of 
Highway 40’s entrance into the city. We have at the eastern 
entrance to the Battlefords, a jumble of conflicting roads 
coming in at several different angles, and this has led to a 
terribly confusing and dangerous situation. We have had 
fatalities in each of the last two years. 
 
The city of North Battleford is so concerned about this situation 
they are prepared to donate land to move Highway 40 further 
east, to take it away from the major area of congestion. 
 
Well so here’s money from Ottawa, here’s money from the 
municipality, the city of North Battleford. All it takes, all it 
takes is a little bit of initiative from our provincial government. 
 
Now does the member for Redberry support the provincial 
government for participating? Well I was pleased to see he did 
in fact come to the news conference to say yes, Highway 40 has 
to be moved. Well it has to be moved with the assistance of our 
provincial government. Let’s not let the provincial government 
off the hook. 
 
Well Highway 14, which is the highway past Cut Knife, 
Marsden, Neilburg, the major way which people from our area 
get to Calgary, I’m getting all sorts of calls this spring about the 
deterioration of that road, about people wrecking their cars and 
trucks on that road, and the oil pans that are being lost. So my 
brother came over the weekend from Calgary and he said he 
didn’t have to read the welcome to Saskatchewan sign to know 
that he had crossed the provincial border. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the last time I looked, Alberta and 
Manitoba had the same federal government as we have got. So 
how is it, how is it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they can discharge 
their responsibilities to their citizens and we can’t? What’s the 
difference? Is the difference Ottawa or is the difference the 
provincial administration? 
 
Well, what are some other small things that could be being 
done? I have written to the Minister of Highways about the fact 
that our bridge over the North Saskatchewan has no barricade 
on the pedestrian walkway. This is standard throughout North 
America. It’s standard even throughout Saskatchewan, but for 
some reason the Battlefords was not thought worthy of a 
pedestrian barricade. We’ve had one fatality because of big 
trucks coming down there and the suction that they create. 
 
Now this is not a major expenditure, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A 
pedestrian barricade would cost very little and, I dare to say, 
that could be accomplished even without sending the letter to 
Ottawa. Our provincial government could simply take some 
responsibility. 
 
The old bridges across the North Saskatchewan, very scenic — 
they’re one of the most photographed areas in the Battlefords. 
They’re now badly rusting. All they need is a coat of paint. Will 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

Department of Highways do that? They can’t even seem to get 
around to some of these minor, mundane matters, and yet they 
spend about 35, 36 cents of what they collect from fuel tax on 
our roads. 
 
And they spend less today on highway construction than was 
spent 10 years ago. Well . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order, order. Just a 
reminder to hon. members that the member for North Battleford 
has the floor. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well I was just concluding, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I am sorry that in suggesting that our provincial 
government should also take some responsibility for our 
highway system that I hit such a sensitive nerve. I had thought 
that all members would join with me in saying that all levels of 
government have to put their shoulder to the wheel and address 
this very important problem. 
 
But I’m sorry that apparently the government members take the 
view that only one level of government has to show leadership 
and responsibility. Unfortunately that level of government 
generally does . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I would like 
at this time to move an amendment to the motion before us. 
And we will discuss some of the hon. member’s other concerns 
later, but I want to move an amendment at this time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to read as follows: 
 

That after the words “federal government,” the words be 
added “and provincial government to assume their 
responsibilities.” And further to delete all words after the 
words “thus removing.” 
 

So the effect of this amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to say 
both levels of government have to take this seriously. Let’s not 
just be hollow hypocrites whining about somebody else taking 
responsibility. Let’s admit we can also do something. We have 
to do something. That’s why we have a provincial government, 
that’s why we have a federal government, so that all Canadians 
will join together in the important mission of giving this 
province a highways system, a transportation system designed 
for the 21st century. 
 
I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seconded by the hon. member 
for Athabasca. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I will ask the indulgence 
of the members. The wording is not complete on this, and I 
believe that the intention of the member for North Battleford is 
that I would marry the amendment with the motion. Is that 
correct? I request some guidance from the hon. member for 
North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — You can take it to . . . You can delete 
everything after “and provincial government to assume their 
responsibilities.” I’m satisfied with that as being the sum total 
of the amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in support 
of the motion, the amendment as proposed by my hon. 
colleague from North Battleford. And I want to also point out, 
Mr. Speaker, that we have had on numerous occasions the 

chance to speak about the highway system of northern 
Saskatchewan. And of course we’ve heard different 
perspectives of southern Saskatchewan and all throughout this 
great province of ours. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I’m here to speak and talk about 
the issues of northern highways and I’ll try my very best not to 
belabour the whole process of speaking on highways by taking 
up a whole pile of time here. I’ll try to be as concise and 
certainly as clear as I could be. 
 
I guess what I want to tell the members opposite, the 
government, when you talk about pointing the finger at the 
federal Liberal government, that I want to advise them at the 
start of my presentation that denial is not just a river in Egypt; 
in fact denial also has a number of meanings according to the 
dictionary, and I’ll just share them. 
 
The first one is the act of saying that something is not true; the 
second interpretation is the act of saying that one does not hold 
to or accept something; number three, is a refusing; number 
four is a disowning, a refusing to acknowledge; and finally the 
fifth interpretation, of doing without things that one wants, 
self-denial. 
 
(1545) 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we find in northern 
Saskatchewan. And I share with my colleague here that it’s very 
apparent throughout all of Saskatchewan that this government is 
in denial when it comes to their responsibility of highways in 
Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
And I want to share a very important bit of information in terms 
of northern Saskatchewan. When they stand up and they say no, 
as a provincial government we’re not really totally responsible 
for highways in the North; it’s the federal government — they 
should be doing something. That’s what they’re saying to the 
people today with this motion, Mr. Speaker. They are saying 
that no, the provincial government does not have responsibility; 
the federal government will look after highways. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the question we have is what’s the value of 
having a provincial government if every problem that we have 
as a province, they simply stand up and say well it’s Ottawa’s 
fault — it’s Ottawa’s fault that we’ve got poor roads, it’s 
Ottawa’s fault that our health care system is in problems, it’s 
Ottawa’s fault that the unemployment rate’s so high in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina South stands in his 
seat and he yells again, once again. Every time we speak about 
highways in the North he stands . . . or he yells across the room. 
And the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure with all 
the people, he’s probably got maybe a 10-minute drive on 
blacktop from his constituency to the office here. 
 
He does not drive from Patuanak to Pinehouse. He doesn’t drive 
from Turnor Lake to Dillon. If he drove those roads he would 
sit there and respect and listen to what the northern people’s 
concerns are, and he would again appreciate, he would totally 
appreciate the fact that as a member of that government he has 
got to push his caucus to start spending some major dollars on 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

highways so Saskatchewan can protect its infrastructure and 
become a very productive and, quite frankly, a totally 
self-reliant province into the 21st century. 
 
So I say to the member from Regina South, that’s the type of 
attitude that people do not enjoy. They do not appreciate it 
when he has a five-minute drive on blacktop to come to work in 
this office here in this building here, and yet people back home 
have many times travelled on very poor roads. And I’m talking 
about roads that are sometimes 90 kilometres long and 
sometimes 150 kilometres. So I think it’s very important that 
we begin to respect what the northern people have been asking 
for in many years, is to be part of this province and to fix our 
roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the isolation of northern communities, 
you’re often seeing people that live a great distance from each 
other. You try to travel from La Loche to Pinehouse. That’s got 
to be at least a two and a half hour drive, if not a three-hour 
drive, and much of that is driven over roads that are in very 
poor shape. And people do that constantly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you would assume in a region that has hospitals, sometimes 
70, sometimes 80, sometimes 100 miles apart, you would 
assume at the very least they would have decent roads so you 
can get to those hospitals easier. You would assume that 
because they’re so isolated we’d have decent roads so we can 
be able to travel out of the communities or travel to each other’s 
communities and visit. But the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, 
northern Saskatchewan has terrible — absolutely terrible — 
highways and the conditions are very appalling. 
 
And I’ll say one thing, Mr. Speaker, all we get from this 
particular government, when we talk about highways, is silly 
notions and silly motions of this sort saying well, hold it here, 
the federal government is responsible. We’re doing our very 
best but until they put more money in, the northern people’s 
problems will continue. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of northern Saskatchewan simply 
do not buy that. For 20 years, if not 30 years, we have had these 
roads that we’ve been travelling on and the tremendous costs, to 
not only safety and people’s lives but to the vehicles and the 
economy as a whole in northern Saskatchewan, is the end result 
of this government not paying particular attention to northern 
Saskatchewan’s highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could share with you a number of stories of 
people who have driven these highways and damaged their 
vehicles and, as the member from North Battleford indicated, a 
number of other problems that other people have. 
 
And the amazing aspect of it, Mr. Speaker, is every time that as 
a MLA I stand up and we talk about the road to Dillon or the 
road to Turnor Lake or the road to Pinehouse, they can simply 
get up and they could say, well it’s a federal government 
responsibility. Or they could use the other line. You know — 
we’re spending $2.5 billion over the next 10 years on highways. 
That’s one of their favourite phrases. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what that translates per year is 250 million 
per year. And the province collects over $400 million in gas 
taxes. So in essence they should be spending a huge majority of 

that particular money into the highway systems of 
Saskatchewan, especially the highway system in northern 
Saskatchewan where there is such dire need. 
 
So in essence what they should be saying is we are collecting 
maybe 4.5 billion in gas tax but we’re only putting in 2.5 billion 
over the next 10 years. That is the truth, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what they should be saying. 
 
And the fact of the matter is they’re simply not . . . (inaudible) 
. . . the word or the phrase 2.5 billion over the next 10 years. 
Well that sounds a heck of a lot more politically safe to say as 
opposed to saying we’re profiting off the highways and that’s 
why our highway systems are in such terrible shape. 
 
Another compelling argument, Mr. Speaker, when we talk 
about highways in the North is that we’ve always maintained, 
we’ve always maintained that the main highway heading into 
the Athabasca constituency, which is Highway 155 from Green 
Lake to Buffalo Narrows and through Beauval and up through 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, La Loche and on to Cluff Lake, that highway 
we’ve made reference to it being Grant Devine’s golf course. 
There’s actually maybe a thousand holes per kilometre. 
 
I don’t know who’s golf course that would be. Maybe that 
would include the member from North Battleford again. He had 
that many holes in every kilometre in terms of trying to golf. 
 
But certainly there are a number, a number of problems with 
Highway 155. And if you were to take an opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, to drive up that way, go down Highway 155. You 
might think it’s a bombing range. You might think it’s a golf 
course. You might think it’s something else. 
 
But the fact of the matter is if you travel down a different road, 
Highway 903, Mr. Speaker, which is just west of Highway 155, 
where they are extracting resources, where forestry and now 
natural gas is starting to become a possibility; that highway, Mr. 
Speaker, runs from Meadow Lake. It runs through Canoe Lake 
and goes on to Dillon, and now it’s cutting up the Upper 
Cumins area. 
 
And that highway, the resource extraction highway, if you drive 
that highway, Mr. Speaker, you will see what an incredible, 
beautiful highway it is. It’s just in really good shape. They 
spend millions of dollars each year to build up that highway to 
extract all the resources. 
 
And to qualify what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, that 
superhighway that they’re building that one day might connect 
Fort McMurray to Meadow Lake directly, what are they 
spending there, Mr. Speaker, for this year? Highway 903 — 
2.35 million, Mr. Speaker. That’s on grading. And another 
grading, 3.5 kilometre grading, $225,000. 
 
So a total of roughly 19 kilometres of work on the 
superhighway, they spending close to $2.5 million, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s right from the horse’s mouth. That’s the 
highway that extracts resources from the North. For 19 
kilometres they’re spending 2.5 million. 
 
Now you go down to Highway 155, the highway that feeds all 
the communities — the community of Buffalo Narrow, the 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

communities of Beauval, Pinehouse, Patuanak — what’s their 
commitment? Highway 155, north of Green Lake, $180,000 — 
$180,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what that says — and that’s for the entire highway — what 
that says is 20 kilometres of road that extracts resources gets 2.5 
million; a hundred-and-some kilometres that people use for 
people purposes gets 180,000. And that, Mr. Speaker, was a 
provincial decision. They made the choice on where they want 
to spend the money and they’re better off, in their view, to 
spend that money on a superhighway that bypasses all these 
communities and extracts all the resources for their wealth. 
 
And yet they have the gall and the audacity to stand up today 
saying, well, your federal Liberal cousins aren’t putting any 
money. 
 
So where are your priorities when you talk about highways — 
the people road versus the resources road? I say to the people of 
the North and to the Assembly and every member across the 
way here, the fact of the matter is it’s your money, you spent it 
on the resources extraction highways and not on the people 
roads. 
 
And I continue, Mr. Speaker, I continue making this point. May 
14, 1990, the member from Cumberland, and I quote from 
Hansard, he indicates, quote: 
 

. . . you know, a lot of the road building goes into the 
development in regards to the forestry development and 
also to the mining development. 
 
But what we’re also stating is that the developments should 
also consider the communities as well, and that the 
improvements to the communities needs also to take a 
priority. As we look into the future the communities aren’t 
going to be able to partake into the development, and when 
we’re getting about a billion dollars a year from the North 
from development, from mining and forestry, and when 
you take that much money out from one or two 
constituencies — you know, over a billion dollars — you 
need to put the infrastructural development in there so that 
the people can partake in the development in the way that 
they should. 

 
And that was the Minister of Northern Affairs in 1990 when he 
was in opposition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re saying. If you’re 
taking all that money out of northern Saskatchewan, at least 
have the decency to respect the isolation, to respect the fact that 
we’re miles and miles away from each other, to respect the fact 
that we can’t access health care as easy as southern 
Saskatchewan does, and to respect the fact that we haven’t got a 
five-minute drive from your home to your workplace on 
blacktop. 
 
We ask you to respect all those points and put together a plan to 
really begin to address some of the challenges when you talk 
about northern highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are people of Saskatchewan we’re talking 
about and the Saskatchewan spirit that we all hear the 

government talking about — well, it exists in northern 
Saskatchewan. Real concerns exist. 
 
And I also want to quote another statement of the member from 
Cumberland: 
 

And also too, the only other . . . after the development 
leaves, there will be the traditional resource use and the 
tourism that is required in that area. And for those to 
develop you need an excellent road system. 
 
So I would like for you to, as you look into the future to 
put greater emphasis on the community level. 
 

And this is the member from Cumberland on May 14, 1990 
talking about the need to put money into community . . . roads 
that service communities. 
 
And now he’s in government, what do they do, Mr. Speaker? 
They flip-flop. He changed his mind all of a sudden. We’ll put 
money into resource. The roads that extract all the resources 
and make all the money for government, that’s where our 
money’s going. The people highway — well, they get 180,000 
bucks. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you can’t fool people. They can talk as much 
as they want about 2.5 billion over the next 10 years or 15 
million or 20 million. All these millions they’re talking about 
— people are still driving on roads that need care. 
 
And if you don’t take my word for it, Mr. Speaker, I have a 
couple of letters here. One of course is from the mayor of the 
northern village of Beauval. He’s a friend of mine; his name is 
Sandy Rediron. And Sandy wrote me a letter dated May 5, 
1998. And I’ll read the letter. It’s a very short letter, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

I would like to bring to your attention the terrible road 
condition of Highway 155 between Green Lake and 
Beauval. I have had numerous complaints from the 
community regarding extensive damage to their vehicles 
and the hazardous driving conditions on this highway. 
 
Your earliest attention on this matter would be greatly 
appreciated. 
 
Sincerely, Sandy Rediron 
Mayor of Beauval. 
 

(1600) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is really amazing is the 
accommodating attitude of northern people. For 20, 30 years 
they have been waiting. They have been very patient. We have 
given this government political support. We have given them 
support on every level that we possibly could. And yet our 
highways continue to deteriorate to the point where our vehicles 
and our lives are in jeopardy. 
 
And yet the resilience and patience of northern people is evident 
in the letter presented by Mr. Rediron when he said your 
earliest attention to this matter would be greatly appreciated. 
Again, he’s very accommodating. 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

So when are we going to be able to get it through our MLA 
heads that when you have a concern that is consistent over the 
next 20, 30 years that there is a real problem there, that there is 
an extensive problem there. 
 
So that’s why it’s important that we provide the opportunity for 
people to come forth, give us the problem so as government — 
it may take us some time — but we put together a solution, a 
plan. But so far as we are aware, there has never been a plan 
and there never will be a plan unless this government wakes up 
and stops blaming Ottawa and stops inflating your numbers to 
appear that they’re doing something. 
 
That type of politics and that type of gestures is simply insulting 
to the northern people’s intelligence and I ask them to desist 
from doing such things as it doesn’t serve nobody’s purpose 
except theirs. 
 
I also want to share one more letter here from the English River 
First Nations. The chief and council of Patuanak are for many 
years argued about the whole situation of their highway. And I 
quote from the letter, Mr. Speaker. I beg your indulgence; it’s 
not very long, quote: 
 

The benefit to the northern residents of Patuanak in the 
province of Saskatchewan is to upgrade and update the 
provincial Highway No. 918 leading from Beauval, 
Saskatchewan to the hamlet of Patuanak and the Indian 
Reserve No. 192D in Patuanak, Saskatchewan. This 
highway, classified as a secondary highway, is 
approximately 90 kilometres in length. By updating, 
upgrading we’re referring to blacktopping and paving to 
said Highway 918. 
 
This gravel road in question was built in the 1970s and has 
been a source of concern for all vehicular traffic since its 
inception. The gravel, loose stones, sand and clay on said 
road has caused numerous punctured tires, punctured gas 
tanks, transmission casings, oil pans, axle rods and casing. 
Flying stones and gravel have caused many windshield 
cracks in our vehicles. Far too many vehicles have been 
subjected to these hazards for the past 25 years. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these guys have said it right from their own 
documentation asking the government to do something. And we 
have had Conservative governments in the ’80s, we’ve had an 
NDP government in the ’70s, and now we’ve got an NDP 
government in the ’90s and we’re still waiting. We’re still 
waiting. 
 
You know, and we to a large extent, we cannot blame the 
current government for putting this province $15 billion in debt. 
That’s the Saskatchewan Tory Party that done that. And they 
lay claim to that. 
 
But what we could do — and there’s two things you have to 
watch here, Mr. Speaker — number one is we have to put the 
blame where the blame is. And that’s the Tory caucus put this 
whole province in deep debt. And secondly, we have to put the 
blame also on the current government because of their inaction. 
Their inaction is causing serious problems in northern 
Saskatchewan and we need to get those things addressed. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important that we talk about 
these issues at great length. I rise today very shortly and briefly, 
because I know I’ve got many more miles I could go on this 
particular matter, to express and to expound my arguments as to 
why the province must desist from blaming the federal 
government for the highways problems of northern 
Saskatchewan. They’ve been doing it for 20, 25 years — 
they’ve been inflating their numbers — and in the meantime, 
our people will be driving on those same roads. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this problem is very apparent in northern 
Saskatchewan. And are we asking for 2,000 kilometres of road 
to be repaired? No, Mr. Speaker. Are we asking for 1,500? No, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re asking for approximately 350 kilometres of 
road to be repaired, to be maintained so people can stop 
travelling on these roads, subjecting their family to danger and 
ruining their vehicles at a rapid pace. 
 
And in closing, Mr. Speaker, there’s an old Highways worker 
from Ile-a-la-Crosse — and I beg the indulgence of the 
Assembly — his name is Harry Morin. And Harry’s a fine man 
that put many years into working for the Saskatchewan 
government and Highways. 
 
And he bumped into some Highways workers on the road and 
he said, you know when I worked on highways when I was a 
young man, we seen a hole, we used to go there, we used to 
make sure the base was solid and then we’d fill that hole up. 
And then we’d cap it up with some finer gravel in those days as 
opposed to oil, and then it would be fixed. Nowadays, instead 
of putting gravel in there you guys are putting flags in there, 
and flags will not fill these holes. 
 
So I guess the situation, Mr. Speaker, is the people of the North 
are saying, well who do we blame? Who do we blame? Do we 
blame the Conservatives for putting us $15 billion in the hole 
and then pretending that, oh, it wasn’t us, it was somebody 
else? No. People know it’s them. People know it’s them. 
 
The fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, point-blank we got to put 
the blame and the emphasis on the provincial government 
because they make their choice. They make the decision as to 
where do you want to spend their money. No question about it. 
 
And when they stand up and they say, your federal Liberal 
cousins or it’s their responsibility, nothing could be further 
from the truth. They collect over $400 million each year in gas 
taxes — 400 million. We have waited 25 years. We have been 
patient. Isn’t it time that this government wake up and begin to 
address these problems? 
 
And even in my own community of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mr. 
Speaker, I go home on weekends; provincial highway goes right 
through our community. It stops right by the church at the south 
end of the community. And you know, Mr. Speaker, that road is 
all torn up. Highways crew comes along once a week and 
mends it up a little bit and fixes it up and they go back again. 
Two days later it’s all messed up again. 
 
And I think the key thing here, that the message we’re trying to 
give is, why don’t you fix up these roads once and for all? Fix 
them up decently so people can travel on them safely and not 
worry about their vehicles being wrecked, and get the thing 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

done. Get the job done. 
 
And you know I think the key thing is as long as you have 
MLAs that are like the member from Regina South, who keeps 
harping from his seat, as long as you have MLAs that drive on 
nice, thick blacktop, five minutes from their home to this 
Assembly, they’ll never understand the people driving from 
Dillon into Buffalo, the road that they’ve got to travel on. 
They’ll never understand what the NRT (Northern Resource 
Trucking) truckers have to travel on late at night. They’ll never 
understand what the taxi operators got to put up with. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The louder the echo, the emptier the 
barrel. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Exactly. The louder the echo, the emptier the 
barrel. And that’s what a lot of people are hearing. They’re 
hearing empty promises from this government because they 
really never had a plan when it comes to highway construction 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So in my fifth closing statement, Mr. Speaker, I want to make 
one point very clear. If the government cannot rebuild these 
roads, if they refuse to rebuild them, they continue refusing to 
accept responsibility and point their finger at Ottawa, and the 
people aren’t going to buy it. They know it’s a provincial 
responsibility. You can’t fool people. The silly game of politics 
is not going to fool anybody. 
 
Why don’t they at least come to these communities and say, 
why don’t we have a major road reconstruction training 
program, to have community people from Turnor Lake, from 
Pinehouse, from Patuanak, from Dillon, from Buffalo, from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Green Lake, why don’t we put a massive 
training program over the next 5 or 10 years, use a portion of 
the northern resource dollars, use some of the tax dollars, gas 
tax dollars, and have the northern people themselves rebuild 
those roads? 
 
It may take 5 years, it may take 10 years. But at least it’s a plan, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s many people out there looking for work; 
they’re looking for training. Why doesn’t the government make 
a massive effort to take all these people that are looking for 
work, the need for highways, put on a training program and 
repair and build all these roads so they may last for the next 10, 
15, to 20 years. 
 
That’s an idea that’s been floating around for many years, Mr. 
Speaker. And you can have people from Turnor Lake rebuilding 
their own road. And they’ll build it, Mr. Speaker. They’ll build 
it good and then maintain it good. And they’ll take care of it 
because they’re the ones that built it and they’re the ones that’ll 
own it. So that’s the key thing that we’re talking about, and it’s 
very important that people understand. 
 
And I also want to send to you, Mr. Speaker, an article that 
appeared in Northern Pride, March 24, 1998, and this can be 
distributed to all the MLAs. And it’s grade 8 and 9 students at 
the Patuanak school. They have submitted letters to the editor 
and poetry to Northern Pride, hoping their voices will be heard 
and something will be done about the state of Highway 918 
which of course is from Beauval to Patuanak. 
 

And I will give this to one of the pages and they’ll xerox these 
pages and hand them to all 58 MLAs so we all are aware that 
poetry and the words of the students of the St. Louis School in 
Patuanak finally are able to hit home and that we’re able to get 
some things done on these northern roads. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, stop playing games. Stop blaming the federal 
government. Stop inflating your numbers. Start with exciting 
and innovative approaches to rebuilding our roads because we 
need them for the essential links to health care, to other 
communities, and to services and hospitals and the whole bit in 
southern Saskatchewan. We need those roads. 
 
And we know that you make an incredible amount of money on 
northern resource extraction. We also know that NRT pays you 
guys, pays the provincial government extra dollars each year for 
hauling heavier loads. At the very least put those monies back 
into the people road so our people can travel in decent and 
relative safety and that we don’t have to worry about our 
vehicles being cracked up and smashed up, and on and on and 
on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I stand here in proud support of my colleague 
from North Battleford on his motion, and I beg the indulgence 
of the rest of the Assembly members to support the motion to 
accept responsibility as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been an 
interesting afternoon observing the opposition parties in their 
one-two punch attempt to move off of an issue that is creating a 
very significant amount of problems in rural Saskatchewan. 
And doing so not only for a short term, but for an extended 
period of time. 
 
And I want to bring up to the attention of the House some 
information that the member from Athabasca speaking about 
northern transportation forgot to bring into place. The federal 
government, through two different segments, did put some 
money and accepted their responsibility in the North when they 
removed the barge system and the maintenance to the dredging 
and that, so that the barge system could function on Lake 
Athabasca. The federal government did move to provide funds, 
something in the neighbourhood of six and a half million 
dollars for the road between Points North and Black Lake. But 
the member from Athabasca did not bring that up to indicate 
that there was that type of a policy in place. 
 
This motion that the member for Redberry moved is a motion 
that would see the same type of acceptance of responsibility by 
the federal government in their removal of rail lines from the 
province of Saskatchewan, to implement funds in the same 
rationale as they did in the case of the barge . . . removal of the 
barge system, so that the highway system is in place and built in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I understand that the member from North Battleford may 
not be in agreement with this, because the benefit he feels 
occurs to his constituency through the construction of grain 
elevators in that particular area. But as you share the benefit, I 
think you should also share the cost. 
 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

And he went on to continue, Mr. Speaker, indicating that he 
was very pleased in wanting to see some more expenditures in 
his own constituency, the painting of bridges and fences. And I 
say that’s very typical of a federal Liberal to enhance the photo 
opportunities in the area that he’s in rather than deal with the 
actual issues of transportation. 
 
(1615) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the system that we have as a government 
where we have the federal government and the provincial 
government having different responsibilities, it seems to me that 
over the last number of years that I’ve been actively involved in 
politics, the federal government has been shirking its 
responsibility and offloading on the provinces not only in the 
area of railway, but also in the area of air in the sense of 
shuffling the airports onto the backs of the local municipalities; 
and in water, in the case of what I’ve just indicated, in the 
removal of the subsidy for barges. 
 
And all of that ends up meaning . . . or bringing about an 
increase in road traffic and costs thereof, and the federal 
government hasn’t been prepared to accept its responsibility by 
putting some money into it. 
 
So what I say is that if we were to accept what took place with 
the barges as the indication, where the province is putting in a 
million and a half and the federal government is putting in six 
and a half million, when the federal government meets its 
responsibility, the province’s funds are already there for about a 
billion dollar expenditure in roads if the same comparison is 
maintained. And I say to the members of the Liberal caucus 
opposite that that’s the type of responsibility that I’d like to see 
the federal government deliver. 
 
I’m going to be, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be supporting the 
motion, but I’m . . . and I do so because I believe that 
transportation is one of the key issues that maintains the 
economy of this province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the matter of 
highways, I think I’d also like to address that because of a few 
concerns in my jurisdiction, and they’ve become a lot more 
serious in the last month or so. 
 
But I think first of all, we need a comment briefly on some of 
the discussion that we’ve heard in the House here. We’ve had 
the government side, the NDP, ramble on for a long time about 
how they shouldn’t take responsibility for it, Mr. Speaker. If the 
feds only stepped in, we would have highways like Alberta — 
highways like Alberta. And we had old Highway ministers 
chatting this up thinking they had all the solutions. 
 
The other excuse that they gave, Mr. Speaker, was if it didn’t 
happen to be this debt thing. Well yes, debt has hurt every 
province in Canada. And if Tommy Douglas hadn’t started the 
debt with the unfunded liability and racked up some $8 billion 
in that area, we’d be a whole lot better off now. And everyone 
in this country knows that, except those people across there are 
not prepared to admit that, that the first dollar of debt, Mr. 
Speaker, was Tommy Douglas’s debt. And everyone knows 

that. And the sooner that the NDP over there start taking 
responsibility for their own debt, the sooner we will be able to 
address some of the problems that are out there. And now . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Now all hon. 
members will recognize that the hon. member for Rosthern is 
not located all that far from the Chair, and the Chair is having 
some difficulty in being able to hear him make his remarks. 
Debate can go on for quite some time, and I’ll invite all 
members to put their remarks on the record. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and those were 
some good comments I had to make. And it was good to see 
that the member from Lloydminster, who by the way, Mr. 
Speaker, lives so close to good highways that it’s very 
understandable that she has very little concern about the rest of 
us. Every chance she gets, the famous phrase about gone west 
applies. 
 
The other part that’s been interesting in this debate, Mr. 
Speaker, is how the Liberal third party over here has said, it is 
only the provincial responsibility. And that too is incorrect. And 
I think both of those two sides that I’ve just addressed need to 
go ahead and look at the world the way it really happens to be. 
If we go, Mr. Speaker, to other countries and see if they have a 
national transportation policy, we see how much better their 
highways are. And we need that, Mr. Speaker, in this country. 
 
We need the federal Liberals to come on side. We need Ralph 
Goodale to come on side and say there needs to be some money 
for transportation. We need to get this grain from the centre of 
Canada out to the Coast, and we need to get the products that 
are coming in from our coastal areas and from across the border 
south, we need those products coming through on good 
highways. And so the federal government needs to do 
something in that area as well. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the feds have a problem that I’ve 
already addressed, and that is they too have over the years 
racked up an enormous debt and they’ve tried to get out of that 
situation by offloading onto the provinces. And I guess, Mr. 
Speaker, as we’re talking of offloading, we just at this particular 
point have to discuss something that has been talked about 
today. 
 
We’ve talked about how many times around the equator or 
around the world or around the moon, the highways in 
Saskatchewan go. And this government seems to think that 
they're taking responsibility for fixing every mile of those. 
 
Well I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, this government’s fixing 
very few miles of those because most of those miles are being 
fixed by RMs. And there isn’t a single person living in our RMs 
right now in Saskatchewan that isn’t aware of the fact that it’s 
this government that’s taking money out of their pockets, and 
say those are your highways; you take those $30 million and 
you take them out of your grain profits, if there was such a 
thing as profits in grain. But that seems to be becoming a myth 
in our country as well. 
 
That offloading, Mr. Speaker, is what has caused a lot of 
hardship to the RMs, because their roads, the roads that they 
have to drive on, as we know very well, Mr. Speaker, in our 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

grid system in Saskatchewan, they’re every mile to every 2 
miles, east and west, north and south — almost all of those, Mr. 
Speaker, are RM responsibilities. 
 
This government has backed out of that. They said, you’re on 
your own. You want to have roads that are good enough to get 
fire trucks down in winter, you take care of it. You want roads 
to haul your school kids on, you take care of it. And so they’ve 
offloaded left, right, and centre. And it’s our rural people in our 
RMs that have been caught with that responsibility. 
 
But not just in the RMs, Mr. Speaker. This government has also 
offloaded onto cities and the highways that end up going 
through our cities and our larger communities. Those various 
local taxpayers have had to pick that up as well, because this 
NDP government has backed out of the responsibility that they 
have had for decades, Mr. Speaker, for decades. 
 
And there was a time, Mr. Speaker, when this government took 
its responsibility and took a fair share of what they were 
supposed to have with support for rural roads. And they put that 
money in place to help the citizens of this province. They’ve 
backed out of that and they’re doing none of that now, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s to their detriment and it’s to their shame. And 
everyone else in Saskatchewan has had to pick up the load for 
this government that doesn’t know how to run its own affairs. 
 
They have money for all sorts of things, but not for RMs. They 
go to Guyana, Mr. Speaker. Millions of dollars. We haven’t 
even got a clue how many are out there, but we know that it’s 
way too many. And there’s probably going to be more coming. 
 
They can go to new Zealand and throw away millions of 
dollars. But what did they give to the RMs, Mr. Speaker? Less. 
A four-letter word that the RMs have heard from this 
government year after year, and that’s less. 
 
NST, Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money out of the country. What 
do the RMs get? Less. Channel Lake comes along, Mr. Speaker. 
Money lost over there. What did the RMs and the cities get for 
roads and infrastructure? Less. 
 
It’s the famous four-letter word from this government to 
everyone in the province. And the member for Swift Current 
sits back there as if he’s going to pontificate on this one as well. 
He knows well enough what his highways are like in that area. 
He knows well enough how many lives have been lost on that 
section of the Trans-Canada very close to his area. 
 
He knows well enough what his rural roads are like. I’ve driven 
on those rural roads. They’re a mess. And they’re not a mess 
because the RMs are not doing their job; they’re a mess because 
this government has abrogated its responsibility and just says, 
we’re going to give you less and give you less again. That’s the 
kind of government we have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now at this particular point, I need to turn the attention of this 
government to my particular constituency. And yes, after we’ve 
lost probably more lives than any other constituency in this 
province, this government did some twinning, some twinning 
— about 4 or 5 miles along Highway 12, and maybe about 
twice that many miles along Highway 11. 
 

However, there’s a major highway there that has a lot of traffic 
that has absolutely fallen apart in the last month to six weeks 
and that’s Highway 312, Mr. Speaker. That highway was 
bearable. Compared to the rest of highways in Saskatchewan, it 
would have been an average highway. Compared to Alberta, 
I’m not sure what they would have called it, but it wouldn’t 
have been a highway. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Cow path. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Cow path possibly. If in fact there were no 
cows in the area, you could allot it to that because grass would 
grow there on occasion as well. However Highway 312, as soon 
as the road bans were off this spring, has fallen totally apart. 
There are big chunks of highway out there. There’s probably 
not a chunk there that two or three people couldn’t pick up and 
walk off. It’s all broken up. It’s in bits and pieces. There are 
trenches and ditches in the middle of the road. It’s become a 
total disaster. 
 
And recently — in fact, it was this weekend — I was talking 
with an individual from my constituency and he says, do people 
ever complain about Highway 312? Yes they do. Every time 
they drive on it they complain about Highway 312, Mr. 
Speaker, because it is terrible. And the unfortunate thing is it’s a 
highway that’s very critical to that constituency. It’s basically a 
highway that links the two bridges that cross the river between 
Saskatoon and Prince Albert. And so for that particular reason, 
this government needs to pay some attention to that particular 
road. 
 
The grain traffic that goes there goes off in all directions. It may 
go to the Can-Oat on the west side of the constituency or go off 
to some of the major elevators on the east side and coming 
across both from the Blaine Lake area and the Wakaw area. 
And so that Highway 312 is a very critical highway in grain 
transportation. 
 
And what has this particular government done? I would 
challenge anyone to drive down that road and find one thing 
they’ve done on it. They’ve done absolutely nothing. The fact is 
they’ve done less, and there’s that four-letter word this 
government’s so famous for. They’ve done less again than they 
did last year and it’s become a real disaster. 
 
I think as we look at those particular highways, there’s another 
part in my constituency that needs to be mentioned because I 
think it shows the ineptitude of the way this government builds 
highways even when they have a chance to do it right. 
 
They created an intersection, Mr. Speaker, on the divided 
section that was on Highway 11, an intersection that comes off 
of Warman Road. They bought up a lot of land. They could 
have had a curve there that would have been a 100-kilometre 
curve — lots of room, lots of space. What do they do? They 
create a curve that’s probably — well it’s hard to call it a curve, 
it’s more like just a corner — about 50, 40 kilometres would be 
about maximum on that one. 
 
They used to have a sign when they finished off this curve on 
this intersection, Mr. Speaker, which was about three years ago. 
They put a sign up there to indicate there was a corner. They 
put the sign up, Mr. Speaker, and they put it up again and again 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

and again and again. For the first half-year they must have put it 
up a dozen times, because the intersection is so totally ignorant 
and undriveable that people continually kept going through the 
intersection, taking down the sign. 
 
So they’ve quit, Mr. Speaker, they just quit putting up the sign. 
So they put it half a mile down the road, thinking nobody there 
. . . no one would hit it at that point. They were right on that 
part — that no one’s hit the sign. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if you went to that particular intersection, you 
would be very hard-pressed, driving back and forth weekly or 
daily for a whole year, not to find skid marks going off in the 
ditch where someone couldn’t make that intersection, because it 
just doesn’t make any sense. It’s one of those curves that just 
doesn’t work. It isn’t identified properly, it’s built poorly, and 
it’s been done that way in spite of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
they had all the room and all the space to do it correctly. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, those were the issues I wanted to 
address this afternoon and that is the abysmal job this 
government’s done with Highway 312. The abysmal job 
they’ve done when they build a highway and don’t know how 
to do it properly. And the offloading they’ve done on all the 
rural roads. 
 
And so when we talk about our transportation system in this 
particular province, we know if this government and their 
famous four-letter word . . . and that is, people in 
Saskatchewan, you’re going to get less for that — you’re going 
to get less. 
 
Now there’s a comment made about 40-some per cent of the tax 
dollars from gasoline not being exactly the right figure and we 
had someone chirp from that side and say it’s over 50 per cent. 
Well isn’t that amazing? So we’ve got a halfwit Robin Hood. 
He doesn’t keep it all — he only keeps half of it. 
 
Now isn’t that just amazing, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
would take credit for really only taking half the money that they 
collect from a particular tax and misusing it. Truly amazing that 
they could take credit for that and stand in their place and say, 
guess what, we’re only misusing half the money. We’re only 
taking half the money that we’re taking in taxes from gasoline 
and throwing it to a big pot where it gets lost and no one knows 
where it goes. Take credit for that sort of thing. 
 
(1630) 
 
And all we have to do — and I’ll ask the members across to do 
their own checking on this, Mr. Speaker, so they get the 
numbers right — do a check in Manitoba, do a check in 
Alberta, and see the percentage of their gasoline tax that goes to 
roads. Do a check on how much . . . what percentage of their 
gasoline tax goes to their roads, and I think this government 
will see again, the famous word, less goes to roads in this 
province out of that tax than any place else. It’s a disaster. 
 
And one more thing about our federal people out there. We had 
a document that was circulated through the House awhile back, 
Mr. Speaker, that indicated how much money the federal 
government was putting into roads. And in the next three, four 
years for Saskatchewan, there’s nothing — absolutely nothing, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Liberals out there, who have a few people here that carry 
their name — not proudly so, I can assure you — but do carry 
their name, they weren’t spending a dollar on the next numbers 
of years in Saskatchewan but they had money for the 
Maritimes, they had money for Ontario, they had money for 
Quebec. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if this government would take the tax 
dollars that they collect from the people in this province and 
spend it on highways, and if the federal government would 
spend an equal share to what they’re spending in other 
provinces in Saskatchewan, we would have the roads we ought 
to have without anyone paying any more tax, without anyone 
paying any more taxes. 
 
So this government can get its act in gear; federal government 
does the same thing; we will have those roads and no one can 
hide behind the fact that it’ll take a whole lot more taxes. Use 
your money wisely; forget about Guyana and NST and Channel 
Lake. Spend it wisely; spend it reasonably and things will be 
okay. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:33 p.m. until 4:34 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 
D’Autremont Heppner  
 

Nays — 17 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Upshall 
Kowalsky Koenker Trew 
Renaud Lorje Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Wall 
Kasperski Ward Murray 
Langford Thomson  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Investing in 
Transportation: A Transportation Strategy For Saskatchewan 
People. Mr. Speaker, this government has many visions for the 
people of Saskatchewan. A wellness model for the best health 
care system, bar none in the world, the envy of our American 
friends and our Alberta and Manitoba neighbours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — A social safety policy, the first comprehensive 
review of the social program in Canada in thirty years. A 
program which will offer concrete, sustainable ways and 
methods of people becoming contributing members of society 
rather than staying caught in the welfare cycle. Another great 
policy we have. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have a vision with regards to 
transportation. A safe, modern and efficient transportation 
system that supports economic growth and social well-being in 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

Saskatchewan, despite what the naysayers would have one 
believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the most extensive highway 
and rural road network in Canada. On a per capita basis, 
Saskatchewan has twice as many roads and highways as any 
other province. Our 185,000 kilometre network was developed 
to serve our widely dispersed communities, our agricultural 
producers, and our resource industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government’s major policy shifts in the 
last little while in the field of transportation have far-reaching 
implications for Saskatchewan producers, shippers, and the 
transportation industry. The federal government has eliminated 
transportation subsidies, reduced regulations, and 
commercialized airport and port facilities. Deregulation of the 
rail industry weakens shipper protection measures and allows 
the railways to proceed with reckless abandonment, their branch 
line policy in Saskatchewan. 
 
The national airports policy will place an added burden on the 
affected communities in the province by transferring ownership 
of eight federally owned airports in Saskatchewan to local 
authorities, the province, communities, or other interest groups. 
There will be no federal support for the airport in Swift Current 
or other airports without scheduled service. Of course the 
profitable airports like the one in Toronto, Montreal, they were 
privatized and sold to their cronies so that they could gouge the 
travelling public. Subsidies that were used from those airports 
to support the airports in rural Saskatchewan . . . and they call 
themselves a party of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for years Saskatchewan and other provinces have 
urged the federal government to enter into negotiations to 
develop a coordinated national transportation policy. Such a 
program needs to be a shared responsibility, but the federal 
government has avoided making a commitment to date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, words will never express my shame and 
disappointment as Canada remains the only federal country in 
the western world that does not have a national transportation 
policy, where the national government does not contribute a 
significant portion to the cost of maintaining a national highway 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members often talk of the highways system in 
the United States, but they fail to realize, or conveniently forget, 
that the national highways in the United States are funded 90 
per cent by the federal government, whereas we in 
Saskatchewan get zero. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is faced with dramatic challenges 
that have significant implications. The abandonment of rail 
lines without any competition will only lead to higher freight 
rates, excessively high freight charges as a result. The loss of 
the Crow benefit, a significant, permanent cost increase. And so 
we are treated by the federals. The second major challenge is 
the repair and the upgrading of our road network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from, I think it’s Rosthern, suggested 
that the provincial tax was not on fuel, was not being used the 
way that it should. Both the Tories and the Liberals often 
suggest that the provincial tax on gasoline should be used to 

fund highway and road construction and repair. 
 
Contrary to popular misconception, the fuel tax is not, nor has it 
ever been, a road tax dedicated to road construction. And 
financial experts have cautioned governments against having 
dedicated taxes. The fuel tax is a sales tax, and as such goes into 
the province’s General Revenue Fund and is used to help fund 
all government programs, including health, education, social 
programs, debt repayment, and of course highway work. 
 
If the amount of money collected through the fuel tax on gas 
and diesel fuel is compared to the total budget of the 
Department of Highways and Transportation, the figures, which 
show that over the period of 1992-93 through 1996-97, the 
average annual fuel tax revenue was 299 million, and the 
average annual Department of Highways and Transportation 
budget was 173 million, or an average of 57 per cent of the fuel 
tax revenues collected . . . Now the hon. member from Rosthern 
says, they brag about paying 50 per cent of it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in 1997-1998 the DHT (Department of 
Highways and Transportation) expenditure amounted to almost 
80 per cent of the fuel tax revenue collected. The member from 
Rosthern would have to do some more research before he 
comes out with those statements. 
 
Now this could be considered reasonable in view of the fact that 
the province is still spending approximately $2 million per day 
because of the former administration of which he is a member. 
He was not in the House at that time, but he is a member of the 
party which left this province with this horrendous debt. And so 
that is why we cannot spend more on the highways. 
 
The opposite member says that all that this government says is 
less, less. What he would do is spend more, more. And he 
would be prepared to spend a billion dollar deficit just like the 
former administration did and leave this province in the terrible 
financial shape that it was when we took over. Mr. Speaker, 
same old story. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Same old Tory. Same old story — 
spend, spend, spend. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Right. 
 
The previous administration discontinued the fuel tax during the 
years 1982 to ’83. Through 1986-87 an estimated 664 million in 
fuel tax revenue went uncollected. Had the fuel tax been a 
dedicated road tax at that point, what that would have meant, 
there would have been no money to spend on roads. 
 
In constant dollars, if 57 per cent of that foregone revenue was 
available for highway construction, it would fund 
approximately 1,000 kilometres of high quality, primary 
two-lane highway. And that’s what we lost. 
 
Also if that $664 million had been saved at 9 per cent interest, 
by the end of the 1995-96 fiscal year it would have been worth 
1.8 billion. By the same analogy the fact that 664 million was 
not collected has added 1.8 billion to the accumulated 
provincial debt, and then the hon. member over there complains 
about how we handle finances. 
 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1998 

Saskatchewan’s fuel tax rate is 15 cents per litre for gas and 
diesel, 9 cents per litre for propane. Those rates have not 
increased since March 19, 1993. The federal excise tax on fuels 
in all provinces is 10 cents per litre on gas, 4 cents on diesel, 
and zero on propane. The federal government collects more 
than $6 billion each year from fuel taxes, but spends less than 
500 million each year on road transportation with as much as 98 
per cent of that 500 million being spent in eastern Canada. 
 
In the 1997-98 budget speech we announced a 2.5 billion 
10-year commitment to improve Saskatchewan’s roads and 
highways. As a first step the Department of Highways and 
Transportation budget for 1997-98 was increased over the 
previous year by 30 million, or 18 per cent, to 198.8 million. 
 
(1645) 
 
And they complained that we haven’t spent 250 million in the 
last two years. It was pointed out clearly to them that we would 
vamp up to that $250 million. And you can rest assured that 
that’s what will occur is that over a period of 10 years the 
average — and, Mr. Speaker, perhaps that’s what they can’t 
understand is the average — an average of 250 million will be 
spent each and every year. 
 
With the loss of the branch lines, Mr. Speaker, and with the 
elevator consolidation and so forth, the traffic of course has 
become much heavier on the roads. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
entire financial responsibility for maintaining and improving the 
highway infrastructure has been placed, by default, on the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
The cost of the ship and grain transport from rails to roads can 
be roughly determined by the dramatically increased 
maintenance costs on our thin membrane surface highways 
which are taking the bulk of such traffic. In addition, 
significantly increased direct transportation costs will be borne 
directly by producers impacted by branch line closures as they 
are forced to buy larger vehicles and haul greater distances. 
 
The Saskatchewan government has recognized these realities 
and is vigorously pursuing various options. The provincial 
government believes that, given the right circumstances, 
short-line railways can provide efficient transportation service, 
reduce the stress on the road system, and prevent or diminish 
some job loss. 
 
Historical expenditures, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to mention 
just a couple of things. During the period 1991 through 1996, 
Saskatchewan expenditures on provincial highways and airports 
totalled 1.02 billion; on municipal rural roads — 185.7 million; 
on municipal urban streets and roads — 80.4 million; total 
during the period — 1.21 billion. 
 
During the same period, the federal contribution to highways 
and provincial airports totalled 41.4 million; on municipal roads 
they spent 22.5 million; on municipal urban streets and roads — 
10.8 million; and a total during the period of 74.7 million. The 
combined total provincial and federal expenditures during the 
year — 1.366 billion. 
 
The provincial percentage of that total — and this is the 
interesting thing — was 94.5. Mr. Speaker, the federal 

percentage, a grand total of 5.4. 
 
We now come to another thing which is of great interest to me, 
the twinning of the highways. Mr. Speaker, we have heard 
many petitions with regards to the twinning of the No. 1; 
haven’t had much to say about the Yellowhead. 
 
Highway No. 1 — the Trans-Canada which runs through my 
constituency — the Highway No. 1 runs for 655 kilometres 
from Manitoba to Alberta. Of that length, 373 kilometres are 
already a four-lane divided highway. The balance is 113 
kilometres, which is 71-mile section from just west of Gull 
Lake to the Alberta border; and 173-kilometre section from east 
of Indian Head to the Manitoba border remains as two-lanes 
highway. 
 
On the western section it is estimated to cost approximately 49 
million to build another parallel two-lane highway adjacent to 
the existing highway. And on the eastern section it is estimated 
to cost 83 million to build a new parallel two-lane highway. 
Total cost of both projects is estimated to be approximately 
$132 million. 
 
And this is what the opposition states: spend that money, spend 
it now; get those highways forming, and so forth. Of course we 
are going to do that. We’re going to do it with a plan. And we 
have promised that within 15 years we will twin not only the 
No. 1 but also the Yellowhead. 
 
In 15 years, Mr. Speaker, we hope that the federal government 
will see the error of their ways. 
 
The provincial government, Mr. Speaker, has committed to 
complete the twinning of No. 1 east and west and No. 16 from 
the Battlefords to Lloydminster within the next 15 years. If 
federal cost assistance was made available, that time frame 
could possibly be reduced to eight or seven years — seven or 
eight. Meanwhile, the provincial government is exploring all 
possible options to accelerate the twinning projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amount of maintenance and repair required to 
maintain a road surface in acceptable condition is dependent on 
many factors — the original construction standards, volume, 
type of traffic, weather conditions, and so forth. We have been 
spending approximately 2,300 per kilometre each year on 
maintenance on the thin membraned highway system as an 
overall average. Even so, conditions are getting worse. 
 
Increases in grain haul and oilfield traffic which were never 
intended to use the TMS (thin membrane surface) system are 
major contributors to the deteriorating road conditions. Our 
total maintenance expenditure on these roads in the ’97-98 
fiscal year will be approximately 19.8 million. It would cost 
about 160 million to bring all TMS highways back to a 
condition which would be considered acceptable, and 
approximately 30 million every year thereafter to keep them in 
that condition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes that we have a 
leadership role to play in transportation issues here in the 
province. But we cannot and should not do it in isolation. As a 
province we can only try to influence what the federal 
government does. Based on history, we’ve been very 



May 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

disappointed with the lack of willingness on their part to 
consider representations we made on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan people. But even when all the western provinces 
have reached consensus and gone forward collectively, we have 
not seen much willingness from the federal government to work 
with us. 
 
Our provincial government does not operate that way. We are 
committed to working with producers and others on 
transportation issues. Once again, the delinquent player in this 
entire scenario is the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, transportation is not simply a matter of building 
roads and railways, it’s a matter of national unity as well, and it 
deserves much more attention and financial support from our 
national government. Together we can build a transportation 
system that meets the social and economic needs of the people 
of Saskatchewan. Whether it is a national highway system or 
safe all-weather access to local hospitals and schools, 
involvement from Saskatchewan . . . our involvement is 
necessary in order that we use the funds allocated to 
transportation as effectively as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:54 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1200 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1200 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
  Lorje.........................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1201 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1201 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Lost Boy Found with Help from Police and Volunteers 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1201 
 Aboriginal Awareness Week 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1201 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
 Acknowledging Achievements of Young Athletes 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
 Tribute to Leader, Saskatchewan 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
 Spiritwood Students Win Youth Business Awards 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
 Cuban model of Saskatchewan 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1203 
 New Drag-line being Constructed 
  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................1203 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Additional Hiring of Nurses 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1203 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1203 
 Metis Hunting Rights 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1204 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1204 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1205 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1205 
 Northern Logging Development 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1205 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1206 
 Additional Hiring of Nurses 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1206 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1206 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1207 
 Child Prostitution 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1207 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1207 
 Foster Parent Recruitment 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1208 
 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 57  The Education Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 modifiant la loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1208 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 5 — National Highways Program 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1208 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1210 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1213 
 Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................1215 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1215 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1217 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1221 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1222 
 Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................1224 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1224 
 
 
 


