





























































Hansard: June 10, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1867 
 June 10, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the petition I have on behalf of Saskatchewan is as 
follows. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the 
communities of Melfort, Naicam, St. Brieux, Gronlid, Weldon, 
Birch Hills. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen’s organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone, 
regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Yorkton, 
Kelvington, Fosston, Lintlaw, St. Gregor, Wadena, across the 
north-east corner of the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, as well to present 
petitions. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions I am presenting today are 
signed by individuals from the Glen Ewen, Milestone, Riceton, 
Zenon Park, Arborfield, Regina, Saskatoon, Lampman areas of 
the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Oxbow, Alameda, 
Storthoaks, Carnduff, and I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens in the north-east concerning the future of the 
Carrot River Hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate actions to ensure the survival of the Carrot 
River Hospital. 

 
Signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Nipawin and Codette. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today regarding Jack Messer and our call for an 
independent public inquiry to look into the facts surrounding 
the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
Everyone that has signed this petition are from Gainsborough, 
Melfort, Tisdale, Hudson Bay, all over Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions as well 
to present to the Assembly this afternoon dealing with the issue 
of foreign investment of Crown corporations in Saskatchewan 
and the people’s view that that is inappropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the Gravelbourg, Lake 
Alma areas of the province and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Petitions from the 
good citizens of Saskatchewan keep pouring in concerned with 
our health care provisions in this province. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

And the good people of Sintaluta, Weyburn, Benson, Estevan, 
North Portal, Bienfait, Oxbow, and Torquay would like their 
voices to be heard through these petitions. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions concerning the confusing and dangerous situation at 
the junction of the Yellowhead and Highway 40. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to relocate Highway 40 to east 
of the David Laird Campground in order to alleviate the 
congestion at the entrance to the city of North Battleford. 



1868 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

Your petitioners come from Battleford, North Battleford, 
Cochin, and Paradise Hill. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the Plains 
hospital closure. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Swift Current, Moose Jaw, Pense, Waldeck, 
Ponteix, Ernfold, also the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition this afternoon, and the petition’s in reference 
to the high power costs of northern Saskatchewan. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to address the issue of reducing 
the high costs of power rates in the North. 
 

And the people that have signed these many petitions, Mr. 
Speaker, some of them are from Canoe Lake, some are from 
Camsell Portage from Uranium City. I have other people from 
Uranium City as well, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got people here from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse that have signed the petition. I’ve got others 
from Ile-a-la-Crosse as well. I’ve got the great community of 
Canoe Narrows that have also signed a number of petitions. 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the final petition of course, these 
certainly complement the thousands of other names we have 
submitted. And I so present on behalf of the people of the 
North. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today in bringing forward petitions. These 
petitions, Mr. Speaker, are in people’s efforts in saving the 
Plains hospital and in fact health care in general. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these pages and pages 
of petitions and felt that it was the Liberal caucus that had to 
raise them was from . . . 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again on behalf of citizens who are seeking justice for men and 
women who have lost spouses in work-related accidents. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan, whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and their revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Today, Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed these petitions 
are from Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Wartime, Regina, and there 
are actually some people who have signed from out of province, 
from the province of Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today your 
petitioner’s prayer for relief reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These all come from the community of Morse, Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received. 
 

Of citizens humbly praying: for agreements with other 
levels of government to fund twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; to save the Plains Health Centre; to enact 
legislation to completely ban the practice of night hunting; 
twinning of the remaining portions of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan; to cancel severance payments 
to Jack Messer and to call an independent public inquiry 
surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco; for a moratorium on 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre; to the Worker’s 
Compensation Board Act to be amended to reinstate 
pensions for the disenfranchised widows and widowers of 
Saskatchewan; to immediately halt all plans to close the 
Plains Health Centre; to take action to allow the North to 
join the rest of Saskatchewan; to ensure the survival of the 
Carrot River Hospital; to ensure service in radiology is 
maintained in the North Central Health District; and to 
allow Saskatchewan citizens to erect a cross on the 
highway where their loved one was killed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Seated in 
the west gallery are some very fine people and I welcome them 
all. But I specifically want to welcome a group from MacNeill 
School in my constituency. They are, as I said, Mr. Speaker, 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1869 

seated in the gallery. And to you and to my colleagues, I 
introduce 14 grade 5 students who are accompanied by their 
teacher, Mrs. Sue Leech. They are also . . . Present with them 
are their chaperons Mrs. Smotra-Cook and Mrs. Cochrane. 
 
Now I was — earlier this spring — I was in and around their 
school when they had their spring carnival. And I can assure 
you that this is a very energetic group that is here, and I know 
that they will look forward to the proceedings and I look 
forward to meeting with them later on today. 
 
So please extend to these students and their teachers a very 
warm welcome. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take pleasure in 
introducing to you, seated in your gallery, my cousin, Ken 
Dowie. And hon. members will recall Michael Dowie, his son, 
who was one of our pages last year. I’d ask all members to 
kindly welcome him this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce a friend of mine; he used to work with 
a rural service centre in Watson, and now he’s with a pork 
implementation team here in Regina. Regina’s gain is our loss, 
so welcome Norm Jensen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased this 
afternoon to introduce to you and members of the House, seated 
in your Assembly, 38 students from the Dr. Brass School in 
Yorkton. They, this morning, visited the Motherwell building. 
They’re going to spend some time of course this afternoon here 
in the legislature, both observing the session and also touring 
the building. And then they’re going on later to Government 
House. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is one of the classrooms 
that you visited in Yorkton, and the teachers in this school take 
a strong interest in the workings of the Legislative Buildings 
and the legislature. Accompanying the students today is Mrs. 
Mauri Ingham and Mrs. Glenda Lazurko, and the bus driver is 
Burke Bullock. So I’d ask all members of the Assembly could 
join with me this afternoon and welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure today to introduce some former 
neighbours of mine from Prince Albert, formerly from Prince 
Albert, who have chosen career opportunities now in Saskatoon 
— Gale and Eileen Blythe. Along with them today is their son, 
Mark, who has been one of our sessional staff during this 
session. Mark is accompanied by his friend, Laura Vangen. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to Mark’s parents, that he did a 
very fine job for us. And I’m fortunate to say before he leaves 
to further his studies, to complete his Ph.D. in Edmonton this 
fall, he’ll be joining my staff as a summer student until he 

leaves to further his studies. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and to the members of the Assembly, two friends of mine who 
are also seated in the west gallery. Up in the extreme far corner 
is Bob Loewen, who is a retired educator, a man who is keenly 
interested in politics, and has been . . . often visits the 
legislature and worked here for some time. And I’d like the 
members to welcome Bob back to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — And kitty-corner in the west gallery is 
another person who has been interested in politics I think ever 
since he wore a diaper, Mr. Speaker. And that is Ray Funk, who 
was the former MP (Member of Parliament) for Prince 
Albert-Churchill River, and is now running a consulting 
company known as Spruce River Research. And welcome to 
Regina, Ray. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you today to members of the 
Assembly, a group of 39 young people from Forest Grove 
School in the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland. These are 
grade 8 students and they’re accompanied by their teachers, 
Mrs. Fowler-Thomson and Mr. Tranborg. 
 
I’m sure that they’ll have many questions based on the 
proceedings that they witness when I meet with them after 
question period. And I ask all members to welcome them in the 
accustomed way. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
introduce some people in your gallery, but I’m going to start by 
saying I hope this introduction would be seen to include all the 
people who work in this building, and them really here 
representing all the fine people that work in this building. And 
because they’re very shy, I’m going to introduce these three 
very important women in my life who work in my office as 
Hear No Evil, See No Evil, and Do No Evil. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I also want to join my colleague from Prince Albert in 
welcoming an old friend, older friend — notice I didn’t say old 
— Mr. Ray Funk, from Prince Albert. Ray was a former MP 
and I just wanted to take the opportunity on behalf of my 
caucus to welcome Mr. Funk to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, you’ll find this hard to believe 
but there’s still people who haven’t been introduced yet. I 
notice a couple of friends sitting in your gallery. I’d like to 
introduce to the Assembly, Sara — sorry or actually in the 
government gallery — Sara McQuarrie who is joining us from 



1870 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

my riding, she lives in my riding, and accompanying her also is 
Brett Quiring. 
 
I notice both of them here today. I thought they should be 
canvassing up in the Eastview by-election, but they obviously 
are so confident about how we’re going to do that they decided 
to take the day off and come here. So if you’d join me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Trailer Parts Expansion 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
announce today another business expansion in Swift Current. 
National Trailer Parts Ltd. recently completed a 500,000 
expansion of their warehouse on Highway No. 1 west, making 
it the largest distributor of trailer parts in western Canada. 
 
Keith Brown established the company in 1992 because there 
was a market for utility trailer components. Since then the 
business has grown very quickly. National Trailer distributes 
rims, tires, axles, and jacks for stock, horse, and flat deck 
trailers. 
 
At the grand opening of the new warehouse on Friday, June 5, 
Keith Brown said Swift Current is an ideal location for his 
business because of its proximity to the highway and the high 
quality of the local workforce. 
 
Keith Brown started his company with three employees. In five 
years his staff grew to 20. Today, the expansion will mean five 
additional jobs for Swift Current. 
 
He told the crowd at the grand opening that great customer 
service is the key to his success. He thanked his competent, 
loyal employees who, he said, have a strong work ethic. 
 
National Trailer Parts serves customers from all across the 
prairie provinces, British Columbia, and the mid-western 
United States. 
 
Success stories like this are happening all across Saskatchewan 
and our strong provincial economy is making it possible for 
business women and men like Keith Brown to expand, creating 
jobs and growing the local economy. 
 
Congratulations to the staff of National Trailer Parts in Swift 
Current. Thank you. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Membership 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
unlike the other two parties in this House, the Saskatchewan 
Party doesn’t feel that it’s necessary to take cheap shots at the 
representatives of the media, in particular those from the 
newspaper. 
 
However, I must take serious issue with an item, which 
appeared in this morning’s Regina Leader-Post. In today’s 
editorial the member from Thunder Creek was referred . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Now I’ll ask for 
the cooperation of all of the members on both sides of the 
House to enable the member who’s making the statement to be 
heard by the Chair and anyone else who is interested and I think 
that will include a large number of folks . . . Order. And I’ll ask 
for the cooperation of the House to enable the member to be 
heard. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, this is an 
important statement and I’m glad they’re all interested. In 
today’s editorial the member from Thunder Creek was referred 
to as a Saskatchewan Party MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly). While we don’t think we’re going to sue the 
Leader-Post for slandering us in such a horrendous manner, I 
think I should take this opportunity to set the record straight for 
the people of Saskatchewan. The member from Thunder Creek 
is not a member of our caucus, never has been a member of our 
caucus, and rest assured, never ever will be invited to be a 
member of this caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the door is barred for this member. While there 
probably will be a dispersal draft of the Liberal caucus after this 
session, we may want to have first pick but certainly not last, 
which is the most likely spot for the member from Thunder 
Creek to be chosen, except perhaps for his evil twin, the 
member from Wood River. He was a Liberal problem 
yesterday; he’s a Liberal problem today; he will be a Liberal 
problem tomorrow. Amen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canada’s Representative for the International 
Hunter Education Association 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A constituent of 
mine, John Panio, has recently been elected at the Canadian 
international level to represent Canada for the International 
Hunter Education Association. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now I’m afraid I have to ask the 
House for order for the second time. I’m just plain unable to 
hear the hon. member making his statement to the House. And I 
do ask for the cooperation of all members to enable the member 
who’s making a statement to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. John Panio lives 
in Montmartre where he spends his retirement after a 
distinguished teaching career. However, retirement is not for 
John. He continues to work in various associations and 
committees including Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation 
Association, Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, cottage owners 
association, to name a few. 
 
John has spent many years raising social awareness about 
responsibilities, ethics, and safety. Several years ago 
Saskatchewan took the initiative to change the atmosphere 
around hunting and firearms due to the infamous Bill C-68 
firearms legislation in Ottawa. Saskatchewan’s policies on 
hunter safety are now a model for Canada and more recently, 38 
states want to buy the Saskatchewan program. 
 
John says he took a hunter safety class in 1983 and has since 
dedicated himself to the education of hunters. Hunting, 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1871 

trapping, and fishing are important both in terms of 
employment and recreation in our province. However, a safe 
environment in which to participate in these activities is also 
very important. 
 
I would like to congratulate John in his recent election, and I 
have confidence that he will continue to work to educate young 
people, hunters, and other outdoor enthusiasts and represent our 
province and country very ably at the international level. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Top 10 List 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, I received a fax this morning 
from David Letterman. He was shocked to read this morning’s 
Leader-Post and discover I was referred to as a Sask Party 
MLA. Knowing I’d never do so, he faxed me the top 10 reasons 
for not joining the Sask Tory Party: 
 
10. I’d rather eliminate the extreme right than human rights. 
 
9. Unlike the member from Turncoat . . . or Saltcoats, I don’t 
want to see our roads return to gravel. 
 
8. I wouldn’t want to be sitting in the pick-up when a water 
bomber drops tonnes of water on the member from Cannington. 
 
7. I could never bring myself to support, oh, what’s-his-name? 
— something Petersen as leader. 
 
6. I’m not nocturnal. I’d not be able to find the Schmidt house 
for those meetings in the dead of the night. 
 
5. Slush funds are meant for 7 Eleven slurpees not re-election 
campaigns. 
 
4. It’s branding season in Saskatchewan. While I’ve done some 
branding in my lifetime I’d never want to be branded myself. 
 
3. I only own one coat. 
 
2. I don’t want to share the same phone number and office 
space as the Conservative Party. 
 
And finally the number one reason I’d never join the 
Saskatchewan Party: 
 
I don’t want to have to go to the correctional centre to have my 
campaign paper signed. 
 

Walk A Mile in our Moccasins 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Minister of Justice, the Minister of Post-Secondary Education, 
and I along with many others participated in the Walk A Mile in 
our Moccasins campaign against violence. We joined together 
in this walk to demonstrate our common view that violence is 
wrong. 
 
Yesterday we gathered for a prayer and sweet grass ceremony 
and walked a mile. We walked not to raise the profile of any 
specific act of violence but we walked to demonstrate against 

violence in any form. Many people joined us along the way, 
Mr. Speaker. The walk ended at Scott Collegiate where a pipe 
ceremony and a feast was held at a tepee. 
 
One way of thinking about our actions and how they affect 
others was presented to me in the following interesting way. 
Think of a circle, drop a pebble into a pond, and the ripples 
expand outward. That is how it is with our actions both good 
and bad. 
 
Violence works the same way. Violent acts affect us all and it is 
up to all of us to ensure that we stand against violence, 
whatever form it takes. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Remembering a Great Saskatchewan Citizen 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently a 
well-known gentleman who was the president of the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation passed away. And I would 
like to just acknowledge the work that Mr. Jack Redman 
contributed to the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. 
 
Mr. Redman and his wife ran the Wapella hotel. They were 
very involved in the Wapella Wildlife Federation. He was 
president of the Wapella Wildlife Federation, and most recently 
was president of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. 
 
Mr. Redman was very dedicated, not only to his family, but to 
working with others who were interested in Saskatchewan 
wildlife, and certainly building and promoting the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. 
 
I would like to acknowledge at this time that on June 20 the 
Wapella Wildlife Federation in memorium are going to hold a 
cairn dedication and they’re going to place a cairn on a piece of 
property that they own, in memory of Mr. Jack Redman. 
 
I certainly extend my sympathy to the family and commend the 
Wapella Wildlife Federation for this honorarium that they . . . 
and this cairn dedication that they are undertaking to remember 
a great Saskatchewan citizen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Readers' Program 
 
Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow and I, together put our 
reputation and that of every MLA in the Assembly right on the 
line. We performed without a net; we played without a helmet; 
and we flew without a parachute. And, Mr. Speaker, fortunately 
for all of us, we are both here to tell the tale. 
 
We visited St Peter’s Elementary School in Unity and learned 
about a fever sweeping through the school. It’s called the 
accelerated reading virus, the AR virus for short. 
 
Students who contract this virus choose one of many specially 
marked books in the school library. They then take a multiple 



1872 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

choice test on the computer in the lab. The computer tells them 
their score in percentages and in reading points. It’s very 
complex, Mr. Speaker. Points range from a half a point to 21 
points per book, depending on its difficulty. 
 
The school goal was 4,500 points. As of yesterday, the total was 
5,236 points. All students and staff are to be congratulated. 
 
The minister and I walked right into the middle of the virus. We 
were read a book by one of the school’s top readers — I won’t 
tell you how many points our book was worth — then we both 
took the test. Mr. Speaker, we are proud members of the 
Legislative Assembly and we did not let you down — we both 
passed. Thank you. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Channel Lake Inquiry 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, for three months you’ve been ducking 
your responsibility, hiding from the Channel Lake hearings, and 
refusing to explain your role in this whole messed-up affair. 
Today we’re finally going to have some answers to questions in 
the Committee of Finance. The timing’s actually pretty good, 
because just this morning John Wright directly contradicted 
your version of events. 
 
From the day of the throne speech and quoted in the March 10 
Leader-Post, you told reporters that Jack Messer had not been 
asked to resign. This morning under oath, John Wright said he 
was directed by the board of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation) to ask for Mr. Messer’s resignation directly and 
inform him that if he did not resign by 6 o’clock on that day, he 
would be fired. 
 
Mr. Premier, why did you make those false statements about 
Jack Messer’s dismissal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite, obviously this issue has been dealt with in a 
thousand different ways and a thousand different documents 
were tabled before the committee starting on March 10 when 
we delivered to the Assembly a report from Crown Investments 
Corporation, the Deloitte Touche report, later the Gerrand 
report — all of these documents have been tabled. Nothing has 
had a more full airing in this province than the issue of Channel 
Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I would urge the member to do, who has 
been fairly calm the last three weeks about this issue . . . going 
through the work of the committee which I would say the 
members opposite have worked diligently on — members of the 
Liberal, the Conservatives, members of our caucus — I would 
just urge you to continue that work . . . Not again jump to 
conclusions which after three weeks of calmness today you 
come back to the House and want to demand this and that. 
Complete your work, write the report, and I’m sure that you 
will find that the process has been satisfactory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
on behalf of the Premier, are you prepared to clarify the direct 
contradiction between the statements as quoted in the March 10 
Regina Leader-Post that clearly says that the Premier clearly 
said that there were no ministers involved with the firing of 
Jack Messer. And it’s further quoted that he was doing that . . . 
in uncharacteristic stammering and stuttering. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, if this is not a direct contradiction to the 
testimony this morning of Mr. John Wright, I don’t know what 
is. Who’s telling the truth, Mr. Deputy Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the members 
opposite that they are, I think, treading on difficult ground when 
they talk about who’s misleading, especially that member from 
Melfort when he promised the Liberal members, when he 
promised in writing, the Liberal member from Melfort, that he 
would never, ever, ever leave the Liberal Party to join the 
Conservatives. And today he’s asking his question from the 
Conservative bench. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, do the work of the committee. 
The Premier will be here later this afternoon to answer all your 
questions. And we’ll watch with interest how that debate 
unfolds. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, you’ve been calm and cool 
for the last three weeks if you’ve done your work in the 
committee. Continue on that basis and I’m sure you’ll find the 
process will work to the benefit of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Upgrading Highways and Transportation Systems 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier or his designate. Mr. Premier, retired Chief 
Justice Willard Estey has released an interim report on prairie 
grain handling and transportation system, and Justice Estey’s 
number one comment was that your roads stink, Mr. Premier. 
 
The executive director of the western Canadian wheat growers 
agree. She said the road system is in desperate need of repair. 
And SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) president, Sinclair Harrison, said Estey isn’t 
going nearly far enough in describing the damage to our road 
system. Mr. Premier, Estey says the road system is a big part of 
our problems and what are you going to do to bring on a 
solution? 
 
Mr. Premier, last year you promised 250 million in highway 
funding every year and then immediately reneged on that 
promise. Then you reneged on a promise again this year. 
 
Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan’s road system is in shambles and 
the best you can do is break your word. Will you at least live up 
to the highway spending promises you made last year and add 
80 million to this year’s highway budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again have to, 
I guess, clarify to the member opposite that we have identified 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1873 

that roads and transportation are a priority for this provincial 
government. And that’s why we’ve put in, over 10 years, as 
I’ve said . . . $2.5 billion is what we will be spending. 
 
And what Justice Estey has said in a report to the federal 
government, which we would agree. One of the issues in the 
changes in grain transportation is the impact that it does have on 
highways and roads. And just as Justice Estey said, as many 
others have identified, that this is a national problem and needs 
to be identified to the federal Liberal government. 
 
And so we would agree that the infrastructure in this province is 
certainly something that we see some federal responsibility, and 
it has been identified in that report. 
 
The second item that we have said that is absolutely important 
to this is that during this important review . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the Chair is having some 
difficulty being able to hear the minister provide the response 
because of the constant commentary coming from the 
opposition benches. And I would ask for the cooperation of all 
hon. members to enable the minister to be heard. And I’ll give 
the minister a little more time to wrap up her response. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Just in my last comment, the one thing 
that we have stressed and which Estey also said is that the 
branch-line abandonment is the major factor in this, in the 
factor that’s affecting our road system. And during this review, 
as all western provinces and even the province of Ontario has 
said, we need to halt the rail-line abandonment during this 
important review. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister may have identified the problem but she certainly isn’t 
backing up with dollars that she promised last year. 
 
Madam Minister, on Tuesday while the Premier was following 
the Prime Minister around Regina like a lost puppy looking for 
its mom, the Saskatchewan Party was here in the legislature 
standing up for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, the Saskatchewan Party attempted to 
introduce an emergency motion calling on the Prime Minister to 
immediately establish and fund a national highways program. 
And what do your NDP (New Democratic Party) members do? 
They say no. 
 
Saskatchewan NDP was so busy sucking up to the Prime 
Minister, they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order! Order. Now we 
have unparliamentary language being used on both sides of the 
House, and I’m going to ask first of all the hon. member for 
Saltcoats to withdraw his unparliamentary remark, and 
following that I will ask the hon. member for Regina Victoria to 
withdraw the unparliamentary remark that he shouts from his 
seat. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw those 
remarks. 

The Speaker: — And I ask the member for Regina Victoria to 
withdraw his unparliamentary remark from his seat. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I withdraw the unparliamentary remark 
I directed at that member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Premier, at the other day’s back-slapping frenzy with Jean 
Chrétien, did you manage to squeeze in any discussions on one 
of the major priorities of municipalities and the people of 
Saskatchewan — a national highway program that would fund 
the twinning of the Trans-Canada and the Yellowhead 
Highway. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, our Premier has certainly 
made Highways and Transportation an important issue that he 
has raised at the federal level. 
 
We have made a commitment over 10 years to spend $2.5 
billion in this government with good planning, with the 
community of Saskatchewan. And I find it a bit hypocritical, 
over 10 years of a Tory government that ran 10 years of deficits 
in which we still have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Order. Order. Now 
. . . order, order. All hon. members will recognize that question 
period is not well served by either the hon. member who asked 
the question shouting while the answer is being provided, or by 
the minister’s colleagues shouting while she’s providing it. And 
I will ask all hon. members again to allow the minister to be 
heard in an uninterrupted manner. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Yes, as I said, we made our 10-year 
commitment of more monies to build our infrastructure system, 
our highway and transportation system, but they ran 10 years of 
deficit. That was their plan, and they sold off all the highway 
equipment in 1982. So don’t tell me the commitment . . . 
 
The biggest pothole, as I’ve said, in this province is the debt 
that was left behind by them that we have to spend $2 million a 
day on interest; three months of that interest could double our 
Highways and Transportation budget. 
 
We’ve made a commitment to it; we are fixing the 
transportation system for this . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Disaster Assistance for Ranchers and Farmers 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier or his designate. Yesterday the Saskatchewan Party 
exposed the latest attack on farmers and ranchers in 
Saskatchewan. Jacking lease rates up is what the Minister of 
Agriculture has done to the tune of 25 per cent. Farmers and 
ranchers all over the province have told us this is very unfair 
considering the condition of those pastures in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, the legislative session may 
adjourn in the next few days and it’ll be too soon to tell the total 
extent of crop damage caused by drought and by frost in the 



1874 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

province. However, if conditions don’t improve very quickly, 
we’re going to have a real disaster on our hands. 
 
We’ve had a fall session at one point dealing with the 
constitution. Agriculture is a very important issue to 
Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan families. Will you give your 
assurance today that if the crop conditions continue to 
deteriorate in Saskatchewan over the next few weeks, that you 
will recall the legislature to deal with this possible crisis and the 
need for disaster assistance for the farmers and ranchers in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the Tory 
Party finally figured out there was a drought out there; the last 
couple of days had two questions in a row. You’re doing real 
good, so you can just keep it up. I’m sure someone will 
recognize that sooner or later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, we wouldn’t need the fall 
session legislature to fix the problem because if it’s not . . . if 
you don’t have a plan in place by then it might be too late. 
 
So what we have done, we’ve put out a report to all the 
agrologists’ offices — and that available widely in rural 
Saskatchewan — about everything that’s available for the hay 
land for pastures and for water pumping. We’ve called the 
federal government to enact the tax deferral when you sell your 
livestock. Those things are being done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we planned this for many years. We’ve got a crop 
insurance program that’s available and a NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) program. In fact NISA has about $1.2 
billion in it. 
 
In the 1988 drought payment, Saskatchewan only got paid $400 
million. There is contingency plans available. This fall, if this is 
a province-wide problem, then we certainly will have to 
reassess with the federal government, and that’s what you 
should be looking at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, as this legislative session draws to 
a close, there are people, our citizens, the people that we serve, 
who have some words that come to mind in their minds, and 
that’s beaten, battered, bruised, and abandoned. And I’m not 
referring to the Minister of Health, although this could certainly 
apply to him. 
 
I’m speaking for those people who rely on our health care 
system. I’m talking about the more than 6,000 people who 
occupy waiting-lists. I’m talking about cancer patients who 
must wait unacceptable periods for treatment. 
 
I’m talking about people, member from Lloydminster, who 
can’t get medical care in Regina because of a bed crises. And 
I’m talking about our seniors who are booted out of hospital 
before they’re ready because doctors must make room for other 
patients. 
 
To the minister, why have you allowed cracks in our health care 

system to become gaping holes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite, as I did last evening when we talked in estimates, that 
the health care system in Saskatchewan over the last several 
years has not only grown but it has enhanced the number of 
services across the province, and I say that to the member. 
 
When you take a look at the kinds of expenditures and 
investment that we’ve made in health care in this province, it 
supersedes anything that you’ll see in any other province over 
the history of the last seven years. Because in Saskatchewan, 
our Premier, and this government has said that the number one 
priority will always be health and will continue to be health. 
 
When the member opposite talks about beaten, abused, and 
abandoned, he’s got to be talking about his leader — he’s got to 
be talking about his leader — because today here’s the man 
who’s getting ready to tie himself to the incinerator at the Plains 
Health Centre. And I say to you, he’ll go up in smoke like 
everything else comes out of the incinerator goes up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I am disappointed that the Health 
minister would trivialize those serious concerns of cancer 
patients and people waiting for treatment. 
 
This legislative session is ending exactly the way it started, with 
the Liberal opposition assuming — assuming — its role as 
defender of health care and demonstrating how this government 
over here has abandoned its health care principles. 
 
From the day we raised health care concerns on behalf of 
people across Saskatchewan we have been rewarded with their 
confidence and with their support for this very important fight. 
It is rare that a government and the official opposition both 
chase the agenda set out by the third party, but that’s exactly 
what’s been happening during this session. 
 
My question to the Minister of Health. You sell your party as 
the saviours of medicare. You suggest that you are carrying on 
the work of the late Tommy Douglas. Why then — why — do 
you continue to gut our health care system? Why have you 
abandoned the principles upon which medicare was built? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that in the adversity of what this province was left with 
after the Tory administration finished in this province, and the 
philosophy that the current Saskatchewan Party promotes 
through its leader in terms of what it would do with health care, 
and what you and your leader propagate in terms of what you 
would do to health care in this province . . .We in Saskatchewan 
have been able to sustain all of those adversities and continue to 
build. 
 
When you say to me, Mr. Member, and ask a question about 
what we’re doing in Saskatchewan today we point out to you 
many, many of those objectives that we’ve reached and are 
going to continue to ensure. 
 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

You talk about cancer patients in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
and I said many times over — many times over — that in 
Saskatchewan we enjoy some of the best cancer service 
programs anywhere in North America. And that’s been 
highlighted, I would say to the member opposite, in the recent 
report by Maclean’s. And what do they say, Saskatchewan has 
fewer cancer deaths — 1.76 per 100,000 — than the national 
average. 
 
In this province we serve our cancer patients in a far better 
fashion than anywhere else across the country and you should 
take heed of that and be speaking in that favour, Mr. Member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Health 
told this House that the headlines tell the real story about health 
care. And that’s a point that he and I will probably agree on. 
 
So what do the headlines in our major newspaper suggest? Let 
me read a couple. “Health funds said misdirected.” “City short 
ER beds.” “Bed closures questioned.” “Saskatoon health crisis.” 
“Man’s death blamed on bed shortage.” “Pediatric bed shortage 
severe.” 
 
Those are the headlines, Mr. Speaker. And what do these 
headlines all have in common? They are all as a result of 
concerns raised by this Liberal opposition. 
 
Yes, Mr. Minister, the facts do speak for themselves. 
Saskatchewan people are looking to you for the answers. Are 
you going to take action or are you simply going to point 
fingers and say that we’re spending a lot of money. And it gives 
me a reminder about somebody saying I gave you all that 
money; what did you do with it? If you do have all that money 
and you’re spending it, where are you spending it? You’re not 
spending it in the right places. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when I read the article 
out of Maclean’s it says a number of issues. It says first of all, 
Mr. Speaker, that in the province of Saskatchewan we have 6.91 
beds per 100,000 residents — the highest in the country. 
Number one. 
 
They go on to say that Saskatchewan actually has some of the 
best health indicators in the country in terms of life expectancy, 
mortality rates, and these kinds of things. And then they go on, 
Mr. Speaker, to talk about the average length of stays today in 
hospital beds, which are reducing in Canada and in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the point I was making yesterday and you raised today, and 
you’re right. In every one of the newspapers or in the 
newspapers over the last 50 or 60 days, on page number 1 and 
number 3, you see those stories every day. 
 
And when you get a story of this nature that talks about — a 
national story — that talks about how in fact Saskatchewan has 
been able to capture and provide excellent health services in this 
country, where do they appear? They appear on the eighth page, 
in a small article. They don’t talk about the kind . . . (inaudible) 
. . . And I say to the member opposite, if you know where there 
is better health care in Canada or the world, you stand up and 

tell this House and the people of Saskatchewan where in fact 
that is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During this session 
one thing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now I ask for cooperation of 
both sides of the House, including the government side of the 
House. I’m in difficulty, before he even begins his question, 
hearing the Leader of the Third Party. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Well members in the Assembly who trivialize 
this really don’t give much of a care for our citizens because 
during this session one thing has been constant, is that the NDP 
has refused to assume any kind of responsibility for gutting of 
our health care system. They blame Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, they 
blame Grant Devine, and when they get tired of pointing their 
fingers, they launch vicious personal attacks on our nurses and 
our doctors. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan don’t buy it anymore. 
The time for excuses is over. The biggest single problem facing 
our health care system, particularly in Regina, is a lack of acute 
care beds. The obvious solution is then to keep the Plains 
Health Centre. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you finally willing to admit that you went too 
far too fast in eliminating almost 1,000 acute care beds? Will 
you make a commitment to save the Plains hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I was very interested in the 
member’s comments, and he makes three. He says back-filled 
cuts, he talks about gutting the health care system, and blaming 
Grant Devine. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, in Saskatchewan we have 
back-filled behind the federal government — back-filled fully 
every penny that was cut. And Allan Rock a year ago stood up 
in front of the Canadian Medical Association and said provinces 
across the country have had to deal with significant cuts of the 
federal Liberals, and we to some degree apologize for that. 
 
And today for you to stand up in the House and say that health 
care hasn’t been gutted — it has been gutted by the federal 
government, of which you are a partner I say, Mr. Member. 
And today to stand up in the House and say that we’re blaming 
Grant Devine, of course we blaming Grant Devine and his 
administration, $15 billion . . . 
 
And that signal to me says only one thing, is that you’re 
concerned about your leadership race in Saskatoon and you, 
like some of your colleagues last year, are preparing to move 
across to the other side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Now I ask for 
cooperation of all hon. members, and particularly I ask for the 
cooperation of government members, to enable the Leader of 
the Third Party to be heard in putting his question. 
 



1876 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, without a doubt the root cause of 
this health care crisis is finances . . . without a doubt. Health 
districts continue cutting services because of finances. Rural 
hospitals continue to close because of finances. Almost 1,000 
acute care beds have been eliminated because of finances. 
 
Almost 600 nurses have been turfed because of finances, and 
waiting-lists are at an unprecedented level because of finances. 
The present system is dictated by dollars and cents. And this 
may make NDP bean counters happy but not those who depend 
on the health care system. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re always quick to add that this government 
is providing more funding than ever before for health care. Why 
then, why, is our health care system worse than ever before? 
And what steps will you be taking in the coming months to 
address these very serious problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member opposite 
that you’ve now, and your party have, covered all the ground 
that you can cover as it comes to health care. You’ve gone full 
circle on this issue. You have said that we don’t have enough 
docs, and we don’t have enough nurses, and that the systems are 
breaking down, facilities don’t work, and we don’t have enough 
equipment, and finally today, Mr. Member, you come to the 
issue at heart, which is the finances. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, we in Saskatchewan have 
back-filled every penny that the federal government has 
removed across the country. And those are your brothers and 
sisters, who in fact cut Saskatchewan and Canadian health care 
to the bone. And that’s been endorsed by the federal minister, 
it’s been endorsed by the Prime Minister of this country. And I 
say to you, in this province, in Saskatchewan, we will always 
ensure — always ensure — that health will be our number one 
priority and the Saskatchewan people will be well served in a 
fashion in which they’ve become accustomed to under this 
administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Paging Systems for Emergency Responders 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker the 
emergency communications coordinator for the St. Brieux and 
district volunteer fire department and first responders has for 
the past year and a half been pursuing every avenue with 
SaskTel to improve paging in his coverage area off the SaskTel 
paging network, or by providing alpha-numeric paging through 
FleetNet. The only suggestion forthcoming from SaskTel was to 
put in a paging tower in St. Brieux which costs several 
thousands of dollars and would impose upon them exorbitant 
and unaffordable monthly operating costs. 
 
Mr. Minister, as a volunteer organization they cannot possibly 
afford these costs. Mr. Speaker, reliable emergency 
communications are a matter of life and death. And my question 
to the Minister responsible for SaskTel is what is SaskTel doing 
to assist emergency response coordinators in their efforts to 
ensure fail-safe communications in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that her continued attack on men and women 

who work in our Crowns, as to the poor service that they 
provide, I think leaves her credibility a little bit open to 
question. 
 
That fact of the matter is that when it comes to FleetNet 800 
services in the province of Saskatchewan and cellular service 
and communications in general, you will find that SaskTel 
delivers a premium product as compared to any 
telecommunication company in any part of Canada. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, rather than complaining 
about the service being delivered in the rural areas, you as a 
rural member from the Humboldt area I think should be 
standing and congratulating the men and women who deliver 
that service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, you thoroughly misunderstand the 
intent of the question. There was no time during that question 
that I was criticizing SaskTel employees. I was simply asking a 
question about a more efficient paging system which is needed 
because, over the last year, the emergency signal in the St. 
Brieux district has been getting poorer and there are increasing 
numbers of locations where their pagers do not work 
adequately. 
 
There is more to this, Mr. Minister, than a local problem. It’s a 
province-wide problem. A good, clear emergency signal is 
necessary in order that communications coordinators are able to 
expediently relay messages to all responders so that they can in 
turn save lives. 
 
And alphanumeric is economical, flexible, and provides more 
options for pagers. So why have SaskTel not yet provided the 
affordable solution that is best for emergency response? Please, 
Mr. Minister, respond to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what I will do for the 
member is give her a complete briefing on the situation as it 
relates to 911, FleetNet, all of the paging equipment that we 
have in rural Saskatchewan. The members in rural 
Saskatchewan in most areas will realize that we have a much 
better communications system with our rural members, whether 
it’s with health care or whether it’s with school buses, than any 
other area in rural Canada or United States, and certainly as 
related to other parts of the world. 
 
But I will take upon myself to give you a complete briefing 
about the future, the vision they have for the future, as it would 
relate to this style of communication because obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, the member is sadly lacking as it would relate to the 
products that are available to her area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day I 
table, pursuant to section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, the 
auditor’s 1998 annual report on operations. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Before orders of the day, by leave 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1877 

I’d like to make a motion concerning membership of a certain 
standing committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader requests leave 
to introduce a motion on membership of a committee. I think 
I’m getting a request from the House regarding which 
committee before leave is considered. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I could read the 
motion, that the name of Mr. Ned Shillington be substituted for 
that of Mr. Ed Tchorzewski on the list of members composing 
the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(l430) 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Member on the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That Mr. Ned Shillington be substituted for that of Mr. Ed 
Tchorzewski on a list of members composing the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 
 

Seconded by the member from Prince Albert Carlton. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, before I submit the answer to 
question 81, I would like to bring to your attention what I 
believe to be a record in this Assembly. That is, Mr. Speaker, 
that to date, out of the 81 questions, all of them have been dealt 
with. All but one have been responded to, have been answered. 
 
There have been no amendments, and I think that speaks well 
for the members opposite that their questions were not 
ambiguous. The one that was not answered was unable to be 
answered because of a client-solicitor privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re committed to make democracy work. We’re 
trying to improve public confidence and confidence in this 
legislature by making information available in a timely manner; 
by putting a floodlight on the issues rather than by sweeping 
them under the rug. And I think this speaks very well for a 
public service and ministers’ offices, and indeed those members 
who are asking the questions. 
 
And I’m very proud, Mr. Speaker, to submit the answer to 
question 81. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 81 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the Premier to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. My pleasure to be here with my estimates today. I 
have with me, seated to my left, the deputy minister to the 
Executive Council, to myself, and cabinet secretary, Dr. Greg 
Marchildon. To my right, the chief of staff to myself, Ms. Judy 
Samuelson. 
 
Directly seated behind me is Mr. Jim Nicol, executive assistant 
to the deputy minister. And seated behind the deputy minister is 
the director of administration, Bonita Heidt. That is our little 
group and we’re ready for the questions and the comments the 
opposition and the government benches may wish to direct to 
myself as Executive Council. 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Premier, welcome this afternoon and to all of your officials. 
 
Mr. Premier, I understand the scheduling of this year’s 
estimates precluded you from attending a roast in honour of 
Frank McKenna down East and I know you’re disappointed, 
Mr. Premier, but I really do think there are some questions that 
are begging to be asked here at home, so we appreciate you 
making time for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
A full year has gone by since we last had a chance to question 
you and your set of estimates. And obviously by looking behind 
me, Mr. Premier, a lot has changed in that year. Not only for 
members on this side of the House but I think for members over 
there as well. 
 
I’ll not go on at length this afternoon, Mr. Premier, as I know 
all of my colleagues have some very, very specific questions for 
you on a number of topics of interest to the Saskatchewan 
public today. Mr. Premier, I hope you take the opportunity to 
answer those questions. They are the questions the people of 
this province are asking and they are questions that are 
deserving of full and complete answers. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’ve had a very interesting session so far. And if 
one theme has dominated this session, it’s that of openness and 
accountability, or rather the lack of openness and accountability 
on the part of your government. This is by no means a new 
lament. Indeed it’s been something I and many of my 
colleagues have been saying since we were first elected. 
 
But in many ways, Mr. Premier, I believe the chickens have 
come home to roost this year. This is the year when 
Saskatchewan public has truly gotten angry about what they 
perceive as a lack of openness on the part of your government. 
They have the feeling that this is a government that has become 
masters at slight-of-hand tricks — a master of smoke and 
mirrors. Well in many ways, Mr. Premier, I think that mirror 



1878 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

cracked this year. 
 
I know the Premier is an old pro at politics, having been a 
member of this legislature before I even graduated from high 
school. So he doesn’t need . . . he doesn’t need me to tell him 
that it’s usually not policy that brings down a government. It’s 
not the little mistakes that happen along the way or, for that 
matter, even the big ones. What usually brings down a 
government at the end of the day is it’s own arrogance and its 
lack of willingness to listen to the people who elected it. And 
with all due respect I believe your government is more arrogant 
today than ever before, if that is indeed possible. 
 
A new attitude now pervades your ranks that makes it seem as 
though that cabinet feels that they have the right to do whatever 
they want, whenever they want, however they want. When 
people feel their government is listening to them, is indeed 
concerned with the opinions of voters, then the policies of that 
government are easier to accept. And even when such a 
government makes mistakes, I believe people are much more 
forgiving of those mistakes. 
 
But when the people believe a government has become 
irredeemably arrogant, that’s when they say enough is enough. 
And, Mr. Premier, again with all due respect I believe you and 
your government are moving very quickly to becoming 
irredeemably arrogant. 
 
In the area of taxation, in the area of Crown corporations, in the 
area of health care and so many others, the people are asking for 
answers. And all they get from the government is the shrugging 
of the shoulders and the pointing of fingers. The mark of true 
leadership I believe is the ability to accept one’s own 
responsibility for mistakes that have occurred, for decisions that 
have been taken. 
 
The current government has now been in power for seven years 
and still we see that they are not willing to take responsibility 
for their own actions. Everything bad that happens in this 
province is the fault of a previous administration, long since 
dismissed, or the fault of the federal government. And while 
this panache you have for blaming all of your troubles on the 
feds — it’s not totally without merit, it does come off as 
disingenuous at times. 
 
It’s no secret that you’re probably closer with the Prime 
Minister than any other member of this House — including the 
members on my left. And your blame game with the feds came 
to be all the more phoney this past week. In this House the 
official opposition moved a motion calling on the federal 
government to come up with a national highways program — 
something you and your ministers have also been calling on for 
many, many years. 
 
And yes, we purposely moved this motion on Monday when 
Jean Chrétien was in town, to try to make a point with him. But 
what happened? Shockingly your members refused to support 
this motion. And I know that my colleague from Saltcoats will 
have much more to say on this later on. 
 
Here the Prime Minister was in town; this House had the perfect 
opportunity to send a very strong message to him about a 
subject that is of vital importance to this province, and you 

decided that the needs of the people of this province were less 
important than your friendship with good old Jean. 
 
I think that’s what the people of this province were looking for, 
Mr. Premier. From now on when you blame our transportation 
problems, our health care problems, our education problems, 
our social services problems on the federal government, it’s 
going to come off a little less believable after your failure to 
support our motion on Monday. 
 
Mr. Premier, there are many issues of concern to Saskatchewan 
residents. Health care remains a high concern. Many people in 
many parts of this province simply feel they do not have access 
to quality health care any longer, and they don’t think they’re 
being listened to. That’s why they’re so angry about the Plains 
closure. The people feel they weren’t consulted that their 
opinions don’t matter. They see their services reduced and 
reduced again. And for this courtesy they’re asked to pay the 
highest taxes in the entire country. 
 
Last year a great cheer went up throughout this province when 
the PST (provincial sales tax) was reduced to the same point it 
was when you came to power in 1991. However, the so-called 
tax cut turned out to be something of a mirage once people were 
hit with SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) rates, 
higher telephone rates, and higher natural gas rates. And thanks 
largely to your cut-backs to municipal transfers; people were hit 
with higher property tax rates — in one pocket and out the 
other. 
 
This is particularly distasteful when one looks at the Crowns. I 
don’t think there’s a person in this province who now views rate 
hikes by the Crowns as anything but tax increases. The story is 
familiar. The Crown decides it needs a rate increase, and 45 
days later it gets that increase. And the people of Saskatchewan 
are supposed to just take the government’s word that it is 
justified. 
 
Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan remains the only jurisdiction in 
North America outside of perhaps Cuba that doesn’t have an 
independent utility rate review mechanism. The NDP say we 
don’t want one. They know best when it comes to the utilities, 
we’re told. The people’s views are not important. That’s the 
mentality that now pervades the Crowns. And when this 
arrogance takes hold that’s when we see the Guyanas take 
place, and of course that’s when we see the Channel Lakes 
occur. 
 
For two months we’ve see the legislative committee looking 
into Channel Lakes, slogging through the evidence with the 
government majority defeating nearly every opposition motion. 
So much for an impartial inquiry. 
 
One of the most important motions your minions defeated, sir, 
was the one calling you as a witness. It was up to you, sir, as the 
head of government, to explain your actions around the Channel 
Lakes mess. It’s up to you to explain your role in the departure 
of Jack Messer and the golden handshake he received. You’ve 
refused to appear before the committee to answer these 
questions. You’ve left it up to the Deputy Premier to answer the 
questions in question period. Now I hope it’s your turn. 
 
While we will be asking you questions about a number of topics 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1879 

over the next few hours and days, I am hoping you will finally 
break your silence when it comes to Channel Lake and Jack 
Messer. But before my colleagues begin with those questions, 
Mr. Premier, perhaps you’d like to respond to my comments 
thus far. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much for inviting me 
to respond, but I don’t think I needed your invitation. I am 
going to respond. I’m going to respond first of all by the 
scheduling to New Brunswick. I believe that my first duty is to 
the legislature of the province of Saskatchewan. And based on 
the discussions which took place amongst the officials, elected 
and non-elected, the arrangement was such that I was to start 
my estimates last night at 9 o’clock and go until 11:30 and to go 
today, so that we would be able to have two days, last night and 
today, to deal with the estimates of the Premier. 
 
And on that basis I phoned to New Brunswick and I told Frank 
McKenna and those who advertised and those who had said the 
responsibility that I should be there as the Premier, one of 
many, to honour, a great Canadian, not one of my political 
stripe. On that basis I attended. And then you, typical Tories as 
you are, broke your word like that. No estimates last night, no 
estimates last night, and now the estimates are here again. And 
where did they go, Mr. Speaker? Well we’ll see how the 
evidence comes about. 
 
So none the less we are here, and we are here on the basis that 
somehow these people gave their word, but typically break their 
word just like that — just like that. 
 
What I find most interesting, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, about 
the opening remarks of the hon. member from the 
Saskatchewan Party, is the notion of accountability and 
arrogance. He is chastising this government for being arrogant 
and not accountable. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You bet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You bet, he says. And I want to say to 
the hon. member opposite, that in a democracy there can be 
nothing more arrogant, nothing more arrogant than being 
elected as a Liberal — as you were elected, given the trust and 
the confidence of the voters in your constituency to represent 
them as a Liberal. And in the dead of night, arrogantly, without 
the courtesy of going back to consult them by way of vote, you 
switched parties and allegiances like that, and joined up with 
the Tory parties. 
 
And tell me about arrogance and accountability! Sir, you and 
the Saskatchewan Party are the most arrogant and the least 
accountable political party in Saskatchewan’s history, by your 
dead of the night operations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Arrogant. Arrogant. Arrogant. 
 
An Hon. Member: — People don’t believe that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — People don’t believe that, he says. 

Arrogant. Where did you hold your founding convention? You 
held it out there in the back rooms of some telephone booth. 
And you had the dead of the night meeting in August of 1997. 
And the four discontented Liberals — I should say three 
discontented Liberals; there’s the member from Saltcoats, or as 
the member from Thunder Creek identified him, the member 
from turncoat. 
 
Those three Liberals and the remaining four Tories got together 
and voilà like magic, voilà without the approval of the people of 
Saskatchewan, voilà just like that, they say there’s a new 
political party. 
 
And you tell us about arrogance? And you tell us about 
accountability? If you are so accountable, why don’t you resign 
your seat and go in there and face the electors of Canora 
constituency. If the member from Kindersley is so strong, 
resign your seat and get out there in Kindersley in a by-election. 
If the member from Cannington is not arrogant, get out there 
and call yourself a by-election. 
 
If your leader, the Reform Party member, is so confident of his 
support, why doesn’t he get out there and run in Saskatoon 
Eastview? Because you’re all a bunch of scared pussycats. All a 
bunch of scared pussycats who run together and plot together in 
the middle of the night. 
 
And in the middle of the night, without any accountability to 
the voters, have this record and this history. This will always be 
with you. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, you know what we have here? We have a 
Saskatchewan Party which is made up of Liberals, some of 
them may be red; made of Tories, some of them may be blue; 
they’ve got a brand new banner called the Saskatchewan Party, 
they say. I’ve got news for those people. There has been a 
Saskatchewan party for 50 years and it’s the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) and the NDP, not the 
Saskatchewan Party over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And I’ve got news also, Mr. 
Chairman, I’ve got news also, Mr. Chairman, for these folks 
opposite there. If you take a hard look at that Saskatchewan 
Party banner that they’re now carrying, if you look hard at it, 
there’s going to be a faded motto in that banner and that faded 
motto is, “Give ‘er snoose, Bruce.” That’s what these people 
are. “Give ‘er snoose, Bruce,” the faded motto which will be 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they may be red coats, they may be blue coats, 
but, Mr. Chairman, everyone of them including their leader is a 
turncoat — a turncoat, everyone of them. Arrogant and 
unaccountable. A turncoat! Everyone of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — So much so that they don’t even have 
the courage of their convictions. The leader hiding up there in 
the gallery — there he is. He won’t even face . . . He waves at 
me. He waves at me from the safety of the Speaker’s gallery but 
he won’t wave to the people of Saskatoon Eastview because he 



1880 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

doesn’t have the guts to face the people in Saskatoon Eastview. 
He doesn’t have the guts to put his policies before the people of 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
He doesn’t have the guts to explain to the people of Saskatoon 
Eastview how this collection of Tories, who have a record that 
they have, and these Liberals, who signed an oath of office . . . 
Remember, Mr. Leader, up there in the gallery, when it comes 
to your turn to receive that signed oath of office . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, 
order! I will bring it to the attention of the Premier that he’s not 
to bring anyone into the debate from the galleries and that he is 
bordering on unparliamentary language also. So I will give that 
warning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I won’t bring anybody 
in from the gallery if the gallery doesn’t bring me in. So please 
if it’s a ruling, it’s got to be a two-way ruling from the gallery 
as well. 
 
I am saying to you, Mr. Chairman, and to this House that the 
leader of this so-called Saskatchewan Party and the members of 
this so-called Saskatchewan Party are the epitome, the epitome 
of unaccountability and arrogance. 
 
And when I used the word the lack of guts, I repeat that. Not 
one of them has the guts to do the right thing: to resign, put 
their names before the electorates in their individual 
constituency; to run in the Saskatoon Eastview by-election; not 
one of them because they are not accountable, and they are 
arrogant, and the people of Saskatchewan know exactly what 
they are. And as I’ve said before, some may wear Liberal red 
coats; some may wear Tory blue coats, but each and every one 
of them are turncoats. Make no mistake about that — turncoats, 
every one of them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, moving on to other 
matters, talks about an independent utilities review commission 
— an independent utilities review commission which we 
established, they established, the Tories established back in the 
1980s when they were in power. We had an independent 
so-called utilities review commission for four or five years. The 
budget was $3 million, roughly speaking, I could be wrong in 
the exact number, but in that area. 
 
Every rate application with the Crown corporations advanced 
— every rate application that they advanced was approved by 
that independent utilities review commission — every one. Not 
only was it the cost of running the independent rate review 
commission; but you had to pay for the consumers who had to 
appear; you had to pay for the lawyers; you had to pay for all 
the other interest groups — running this cost . . . year into 
several millions of dollars. And every rate was approved 
because it was an unfair contest to be sure, with the accountants 
of Power or Energy or SGI coming forward and advancing the 
rate causes. 
 
And you know the one time, the one time that the independent 
rates review commission of the Tory Party — the one time that 
it had the guts and the courage to say no to rate increases on 
SGI — you know, Mr. Chairman, what the Tories did, what 
those people did there? — They fired each and every one of the 

utilities review commission. So much for independent review 
— right there, from that crowd. And now they stand up and 
they talk about credibility; they talk about arrogance; they talk 
about accountability. That’s what they did with the independent 
rate review commission. 
 
I say a 45-day review is not perfect. I understand that, but it’s 
better than no review, and it’s one heck of a lot better than the 
experience that we had of the independent, so-called rate review 
commission that you and your crowd established and followed 
and fired when it didn’t suit your pleasing in the ways you 
wanted to do it. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the member says that we’re close to the 
feds. Well we may be and we may not be, but I believe in 
cooperative federalism. And I believe in working with 
Conservative premiers, I believe in working with Liberal 
premiers, and I believe in working with the Liberal government 
or any federal government going. 
 
I tell you the day that you moved that motion I spoke to the 
ministers of the municipalities, the FCM (Federation of 
Canadian Municipalities), and I talked about a national 
infrastructure program. And I talked about a road structure 
publicly, and I called on the federal government publicly. And 
I’ve written to the Prime Minister and I’ve spoken to the Prime 
Minister about it. What did you do? For 63 days of this session, 
— zero. You didn’t even ask a question on road infrastructure, 
not one question. For 63 days, until the member from 
Kindersley got up on Monday and all of a sudden realized that 
this whole session had gone sideways on them because of the 
Channel Lake stories which didn’t materialize, now he gets up 
— yes, now he gets up — and he says he wants to talk about 
agriculture. Sixty-three days, what happened? Did the cat catch 
your tongue? 
 
What happened to your courage? What happened to your 
strength to stand up and fight for national transportation? Where 
was your courage about fighting for national transportation and 
the emergency motion — where was it? Zero, nowhere. 
 
Your courage on national transportation equates the same 
amount of courage that you have or you don’t have, when in the 
middle of the night you formed this kind of a dead of the night 
party. Not validated by one voter — not one voter has validated 
your posture or your position or the position of your voters. 
That’s exactly the level of courage that you have with respect to 
the feds on the question of national roads and national road 
policies. So don’t tell me about this situation at all. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, may I just finish off my remarks? And the 
member says opposite, do I have some opening remarks? I do. 
 
I’ll tell you about this session. These people know they got off 
on the wrong track. They know now they got off on the wrong 
track. They got off on the wrong track because they thought that 
Channel Lake would be the . . . that this would be the 
destruction point of the government — Channel Lake. And now 
they’re realizing three months later, after 1,000 documents, 
after the three documents we tabled, after the televised hearings, 
now they’re realizing that what the minister in charge of CIC 
tabled on the second day of the House is essentially, in fact, the 
truth of what the circumstances are. 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

We tabled them, we hired the independent reviewers, we hired 
the lawyers, we hired the CIC report that was tabled, and now 
they realized that what was said was the truth. 
 
Unlike you and your fiascos, when you had GigaText, when 
you had Supercart, when you had High R Doors, every fiasco 
that the Tories had in the 1980s, you hid everything and there 
was not even one inquiry. 
 
And the hon. member opposite says we’ve got something to 
hide. After they went on strike on Public Accounts, they went 
on strike on Public Accounts — you couldn’t get them to meet 
on this issue. We begged them to meet on this issue; we pleaded 
with them to meet on this issue. 
 
No way. Out they ran. And that member from Kelvington, out 
she ran, hiding from her own committee, the chairmanship of 
her own committee. 
 
And they say that we’ve had something to hide. Impossible, Mr. 
Chairman, we have nothing to hide. They had everything to 
hide and that’s why they ran. And that is why I say they’ve got 
off on the wrong track. 
 
The people in Saskatchewan have seen in Channel Lake exactly 
what this opposition’s all about. This opposition doesn’t know 
where it’s going, it doesn’t know where it’s come from except 
Liberals and Conservatives, and it has no future. 
 
This session is a session of success. This is a session where we 
have the fifth balanced budget in a row. This session is a 
session of a second year of tax reductions. 
 
This session is a session where we’ve eliminated your deficit. 
This session is a session where we continue to reduce your debt 
of 12, $14 billion. 
 
This is a session where we have the highest expenditure for 
health care in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a session where we have more people working than ever 
in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a session where we’ve dedicated more roads for 
highways than ever before. 
 
This is a session where we introduced actions for safe 
communities, more prosecutors, and more police. 
 
This is a session, which says that we’re going to build 
independence and care for the kids in poverty. 
 
This is a session, which builds for the future of the province of 
Saskatchewan. This was our agenda and this is what we 
enacted. 
 
And for 63 days you people were asleep at the switch in not 
speaking to the interests of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You’re doggone 
right you were and you know it now, and that’s what you’re 
trying to get by way of a recapture on these estimates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, arrogance, incompetence, unaccountability, dead 

of the night — Tories by any other name — no policy, right 
wing, mean, incompetent, that is the official opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I would ask the government 
members to, and the opposition . . . Order. The opposition has 
sat and listened to the Premier’s replies, and I would ask the 
government members to come to order and listen to the 
questions from the hon. member for Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to give the Premier a 
breather. I was a little worried he was going to hurt himself in 
his comments and certainly at your advancing years that you 
have to be careful about that overexertion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I realize that certainly when you get to that 
grandfatherly age, as I certainly am as well, that a person has to 
be able to pace himself, and I wouldn’t want to see any injury 
come to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, this afternoon earlier in question period, the 
deputy, your deputy, said that you’d be pleased to answer the 
questions that I posed at that time, later on. So to begin I would 
like to follow up on the questions that I attempted to place to 
you this afternoon earlier. 
 
Mr. Premier, this morning, Mr. John Wright, who is the CEO 
(chief executive officer) of CIC, testified under oath that he was 
instructed by the CIC board, which is made up exclusively of 
cabinet ministers, to go to Mr. John Messer and demand that he 
resign by 6 o’clock that same evening or be fired. 
 
On March 9, as quoted in the March 10 edition of the Regina 
Leader-Post, you said that no cabinet minister had been 
involved in asking for Mr. Messer’s resignation, that he had 
been fired and that indeed that was the end of it. All is that was 
. . . to this whole issue is that Jack Messer resigned. That clearly 
is in direct conflict with what Mr. Wright said this morning. Mr. 
Premier, why the contradiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, there is no contradiction. 
John Wright — although I didn’t hear his testimony and I don’t 
have a copy of it in front of me, I think we can get it very 
shortly — said the decision was the decision of the CIC board, 
albeit made up of ministers. 
 
I was asked at that press conference, to the best of my 
recollection, if a minister had asked Mr. Messer for his 
resignation. If a minister had asked Mr. Messer for his 
resignation, not whether or not a minister had asked for Mr. 
Messer’s resignation in the deliberations of the Crown 
Investment Corporations board. 
 
I said at that time that no, no minister had asked Mr. Messer for 
his resignation. The matter was to be handled when Mr. Wright 
was president of CIC, and it was, as Mr. Wright testified today, 
no contradiction. 



1882 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

Mr. Gantefoer: — I’m sorry, Mr. Premier, I think that you’re 
playing a little bit fast and loose with the definition of whose 
responsibility is here. Mr. Wright is immaterial to this exercise; 
he was merely doing what was told to him to do by the cabinet 
ministers, who indeed were the CIC board. And to sort of now 
place it as if this was initiated by Mr. Wright is blatantly unfair 
and blatantly misrepresenting the statements that you had made. 
 
It was not only one minister that asked for Mr. Messer’s 
resignation, it was the collective wish of your cabinet that Mr. 
Messer resign. You couldn’t be further from the truth on this 
issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, we can go around the 
block on this as many times as you want, and you’re perfectly 
welcome to do it. I’ve given you my answer because I’ve been 
asked both by the press on this in widely publicized stories — 
there’s nothing new on this — and I give you my answer in the 
House today. 
 
The way the question was put to me on the opening of the 
House, the embargoed day of the opening of the House, 
whether or not the minister . . . any minister had gone to Mr. 
Messer to ask for his resignation. At least that’s the way I 
interpreted it. Perhaps I misinterpreted it, but that’s the way I 
interpreted it. 
 
I gave the answer, as I’ve told you: no that was done by Mr. 
Wright. Mr. Wright gave his testimony to that effect. There is 
no contradiction. You can either accept it or reject it; that’s 
what I answered in the Q&A (question and answer) of a 
question period. I think it’s perfectly logical and 
understandable. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Premier. Mr. 
Premier, as I recall as an observer of politics, in 1991 from the 
community of Melfort where I do business, in 1991 you 
promised to end patronage in Saskatchewan. I recall that you 
criticized the previous Devine government at great length about 
the patronage appointments that had occurred. 
 
And the thing that surprised me most, coming from the 
north-east of the province, is that after that very clear and 
deliberate promise to the people of Saskatchewan as part of 
your campaign to be elected, that almost the very first thing you 
did was hire your old buddy Jack Messer to head SaskPower. 
 
And to add insult to injury, you didn’t even go through a direct 
appointment and said Jack, you’ve been an awfully good guy 
and you’ve directed our successful election campaign, we’re 
going to give you SaskPower in exchange for that. 
 
What really was hurtful to the whole credibility of the process 
at that time, there was this great sham, this great sham of an 
executive search. And I can remember people up in the 
north-east saying, well; here’s this great search for a chief 
executive officer for SaskPower. And lo and behold, out of all 
the people that potentially could have been hired for this job, 
we were so surprised that a guy from Tisdale would get the job. 
Surprised. 
 
But everyone knew that it was a mockery, the beginning of a 
mockery of the process; the beginning of you breaking your 

promises about what you were going to do about patronage 
appointments and the beginning of the realization that you were 
there to support Jack Messer, that you had rewarded him as 
your confidante and friend with a plum position in SaskPower. 
 
And then as time went on, of course you ended up into a 
situation where these patronage appointments were going to 
finally come back and bite you. 
 
Jack Messer and the SaskPower people that he had hired under 
his administration, if you like, ended up getting up getting into 
the wild affair in Guyana, and we can talk about that later; got 
into the whole issue of Channel Lake and that’s an issue under 
review, and I certainly want to ask you some questions in that 
regard since it seems very clear that you won’t be coming to the 
committee. And at the end of the day, you ended up having to 
finally admit that Jack had to go, that there was no other way 
that you could continue to protect him; and then at the end of 
the day, we ended up with him leaving with a $300,000 golden 
handshake. 
 
Now I know that in the committee, and we talk about it, there’s 
opinions here and there and everywhere. And I think the 
Minister of Finance in response to a question somewhere in the 
session said, you can hire 100 lawyers, you can get 100 
opinions. And I that probably pretty accurately states the reality 
in some of these issues. The bottom line is that you made sure 
that this was going to happen. 
 
You know, we ended up with a situation where Mr. Nystuen — 
who ended up with a mess at STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company), another patronage kind of 
appointment, and forgot to make sure the computers were 
billing for invoices properly — he ends up moved out of there 
and is now going to be in charge of the so-called SHIN 
(Saskatchewan Health Information Network) project, another 
patronage sort of thing. And I think my colleague will ask some 
questions about that. 
 
And I know people out in rural Saskatchewan and urban 
Saskatchewan are extremely concerned about the fact that while 
all this is going on, there has been rate increase after rate 
increases across the board in their utilities. And you can defend 
the 45-day review process all you like and you can make fun of 
what the PURC (Public Utilities Review Commission) process 
was. I say to you, Mr. Premier, neither is satisfactory. 
 
But surely if almost every single jurisdiction in North America 
has a proper and independent review process, surely somewhere 
in all that mix of structures that are there, we can find 
something that will truly work and that will have the confidence 
of the people of Saskatchewan because, I think, even by your 
own admission, the current one does not. 
 
Mr. Premier, one of the things that was very strange to me in 
questions that we had asked is that . . . Was there any time prior 
to this current fiasco that Jack Messer and his mandate came 
under scrutiny. And you admitted that you had said that there 
was a time when Mr. Anguish was the minister responsible for 
SaskPower, that indeed he came to you and said the board 
wants to get rid of Jack. They’re unhappy with the way he’s 
conducting affairs at SaskPower. 
 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1883 

And you said in response to that question, Mr. Premier, you 
said, I told Mr. Anguish, the minister responsible, to go back 
and fix it. And in doing that you ended up sending out a clear 
message that Jack Messer was under your protection and 
untouchable. And from that, he was able to take it as a mandate 
that he could operate any way he wanted and any direction he 
wanted to, until things got so bad in Guyana and in Channel 
Lake that you had no choice. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to ask you some questions. Mr. Premier, 
who first advised you about the sale and the problems of the 
sale with Channel Lake Petroleum? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 
question is that the advice with respect to the sale of Channel 
Lake came either a day or so before or during the December 
1997 unity week session that we debated about the Calgary 
Declaration. 
 
If my memory serves me correctly, the Provincial Auditor had 
already made a comment respecting the sale. And to be honest 
with you, the question by the member from the Battlefords 
directed to the minister of CIC was the part that really drew to 
my attention that there was a situation here, which required 
further inquiry. That was the first time, and no other indication 
was raised to my office in this context. 
 
I do want to make a point however about some of the other 
points you raise. First of all I dismissed PURC for the reasons 
which I think are legitimate; I won’t repeat them again. Maybe 
there is another way better than 45 days. I’m open to 
suggestions here. I know that your caucus has talked about a 
LURC (legislative utilities review committee), a legislative 
review committee. I’ve often felt that that had some potential, 
but also some dangers with high politicization of the question of 
rates. 
 
But maybe there’s another mechanism. I mean this quite 
genuinely. If the House can come up with a forum to take a 
look at rates independently, we would be open to that because 
of the obvious benefits to the government in this context. 
 
Leave that aside. I want to talk about patronage. You need a 
little history about Jack Messer first of all with respect to 
patronage. When we assumed office on or about November 1 of 
1991 there were no immediate large-scale dismissals of people 
in the civil service. We didn’t come into the civil service with 
the view that they were a bunch of dead woods and that we had 
to remove them, or that they would be gone. No, we did not 
attend that. 
 
There were a couple obviously who were very close to the 
Premier. Mr. Sojonky was one who I think, by the way, in a 
very professional way even tendered his resignation. With Mr. 
George Hill, and we know his connections to Mr. Devine and 
the Conservative Party, there was no intention to immediately 
dismiss. I will tell you quite frankly, George Hill and I went to 
law school together. He was much older than I was, and I’m not 
like you at the grandfatherly age yet, but I knew George on a 
personal basis. 
 
But what we wanted to do, being a new government, was to 
have somebody — I described it to the press this morning — sit 

sidesaddle, with the key people watching us in this period of 
transition with other activities. And Messer, being a former 
member of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation board of 
directors as chairman and minister responsible in the old way in 
which we did business with the Crowns, was assigned by me or 
assigned — yes I guess I take the responsibility — to sit 
sidesaddle with George Hill. 
 
And everything was going along well and we were in office, in 
government, when lo and behold what do we find out? We find 
out that two weeks before the vote on November 1 — it was 
actually before November 1 — a contract had been entered into 
between the board of directors of the Power Corporation — as it 
then was constituted, and George Hill — as it then was 
constituted, for a million-dollar pay out to Mr. George Hill, in 
the eventuality that if there was a government change he should 
lose his job. 
 
(1515) 
 
And it was more than a contract. There was actually a cash 
transference if my memory serves me correctly — I stand to be 
corrected here — a cash transfer to a trust account of a law firm 
in Saskatoon of this large amount of money. And so we called 
in the lawyers to say, what do we do with this? This was even 
before we assumed office. What do we do with this? 
 
The argument at that point was we needed to, obviously, have a 
new president of the Power Corporation. Right away from one 
moment having a Power Corporation president, there’s no 
Power Corporation president, so Messer was asked to take on 
the duties because of the experience that he had previously 
certainly in his ministerial capacities, and he took on the duties. 
 
And unlike what you say, there actually was a hiring of a 
head-hunting firm to do the job of canvassing who should be 
the president of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, of which 
Messer was one of several people as a candidate and who was 
recommended by the head-hunting firm to be the president of 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. And that’s the history. 
And so he was named and the board confirmed. And it’s a fact. 
 
And I want to say one thing, which is a problem, to be very 
serious about what I think, is a very serious question. Crown 
corporations in this province have got a major problem, many 
major problems, but this is one major problem. In order to have 
a CEO of a Crown corporation, and the stature and size and 
importance of Power Corporation, to advertise nationally or 
internationally to get a CEO you’re going to have to pay 
something in the order of $350,000 a year, maybe upwards to 
$450,000 a year, plus all kinds of perks. 
 
And the political imperative for sure in 1991 was we couldn’t 
do that. And to be honest with you, in 1998 it is still the 
political imperative we can’t do that. Because if we did that, 
you people would be after us, didn’t matter who we hired. 
Automatically the pool of talent is defined by that circumstance. 
 
That’s not to diminish Jack Messer’s appointment who, I think, 
fulfilled his job’s role quite admirably as the president of the 
Power Corporation even at the reduced rate of 145, 150, 
whatever it was, after the various increases that took place. 
 



1884 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

So that’s what happened. And we will always be faced, in this 
particular situation, unless of course we adopt the attitude, 
which is what we’re trying to do, namely: don’t privatization 
the Crowns, remove the ministers from the boards, make them 
commercially sound, let them be judged by commercial 
standards. 
 
But that means that CEOs will not be “people linked to political 
parties,” or they may be, but they’re going to be CEOs paid 
350,000 or $450,000 in order to get the very, very best that you 
can get. Again, not to diminish Jack Messer or anybody else. 
 
That will be a dilemma for us. It’ll be dilemma if you should 
make it to office or if the Liberals should make it to office. Or 
the other alternative of course, which your party’s advocating, 
privatize them all. Let the shareholders and the board of 
directors decide that. Well we oppose the privatization route. 
 
May I add one other thing about patronage. It has been the 
custom of every government to the best of my knowledge in 
Saskatchewan, and by the way outside of Saskatchewan, as a 
matter of good governance that the premier, at the end of the 
day, must say yes or no to the hiring — I’m not now talking 
about Crown corporation heads — yes or no to the hiring of 
deputy ministers. 
 
We like to hire deputy ministers who are the most competent, 
most able, most experienced, can contribute to department. We 
try to do it without political relevance at all. I give you many 
examples of that, many examples of that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — John Wright. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — John Wright, somebody whispered, is 
a good example. John Wright was deputy minister of Finance 
under the Tories and we kept him as deputy minister of Finance 
and — one of the best decisions we ever made — and now he’s 
over at CIC and doing a good job for CIC as well. Another very 
good decision of the government. 
 
So it is always the case that the premier will make . . . approve 
about this. And one can argue this is patronage. We need to 
limit . . . to eliminate patronage. We need to do this. But let me 
just make one other last point on the issue of patronage. 
 
No government will at its core have key advisers who 
fundamentally oppose the direction and the policy of the 
government. It doesn’t work. At the deputy level or at the 
Crown corporation level. It doesn’t work if the Crown 
corporation, head of Power say, wants to privatize right out, the 
Power Corporation, and the policy of the government says no, 
you’re not going to do it. Just is not going to work. 
 
So there needs to be an uneasy balance, is the way I describe it, 
between competence and independence, and not patronage, but 
at least an ability to have advisers who are on the same page as 
the government of the day is, as it’s been elected as a 
government of the day to do its thing. 
 
With respect to severance, this I think now has been canvassed 
ad nauseam by the committee. I haven’t been following the 
process of the committee but I’ve received enough reports to 
know — the Bogdasavich reports, the Gerrand reports. The 

situation while CIC dealt with it referred to it to Mr. Fair. Mr. 
Fair referred to it to . . . the lawyer from Saskatoon from 
MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman; the opinions were made and 
the decision was made by Mr. Fair based on those legal 
opinions. 
 
That is the record. I believe Mr. Wright testified to that today. 
He was party, central, principal actor to that. And that was the 
only way that we could do it without the allegations that this 
was somehow a political interference. 
 
The Deputy Premier has many times said, and he’s right — 
politically popularly — perhaps the government should have 
said, politically popularly, you’re not going to get any 
severance. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, at my age, approaching yours, at my stage in 
life, I’ve decided — and you can believe it or not believe it — 
but the best politics very often, most often, is to do what you 
think is the correct thing and the right thing to do. And the 
process through CIC, through Fair, through lawyers, was 
severance. And that is how the severance situation took place 
and there’s nothing else that can be added. 
 
Now 1994 — and I’ll take my place; I’m sorry for being 
long-winded in the answers. I’ll try to shorten them up a little 
bit in the interest of time so we can get more questions out. 
 
I did not say, technically or actually, the words that you used in 
asking the question that I told Mr. Anguish to go fix it. Mr. 
Anguish will be testifying before the Crown Corporations 
Committee. 
 
What I did say, and quite candidly, Doug Anguish told me — 
and this is no secret — Jack Messer by that time had had 
problems with Lexus issues and files issues and reorganization 
issues. I think he was doing a good job in reorganizing the 
Crown corporation, reducing debt — a number of very many 
good things that Messer did for the corporation. A lot, to be 
quite frank with you, in my judgement. And I’ll maintain that 
position. 
 
But none the less Jack Messer’s style is a style of — and I say 
this charitably of the man — aggressive, go for it, do it. And 
this was irritating the board, and in effect what Messer . . . what 
Anguish reported to me was that this style of personality and 
management had raised serious problems within the board. 
These would be Jack Messer. 
 
He asked me what should I do about it or what I thought about 
it. These are not the exact words but this is the effect, as I recall. 
I indicated to the minister that I thought Messer was doing a 
good job on debt restructuring, reorganizing — although it was 
difficult with respect to the unions and others. The corporation 
was in the black, in a profit position and that the minister should 
go out and try to work out the differences, is what I said, 
between the board and the CEO in order to make sure the 
corporation functions and continues to function in that direction 
— the direction that I alluded to with respect to the question of 
debt/equity ratios, reorganization and the like. 
 
And the rest is history. Apparently that’s what happened and the 
board in effect kept him and there was some appraisals of work 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

as Messer testified himself before the Crown Corporations 
Committee about evaluations, and there we go. That’s the 
situation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Premier. Premier, through the 
course of the discussions of the Channel Lake hearings, a 
recurring theme has come back a number of times surrounding 
the issue of accountability and authority. And certainly there’s 
two planes of this I guess. 
 
We have first of all where you would say the structural type 
where if you look at Channel Lake specifically, you start with 
the Channel Lake management, the Channel Lake board, the 
SaskPower board, CIC board, the cabinet, and ultimately, as 
you said, you ultimately are responsible. I think as President 
Truman said, the buck stops here. And it probably holds the 
same in our process. 
 
But the other area that is there is sort of ministerial 
accountability in terms of — and I’m not talking about where 
the Crown corporations are intending to head into the future by 
removing ministers from individual Crowns — up until and 
including this exact point in time, there is a minister appointed 
to each of the Crown boards who indeed is the chairman of the 
board and who has that direct linkage, if you like, with the 
cabinet. 
 
Mr. Premier, how do you see that ministerial accountability to 
the process. First of all the ministerial accountability and 
responsibility that goes with that accountability to the cabinet, 
and then the cabinet through you to the people of Saskatchewan 
for affairs that are conducted under their auspices. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if I may say so 
again, this is a very fundamentally important question. This is 
what we aim for; this is what our goal is. 
 
The Crown review has said that we need to be competitive, the 
Crowns do, in the world. They need to be commercially tested, 
their standards, profitability, and the like. And they need to be 
therefore freed by the political constraints, which very often are 
imposed upon a Crown corporation by virtue of ministers sitting 
on boards. 
 
We need to, they say — not to diminish any of the boards of 
director members who have served very loyally over many, 
many years on the Crowns — elevate the Crown corporation 
boards of directors with respect to their duties, their obligations, 
their responsibilities which are very, very high on law these 
days. 
 
That’s what Crown review said. And we bought in that because 
we think that if we don’t do that — our Crowns unchanged — 
will gradually diminish in their importance because of the 
limited market that we have in Saskatchewan if they’re 
confined within the boundaries of Saskatchewan. And then 
we’ll lose the Crowns and a valuable asset. 
 
Now we may have an ideological difference here between us 
and you folks. Privatization solves that problem, I grant you 
that. Then you’re out in the world doing everything that you 
want. But for our philosophy and our policy, we want the 
Crowns within the Saskatchewan context — owned by the 

people. If we do, then we can’t allow them to wither on the 
vine. We’ve got to allow them to expand out there and doing it. 
 
So how do we see accountability? We see accountability this 
way: through the Crown Investments Corporation board of 
directors composed of ministers and the minister responsible. 
The answerability for the actions of the Crowns will be in this 
House through that minister — the CIC minister. That’s why 
the questions have been directed to the Deputy Premier because 
he’s the minister in charge of CIC as opposed to the old style of 
going to this minister or that minister or this minister and that 
minister because . . . no more ministers on the boards any more. 
 
Secondly, the minister in charge of Crown Investments 
Corporation is advised and guided by Mr. John Wright or 
whoever John Wright’s successor may be in the future and the 
staff who — as John Wright in his statement this morning 
outlined very briefly . . . the general oversight of the functions 
of the Crowns. 
 
CIC neither has the capacity nor has it the mandate to 
micromanage Power or micromanage Tel or micromanage SGI 
— cannot do that. So this is our attempt to try to square the 
circle of freeing up publicly-owned Crown corporations to be 
commercially active out there and commercially tested while at 
the same time being accountable to you folks and to the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan in the Legislative Assembly 
which is the case here. 
 
By the way, before I take my place, parenthetically speaking, 
the buck in the United States might stop here with President 
Truman but I would remind the member opposite there that in 
the United States the form of government is essentially totally 
different than the form of government here. 
 
In the United States there is the executive arm of which there is 
constitutional power vested in the President. And then there is 
the Congress of which there is a different set of constitutional 
powers vested, and there is the judiciary with a different set of 
constitutional powers vested. And the fathers of that country 
and mothers who invented it, wanted the give and take and the 
uneven balance, and the checks and balances in this regard. And 
when Truman said, the buck stops here, he said, within my 
jurisdiction. 
 
This is a British parliamentary form of government. The British 
parliamentary form of government has a cabinet in which each 
and every one of us is collectively and individually responsible 
for the decisions made. We are supported by our colleagues. 
Our colleagues are all part of the team. 
 
My cabinet, I’ve said to my colleagues, it is no more, no less 
than a committee of the caucus, albeit vested with 
extra-statutory duties. You are the opposition, you test us, you 
oppose, you propose. It’s the give and take. We’re collectively 
responsible. 
 
So every once in a while when a journalist comes up to me and 
says, you know, Lingenfelter, excuse me, the Minister of CIC 
says this — what do you have to say about it . . . they say to me. 
I say he speaks for the government. No, no, what do you have 
to say about it? So I repeat it all over again — it’s cock-eyed. 
They don’t understand the parliamentary system those who put 



1886 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

it that way, and I’m simply saying that the buck stops with all 
of us in the front benches. 
 
(1530) 
 
And if the buck turns out to be a situation, if I can use that 
expression, which merits the lack of confidence of this House, 
then theoretically under a British parliamentary system, a vote 
of non-confidence will bring down the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Canada will decide. 
 
Anyway that’s an aside, my little two-bits worth to get to feel a 
bit better, but . . . feel a bit better. But that is how we think 
accountability will work. CIC minister, always in the presence 
of this House answering questions of policy — not 
micromanaging, but answering questions of policy on Crown 
corporations, on details . . . that presidents and the Chairs which 
will now be professional, non-political, they will be answering 
for the commercial decisions. That’s not to say that you can’t 
ask them here, but on policy terms you come back here and the 
minister has to respond. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, for that 
philosophical dissertation as to where you’re heading with the 
Crowns. We’re reviewing where you’ve been. And the structure 
under which this review has been taking place is not under the 
new model that’s proposed, but under the model where indeed 
ministers were individually responsible for Crown corporations. 
All of the events surrounding Channel Lake occurred under the 
former model, and I believe technically it’s still the current 
model, although I understand the transition is indeed in process. 
 
Mr. Premier, the current minister responsible for Energy and 
Mines was the SaskPower minister at the time of the Channel 
Lake sale. He was the individual charged with being the 
chairman of the SaskPower board. 
 
You’ve indicated that the chairman of the board in the future is 
going to be answerable for the actions of that corporation and I 
understand that into the future. But surely the same principle 
applies into the way things were before, where the chairman of 
the board was a member of your cabinet. 
 
The minister responsible for Energy and Mines was the 
chairman of the board when the sale of Channel Lake occurred. 
Did he tell you and the cabinet about the problems that had 
occurred with the sale? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, at the time of the sale, 
on or about June 20 of 1997, and as I answered to you earlier 
with respect to me — and I believe this is the case with the 
cabinet although I’m not going to get into the question of 
revelation of cabinet discussions in debate — but I will venture 
breaking my rule to say, I believe it’s also safe to say that he did 
not tell the cabinet either, of the circumstances. 
 
And the reason that that was the case is that if you take a look at 
the material which was tabled by Deloitte Touche . . . not by 
Deloitte Touche, but the material we tabled featuring Deloitte 
Touche and CIC and Gerrand, I’m not going to repeat their 
conclusions, but they’re obvious. 
 
That in effect what the testimony seems to also say before the 

Crown Corporations Committee, was that the current, or as he 
was then, Minister of Energy and Mines, and the board did not 
have sufficient information about Channel Lake and the 
activities, the controversies involving Mr. Portigal, Mr. Hurst, 
and SaskPower and the like. 
 
Now that being the case, it’s pretty hard to know how you hold 
accountable the person who did not know. If the person knew 
and did not reveal, then there’s accountability and 
responsibility. And finally, the minister will be appearing 
before the committee and giving testimony, his version of the 
testimony, and you can ask him the details of it. 
 
But that is what the evidence . . . I remind you again what we 
did. Gerrand interviewed people; interviewed everybody who 
consented. Deloitte Touche took every part of that record apart 
fiscally. CIC reviewed all of those and came to those 
conclusions. And now you’re hearing testimony, and a thousand 
documents on top of it. 
 
And I would say to you, at some point the committee will have 
to make the decision whether or not those findings as tabled are 
accurate or not accurate. But as they stand now, as I see it, the 
tabling of those reports are accurate and on that basis, pretty 
hard to know how you hold someone at fault. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Premier, I certainly could go through 
many aspects of this whole thing, and I think that that would 
perhaps be valuable. But I think more importantly is that the 
testimony that we’ve heard and is pretty well beyond debate in 
terms of the events surrounding the whole Channel Lake thing 
— the sale and all the rest of it. 
 
There are certainly significant milestones in there where clearly 
things were — searching for the parliamentary word — done in 
a way that left a lot to be desired. Now ultimately, ultimately 
also in our British parliamentary system, there is ministerial 
responsibility for the actions of those people that are under the 
direct supervision and responsibility of the minister. 
 
And I know that you could cite better than I, countless issues in 
both this province, other provinces, and in the federal scene 
where ministers who have been found to be responsible at a 
time, their officials or people in their department have messed 
up to — the significance is what happened here — hold 
themselves accountable by tendering their resignation, by 
saying I was responsible, this happened under my watch. 
 
And certainly clearly, clearly there could be pointed to dates 
like the June date when there was pretty strong evidence that 
something still could be done to save the day and that clearly at 
that time the minister knew that that was the situation. 
 
Clearly there were events . . . that things could have been turned 
around. And clearly, Mr. Premier, at the very least, the issue of 
under our parliamentary tradition in history of ministerial 
responsibility and offering a resignation is the honourable thing 
to do when things go off the rail in this magnitude. Because, 
Mr. Premier, by your own admission that as a result of these 
events, Mr. Messer was given the choice of be fired or resign 
with severance. 
 
So is he the only person that’s going to have the responsibility 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

for this issue? What about executive responsibility and 
ministerial responsibility, Mr. Premier, under our British 
parliamentary system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the committee 
hearings are not yet complete and those should await 
completion and see what the evidence is. Let me make one 
other point before I take my place however. 
 
One has to be careful that in your line of questioning . . . you 
don’t find yourself, if I may say so with respect, in a point of 
fundamental contradiction. On the one hand if you argue based 
on the Gerrand report, that Mr. Messer should have been fired, 
period, and you base your arguments on that, you accept it. If 
you accept that part of Gerrand, logically you must conclude 
that the board was not sufficiently apprised with all the facts 
because that’s what Gerrand found. And if that’s the case, then 
how can the minister be asked to resign given that he relied on 
the advice and information provided by the management of 
Power and Channel Lake as Gerrand and all the documents 
indicate. It’s one or the other. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I certainly do 
support and appreciate the fact that Mr. Messer was the CEO 
who was responsible for a lack of proper diligence — perhaps 
by himself and including his vice-presidents — who didn’t see 
fit to read the document, who didn’t see fit to place due 
diligence on the process in an attempt to get the deal rushed 
through before March 31. 
 
This morning Mr. Wright was at a loss to explain how those 
officials could come to the conclusion that by getting this deal 
done as was apparent in this whole issue, by getting the deal 
done on March 31, that somehow they came to the opinion that 
they would be able to sort of blend the results of the sale of the 
shares because they’re buying a balance sheet. And because it 
was a balance sheet they could somehow write off into that 
balance sheet the losses that were suffered under the 
unauthorized arbitrage tradings. Mr. Wright was at a loss to 
explain how they could get that into their head because clearly 
the Ernst & Young auditor said that that would not be possible, 
that the reporting mechanisms were such that that couldn’t be 
done. 
 
So it seems to me, Mr. Premier, that you perhaps would even 
agree that Mr. Messer certainly didn’t have control of the 
process. It’s perhaps even true that the senior management 
didn’t have control of the process. Surely under our ministerial 
accountability and responsibility tradition in the British 
parliamentary system, if you end up with that much of a lack of 
confidence in your very senior people that you have under the 
sole department you’re responsible for — when it goes wrong 
that badly — it’s the obligation of the minister responsible to 
tender his resignation. 
 
And if at the very least this inquiry then exonerated the 
minister, then you might reinstate him, but there’s been nothing 
there and I don’t think it’s the duty of a committee to be calling 
for a minister’s resignation. It’s your responsibility, Premier. 
They’re the people that you appoint. As Bill Cosby said, I 
brought you into this world, I’ll take you out of this world. It’s 
your responsibility, sir, and you should have called for his 
resignation as soon as these events came forward. Why didn’t 

you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have had sadly in the 
time of my tenure as Premier, the occasion to ask for ministers 
to resign. The rule that I adopt which I think is the fair rule to 
adopt, is if there is cause to resign . . . what we see thus far . . . 
well whether it’s resign or resignation, I’ve had cause to do that. 
What we see here in this case is that the minister here acted 
reasonably when he relied on the advice and information 
provided by the management of SaskPower and Channel Lake. 
That is my conclusion. 
 
And I cite again what I say is the fundamental contradiction that 
you’re finding yourself in. Because if you rely on Gerrand on 
this issue, which says fire Mr. Messer, why? Because the board 
did not have sufficient information in management respecting 
Channel Lake, then you must logically accept the other side of 
the dimension, namely that the minister and the board was not 
properly informed. On what basis is their culpability or request 
for resignation or for dismissal? 
 
Now again I repeat, the minister will be there to explain. Mr. 
Messer has given his version of what he’s says took place. The 
minister will be there to give his version of what takes place. 
The committee report will be filed and written. At some point I 
may have to reassess all of the facts and make some other 
decisions. 
 
But you’re asking me as of this moment? As of this moment, 
that is where the factual basis remains. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, welcome to yourself and 
your officials. Something that has struck me as very unusual in 
this whole session, and throughout the Channel Lake 
discussions, was your reluctance to testify at the Channel Lake 
hearings. I could never really understand that given the fact that 
today we are talking in a pretty open and frank way about what 
has happened surrounding this whole Channel Lake situation. 
You’ve been answering the questions fairly straightforwardly, I 
think, and arguably so. 
 
People in Saskatchewan I think feel that it is part of your 
responsibility to answer questions in a straightforward and in a 
responsible fashion. And I think we got many, many calls from 
people, and I think if you look back at the editorials, writers’ 
views, many of them felt that you had a responsibility to testify 
at the hearings. 
 
You’ve always, and your committee members have always 
displayed an extreme reluctance to take part in such a 
discussion in that forum. I don’t understand why. I don’t really 
understand why you would want to not move in this direction. 
After all, you are the Premier of Saskatchewan; you have a 
responsibility to the taxpayers of this province, as we all do 
have a responsibility to the taxpayers of this province. You have 
a responsibility to explain the actions, collectively, of your 
administration. And I think that that’s valid. I think that you 
have to explain the actions not only of yourself but your 
ministers. That’s part of the responsibility that we’re talking 
about in terms of ministerial responsibility. 
 
That is something that I think is fundamental for a government. 
And I think that you would agree with me on that point, that 



1888 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

someone has to explain the actions of the administration. And 
ultimately the Premier’s responsibility is to take the top-line 
type of responsibility for the actions of government. I suppose if 
you came to the committee and just said, Mr. Premier, I have no 
knowledge of any of this kind . . . what went on, or some of the 
answers that you’re providing today, it probably would have 
been a pretty brief stay. 
 
Your reluctance to attend, though, raised a lot of questions in a 
lot of people’s minds about what you did or didn’t know about 
what happened in that whole Channel Lake situation. There’s a 
lot of questions about Jack Messer. There’s a lot of questions 
about your relationship with Mr. Messer — how it was at one 
point a very open and very good relationship, and how that 
seems to have deteriorated over a period of time, and how 
perhaps there’s even a little bit of animosity between the two of 
you at this point. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not on my part. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well the Premier says not on his part. And I 
would respect that view. If the Premier feels that there isn’t 
animosity on his part, certainly I would hope that that is the 
case. And I would hope that Mr. Messer would feel the same 
way about it. But there seems to be at least a view by many 
people in Saskatchewan that there’s been a little bit of 
separation of views, to say the least, on this subject. 
 
Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan I think are owed some 
explanations with respect to this whole thing. I think they want 
to see you attend that — those Crown corporation meetings — 
to discuss the whole issue surrounding this so that there can be 
some rather pointed questions asked about the situation. Why 
will you not attend? As I said, I think if you have nothing to 
share with the committee, it would be a relatively brief stay. A 
relatively brief opportunity to say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, the ministers, the member from Rosetown, or 
the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) — he certainly would be 
of the view that you should attend, I would think. 
 
I think people in Saskatchewan want you to stand up for the 
people of Saskatchewan. I think they also want you to take 
responsibility for your government’s actions. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’ll take my place at this point, and perhaps you 
might want to explain why there is a reluctance on your behalf 
and on behalf of the members of your government that are on 
the committee to have you attend and explain. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, this is an easy answer 
for me. First of all, on the question of responsibility from the 
government, we have . . . the day that we tabled the reports the 
minister in charge of CIC has said, I repeat again, the reports 
which we tabled — Deloitte Touche, Gerrand, CIC — point to 
mistake and error for which we take responsibility. The 
government takes responsibility. I’ve said it here; I repeat it 
again; I haven’t denied that. 
 
Secondly I take the view, as I explained in — the member from 
Melfort said lengthy dissertation, philosophic dissertation — 
when ministers or officials appear, they speak on behalf of the 

government. The notion that a minister speaks differently than a 
premier or premier differently from a minister belies cabinet 
solidarity and cabinet decision-making process. 
 
Secondly, I have limited knowledge of this matter, as the 
documentation reveals and any personal direct knowledge that I 
have, as has been already directed to me in the last hour or so of 
questions by the member from Melfort, I’ll do my best to 
answer. 
 
Now in addition to that, we have a list of witnesses coming up 
of ministers and other officials yet to be heard. Everything, 
which is relevant, is out there. That is the answer and I think it’s 
a perfectly logical one. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Premier, frankly I think in a lot of people’s 
minds the reports that your government has tabled raised more 
questions than they answered. I think lots of people would be of 
that view in Saskatchewan that they simply are not adequate in 
terms of where the breakdown was in responsibility. 
 
And what we have seen so far is Messer standing up and saying 
he had no responsibility in it. What we have is officials from 
SaskPower standing up and say they had no responsibility. We 
have people that were from DEML (Direct Energy Marketing 
Limited) standing up and saying they had no responsibility in 
any of this. They bought the company, and they bought it under 
what they thought was a straightforward business deal. 
 
You have people just constantly going on and on, and on 
contradicting each other. I think what’s happened in that whole 
committee structure down there . . . and we’ll watch it unfold 
and the Chair will do her best I’m sure to keep things in line 
there, but the fact of the matter is, is I think a lot of people that 
have attended those committee meetings have developed the 
attitude that they can say whatever they want because it doesn’t 
really make any difference. It doesn’t really make any 
difference in terms of any kind of repercussions. 
 
I don’t see at this point anyone, anyone that seems to be of the 
view that they’re going to be in a position where there’s going 
to be a problem here. There’s contradictions constantly — 
Messer says one thing, the minister responsible for CIC stands 
up in the legislature the very same day and says, well there will 
always be a difference of views about how things have unfolded 
in this situation. 
 
There seems to be an absolute and complete breakdown of any 
responsibility or any accountability in here. Everybody is 
pointing the finger at everyone else here. No, it’s not me, it’s 
them; no, it’s not me, it’s them. Every single person that’s 
attended so far has always protected their interests to the best of 
their ability and have pointed their finger in every other 
direction. Pretty much that is the assumption . . . or that is the 
view that a lot of people in Saskatchewan have here today, I 
believe. 
 
They don’t see a government standing up and saying yes, we 
are responsible; yes, we are accountable to the taxpayers. They 
see everything but that. They see everything but that in every 
fashion. Ministers like the minister from P.A. saying no, he 
isn’t prepared to answer questions about it from the media. 
He’ll answer his questions when he gets to the committee. Not 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1889 

prepared to answer any questions of the media at all. 
 
You have ministers responsible at the time who were shuffled 
away from the responsibilities right around the same time frame 
when these whole discussions about Crown corporations were 
taking place. Shuffled away out of harm’s way, many people 
would be of the view. 
 
All through that same time frame, the minister from 
Rosetown-Biggar, he stood up in the Assembly — there was a 
Crown Corporation Committee . . . or Crown corporation 
review taking place much heralded by this government — 
saying that it would be the definitive voice and definitive view 
on the direction of Crown corporations into the future. An 
authoritative look at how we are going to operate Crown 
corporations now and well into the future. Very, very tight 
terms of reference, I might add. Nevertheless that’s what was 
happening at that time frame. 
 
June 25, the member from Rosetown-Biggar got up before the 
people of Saskatchewan and said all is well. Don’t worry about 
a thing in the Crown corporations; we are watching them very 
carefully; the people of Saskatchewan can go to sleep every 
night and not worry one little bit about how the corporations are 
being managed by the government of the day. That was pretty 
much the assessment, I think, many people had of it. Five days, 
just five short days after the whole discussions took place 
surrounding what had happened by the board, what had 
happened — we lost some money. It happens; we all understand 
that. Business goes sour every once in awhile. Anyone that’s 
been in business understands that. Sometimes things don’t work 
out. 
 
The member, or the Minister, or pardon me, Jack Messer has 
said, well if this is a private corporation who would care? Well 
I’ll tell you who would care in a private corporation — the 
people who own the corporation would care; the shareholders of 
that corporation would care. And they would be asking some 
very important questions of the people who own that . . . or who 
operate and manage that corporation. 
 
It is not my, it is not my view that they shouldn’t have that kind 
of responsibility placed on them. I think everyone is of the view 
that the responsibility placed on management, whether it is a 
private corporation or a government Crown corporation, are 
similar in many fashions. You lose money; you have to answer 
the questions, the difficult questions. Why did you do it? What 
broke down? Who’s responsible? What kind of responsibility 
are you prepared to take on this situation? 
 
The member from Rosetown — member from Rosetown and 
Biggar — what possibly do you think was going on in that 
department when that member stands before the people of 
Saskatchewan and just, I think blatantly tells them very, very 
misleading facts. Says to them everything is fine when he 
knows full well, just coming off of a meeting a few short days 
before, that there is a very, very serious problem that the 
SaskPower . . . SaskPower is engaged in unauthorized trading 
activities. They just finished botching a huge sale deal. People 
are responsible. 
 
I can’t help but think that somehow or another that that 
discussion did not carry back to cabinet. I don’t think many 

people believe the fact that that type of discussion would not 
have been brought back to the cabinet table. I don’t think that 
that’s all that credible. I’m afraid people won’t believe that. It’s 
a little too long of a bow, particularly when he goes out on one 
occasion and says everything’s okay, and then just days later is 
miraculously shuffled off out of harm’s way — quite a 
coincidence. I don’t know whether anyone’s believing it, but 
I’m not. And I think a lot of people in Saskatchewan share my 
view that they don’t believe it either. They don’t believe it 
because it’s just all too coincidental and convenient that things 
of that nature would take place in such nice little time frames to 
ensure that, hopefully anyway, none of this ever comes before 
the people of Saskatchewan, none of its ever revealed to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And had it not been, had it not been for the Provincial Auditor, 
you would have pulled it off. Had it not been for the Provincial 
Auditor raising questions, you’d have pulled it off and the 
people of Saskatchewan would have never known what had 
happened in this whole situation at all. Channel Lake would 
have never been heard from. 
 
Channel Lake would have been a topic that no one would ever 
have known the difference about. Nothing would have ever 
become before the people of Saskatchewan. We wouldn’t have 
had months of this Channel Lake inquiry going on. We 
wouldn’t have had bell ringing the legislature. We wouldn’t 
have had all of those things taking place had it not been for the 
Provincial Auditor saying, whoa, there is something wrong with 
what has happened in this situation. 
 
And I think many people in Saskatchewan view this as just all 
too convenient, a government that wants to — legitimately 
wants to — run the province in a proper fashion, but when 
something goes wrong, instead of standing up like that minister 
should have done, the one from Rosetown-Biggar, or the 
member from P.A., what they should have done was stand up 
and say we’ve had some problems here. We got into a situation 
where we ran into some difficulties, just as I think you would 
see happen in many, many private companies. If you don’t, I 
think you’ve abdicated your responsibility. 
 
I think you have committed what is ultimately the only thing, 
generally speaking, that gets you fired as a minister. You’ve 
stepped outside of the rules of accountability and responsibility. 
The moment that you do that, I think you’re in grave danger, 
politically speaking, and you should be. 
 
I think that’s where the break down is. It’s not in the admission 
of failure because we all have failures. We all make mistakes. It 
is in the admission of those failures that I think is the important 
consideration here that has to be brought before the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Had they done that . . . and you’ve seen examples of it in 
governments all over Canada. We’ve seen examples of it in 
Ontario. We’ve seen examples of it in Alberta. We’ve seen 
examples of it in many, many situations where they stand up 
and say look, we made a mistake. 
 
I think that’s what people are looking for in government these 
days. I think they want an admission that there’s been a 
problem. I think they want an admission from the member from 



1890 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

Rosetown-Biggar that he screwed up. I think they want an 
admission from the member from P.A. that he may have made 
mistakes in this whole situation and that the accountability 
broke down and they are responsible. 
 
Had they done that, I think you could have saved them, Mr. 
Premier. I think you could have saved them. Rather than 
shuffling them out of harm’s way, what you should have done, I 
think, is ask them to take responsibility for their actions. Ask 
them to stand before the people of Saskatchewan, and say yes, I 
made a mistake. And I suppose in a lot of ways people would 
say at least they have the intestinal fortitude to stand up and say 
they made a mistake. 
 
People would have agreed with that, people would have 
believed that, people would have respected that, people would 
have appreciated that, and people may even have forgiven that. 
 
But now, we’ve seen what appears to be a very deliberate 
attempt to cover this whole thing up. I don’t know whether 
you’re hearing from people across Saskatchewan about this, 
Mr. Premier, but we certainly are hearing from people across 
Saskatchewan about this. They don’t believe all of the stories 
on this unfortunately. And, Mr. Premier, we will see I guess 
ultimately when they . . . at the conclusion of these hearings 
what kind of responsibility is going to be taken in all of this 
situation. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, I would ask on behalf of, I think, a lot of 
people in Saskatchewan, that you would take responsibility now 
for the actions of those ministers as you are ultimately, I think, 
responsible. Even though you say ministers speak on behalf of 
the government, I think you have to ultimately be responsible, 
be the one that takes the action on this, be the minister, be the 
first minister; be the Premier of Saskatchewan. Take 
responsibility for the actions of those ministers and dismiss 
them. I think that’s what people feel is appropriate in this 
situation. 
 
And as my colleague from Melfort has said, dismiss them, and 
if there is at the end of day, the view that perhaps they didn’t 
have any involvement or that they are not responsible, I don’t 
think anyone would have any problem reinstating them at that 
point. I don’t think people would have response . . . a concern 
about them being reinstated. 
 
After all, it’s happened before with your administration. People 
have stepped aside. I remember the member from Saskatoon 
when there was some difficulties surrounding allegations about 
some improper financing of farming operation, stepped aside, 
did the honourable thing, and stepped aside. 
 
I remember the Minister of Post-Secondary Education doing 
something of a similar fashion — stepping aside when there 
was some concern about what had happened in his department, 
very similar situations I think today. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you do what I think a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan want you to do on this situation — take the 
ultimate responsibility, ask those two members to step aside 
from their responsibilities until this whole thing can be cleared 
up? 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
made a rather lengthy statement and then tried to close if off 
with a question. I’ll try not to be as long, but I feel duty-bound 
to make a few points in response if I may. 
 
First of all I do want to tell you he may believe in the 
conspiracy theory that says that Elvis is still alive and well 
somewhere, maybe hanging out in the SaskPower buildings, I 
don’t know. But I don’t believe in that and I don’t believe the 
conspiracy theories which the hon. member has tried to spin I 
think rather unconvincingly — not rather unconvincingly — 
totally unconvincingly. 
 
(1600) 
 
The hon. member talked about the question of my appearance, 
and I’ve given the answer already in his previous question. But 
the hon. member full well knows, as does the press gallery, as 
does anybody who follows this on television, that every witness 
who has appeared before the Crown Corporations Committee 
was asked by members, including the member from Melfort 
today with Mr. Wright, specifically, what did the Premier tell 
you; what did the Premier say; what did the Premier ask you to 
do; what did the Premier write; what did the Premier . . . 
 
Every witness, they’ve been trying to do that to try to get some 
direct connection. And in reality, as Mr. Wright has given by 
his sworn testimony, and Mr. Gerrand in his sworn testimony, 
the facts are as I’ve indicated in my estimates here. Anything in 
my direct knowledge I’ve answered the hon. member from 
Melfort. And every one of the testimonies of the people under 
oath with respect to those kind of questions show that what I 
have said is true. 
 
We’re not pointing in every direction I don’t think in this 
Crown Corporations Committee. I don’t know what the 
judgement call of the Crown Corporations Committee will be at 
the end of the day. I would hope that there would be as much as 
possible a unanimous report, which sets out specific aspects of 
the specific transaction, and if necessary, casts blame. 
 
I think if they find the blame I don’t think it will be very much 
different from the blame which is already been identified in the 
three reports by Deloitte and by Gerrand and by CIC. But if 
there’s something extra, that should be a part of your report, 
which obviously will be in the public domain, and the Premier 
and the government will have to act on. 
 
But I want to remind the member opposite that without 
prejudging this report, from what I’ve seen of it, very limitedly, 
we are ending up at this Crown Corporations Committee 
hearing exactly where we started off three months ago, namely 
that Deloitte Touche and CIC and Gerrand are fundamentally 
correct. There has not been one statement by one opposition 
person on either party which points to a fundamental 
contradiction of any statement of fact involving any minister or 
official that hasn’t already been stated by Deloitte Touche and 
stated by the Crown Corporations Committee review. That’s the 
reality. 
 
There’s been confusing testimony about what papers were 
switched, what papers were read, and all of that. The committee 
will sort that out just like Gerrand tried to sort it out and 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1891 

Deloitte Touche. But fundamentally the record is set out there 
in this document and that’s where we’re ending up. And that’s 
what the journalists know and that’s what the public knows. 
 
And in that regard, I say to the hon. member, when he says do 
the right thing as Premier — we did the right thing. We ordered 
Gerrand, we ordered Deloitte & Touche, we ordered CIC, we 
tabled it, we had the minister in charge of CIC make his full 
comprehensive statement, we tabled a thousand documents — 
not pages — but a thousand documents. 
 
All of this we revealed. Nobody forced it on us. We did this. 
We put this before the House. The member laughs. We put this 
before the House on Tuesday . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No. We put this document before the House on Tuesday. 
 
Look, chronologically . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Do you 
want to hear the answer or not? Chronologically, on or about 
December 9, 1997 during the unity hearing, the member from 
Battleford asked the question. On or about December 9, 
according to Mr. Wright’s testimony, Mr. Lingenfelter’s public 
testimony, the full inquiry was directed of CIC, and Deloitte 
Touche and Gerrand were commissioned and the work then 
took place for the remaining weeks or days of December — it 
being Christmas — working through January and February and 
prepared and tabled on the first available day of the opening of 
the House — we did that. 
 
They didn’t ask us and they didn’t press us. That’s the reality. 
We tabled a thousand extra documents. When they wouldn’t 
convene the Public Accounts Committee, we went to the Crown 
Corporations Committee. And I want to pay tribute to all 
members of the Crown Corporations Committee. There have 
been some notable exceptions of statements, which I don’t like 
but that doesn’t matter. I think they have done a good job and 
they have brought credit to the committee and to the Legislative 
Assembly in the fact that they could do this job and get to the 
fact of the matter and the bottom of the issues. 
 
So there are no three points; there’s no blaming people 
differently. We’re ending up exactly where the government, in 
its independent study, said that that would be the case. And 
there is no statement by anybody and no evidence by anybody 
. . . at any fundamental contradiction. 
 
In fact there’s a very high standard, Mr. Member from 
Kindersley. One of the humorous, or sad, aspects of the 
Channel Lake inquiry involve the Russian connection, the 
Russian mafia connection. And it so happened that I was 
reading the report on business of yesterday, June 9, and lo and 
behold I see a story on the front page about, "YBM probe 
unveils policy breaches." 
 
What happened was this, and I’ll read you the report: 
 

An internal review by directors of YBM Magnex 
International, Inc. has found no illegal activity by company 
officials but has noted “significant breaches (seriously, just 
listen to this, member from Kindersley) significant 
breaches in corporate policy and common business 
prudence" by chief operating officer, Igor Fisherman and 
others. 
 

A summary of the report released yesterday also identified 
“substantial transactions that required, but did not receive, 
board of directors' approval.” 
 

I’ll stop there because it might resonate with what Deloitte 
Touche and CIC said when we tabled it at the opening of the 
House. 
 
The company has done what? I’m reading from the report. 
 

The company has "reprimanded the officers involved based 
on the breaches of policy,” the summary said. 
 

Not the chairman of the board of directors of YBM resigning; 
not the internal audit committee resigning; not firing Mr. 
Fisherman, at least not thus far, but reprimanding him in this 
operation by commercial standards. 
 
Now your rebuttal to me will be, but you’re not a private 
company, you’re a public company; your standards should be 
higher. And you’re right. And you’re right; our standards have 
been higher. And our standards were higher in the revelation 
and on the actions that were taken throughout the whole piece. 
 
And finally, I don’t want this to degenerate any more than it 
was in its opening moments of hostility and anger, but I simply 
want to say, I really . . . every time — you can do it any time 
you want — but anytime the Saskatchewan Party gets up in this 
House and tries to tell me about misleading the voters, and 
standing up and taking responsibility, I am not going to allow 
that statement to go unchallenged. 
 
I’m going to say you people practised the biggest deception on 
the voters by switching your loyalty . . . to the people who gave 
you the trust to be elected as Tories. 
 
And the hon. member from Moosomin who is speaking from 
his chair, I love this. This is November 19, 1996. I’m reading 
from the report of the House so it’s not naming a member. This 
is the report. It says: “Toth mixes rumours.” “Moosomin MLA 
Don Toth says there is no truth to rumours he may be 
considering leaving the Progressive Conservative Party to sit as 
a Liberal. He considers crossing the floor . . .” Hold it. “He 
considers . . .” That’s right. I’ll read you . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You’re right about that. And you know — a 
little smile on his face that it’s true — he didn’t sit as a Liberal. 
But then he says this: “He considers crossing the floor to be 
political opportunism. He said Friday that he doesn’t want to be 
branded an opportunist.” 

 
Bring out the old branding iron, ladies and gentlemen. Bring out 
the old branding iron for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and a ninth — and 
a ninth — member who shall go unnamed because of the rules 
of this House, but who also crossed the floor. 
 
Now again, I don’t want to get into that except I’m not . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, I don’t. I don’t. I don’t because I 
will not accept, nor will the people of Saskatchewan accept, a 
lecture form you folks about misleading voters. And if you’re 
going to lecture me on that in the light of what we’ve done, I 
am going to lecture you on what you’ve done, which is the 
highest form of deception on the voters in your ridings. 
 



1892 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. Before I recognize 
the hon. member for Kindersley, I wish to bring to his attention 
rule 28 of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, which is 
that comments will be directed through the Chair. 
 
This is further supported in Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules 
and Forms, sixth ed., chapter 168, which in part — it’s a long 
paragraph. I just choose to read part of it: 
 

In debate all speeches are addressed to the Speaker. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We appreciate your 
advice in this area and we’ll endeavour to be helpful in that 
area. 
 
Mr. Premier, you were first elected in 1967? 
 
An Hon. Member: — October 11 or 18, I’m not sure, of 1967. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — 1967 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I was 17 years of age! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well, I was still junior to you by about six years 
if we would accept the fact that you were 17 when you were 
elected. We all know that you were considerably older than that 
at the time — 11 years older at the time. 
 
And you’ve learned a lot since then and certainly I’ve learned a 
lot since then. And I have to admit that I always . . . since I’ve 
had the privilege of being elected to the Assembly here in 1991 
and re-elected in 1995, I’ve always had the . . . very much had 
the pleasure of watching the Premier get up in the Assembly, go 
into an attack, and then step back and say, but I don’t want to 
do that. It’s a sight to behold. It’s a sight to behold. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The devil made me do it. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Yes, exactly, like my colleague said the devil 
made me do it — didn’t want to but I had to. Didn’t want to but 
I had to. And you put on quite a performance; you have to 
admit that. I mean when the Premier gets up and he gets into 
those rants that he gets into, there is no one better. No one better 
in this whole place. I don’t know whether there’s ever been 
anyone better in this whole place. You’ve got to give the guy 
credit. 
 
Thirty years — you’ve learned a lot. You’ve learned a lot about 
the mastery of the language. The getting up and saying on one 
hand I’m not going to get into this, perfectly well after you’ve 
just went out of your way to get into it, out of your way to get 
into it, and then step back and say well, we won’t get into that 
kind of thing. 
 
It’s a great performance. It’s a great way of pumping up the 
troops over there I am sure, after what many, many people in 
this Assembly across Saskatchewan would view as an 
absolutely disastrous session for this administration. 
 
(1615) 
 

The first time that I have seen, since I was elected in 1991, the 
very first session that I have seen where you and your 
administration have literally been off the agenda since about 
day 3 of the session right through until today, right through 
until today, completely off the agenda. 
 
Here’s what’s happened in this session to date. We’ve had the 
government come forward — they came forward with a report 
on Channel Lake, couple of days previous to the budget. Why 
was it done that way? I think it was done that way for very, very 
obvious reasons. 
 
They thought, dragged kicking and screaming all the way up to 
that point, kicking and screaming every inch of the way up to 
that point, every millimetre of the way up to that point, kicking 
and screaming all the way through this whole thing, they drop 
this report, they think — the CIC minister and I’m sure the 
Premier and all the cabinet thought that’ll be the end of it; 
won’t have to deal with this any more because what’ll happen, 
Mr. Chair, what’ll happen, Mr. Chair, is we’ll drop this budget. 
It’s a good news budget, we’ve tinkered a little bit with a few 
taxes, and this whole thing will go away. And anybody that 
opposes us, we’ll go into this attack on them — you did this and 
you did that; and at the same time, we ordered all of these 
reports and we released them before the people of 
Saskatchewan. We did this; we did that; we did everything in 
the best interest of the taxpayers. 
 
And at the same time, everybody knows full well that the only 
way that any of this was dragged out of you is through the 
efforts of the people who oppose you — through the people 
who oppose you. Every step of the way, every step of the way 
it’s like pulling hens’ teeth with you and your administration. 
Every single step of the way, it’s been a debate in the 
legislature, it’s been bell-ringing, it’s been work in the 
committee — it’s been everything. 
 
And in that committee, what happens all of the time? In the 
committee what happens all the time. Whenever there’s a need 
to try and diffuse things, in comes another part of a report that 
was absent in the original documents. The member from Regina 
sitting over there that’s on the committee, knows full well what 
I’m talking about there. In comes that kind of thing. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, I don’t think people are buying it any 
longer. I don’t think they believe you on some of these things 
any longer. I don’t believe that they think that this was done in 
an appropriate fashion. I don’t think they believe the personal or 
the attacks on the Saskatchewan Party are living up to scrutiny 
any longer. 
 
You can call it whatever you want, and I’m sure you’re going 
to. You think that it’s going to help you in the long run. But the 
fact of the matter is the Saskatchewan Party is here. It’s here to 
stay. It’s here before the people of Saskatchewan. It will stand 
the test of time. It will go before the people of Saskatchewan in 
a general election. It will be there. Our leader will be sitting 
down here, our leader will be sitting here, and in fact I think he 
might even be sitting in a chair you occupy today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I think, Mr. Premier, that we’re on, I think we’re 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

on to something very, very important here in Saskatchewan. 
The Saskatchewan Party will stand up for the people of 
Saskatchewan. We will stand up to for the taxpayers of this 
province. We will stand up to your administration. We will 
stand up to the scrutiny of people in this province. We will 
stand up because they want us to. They want us to. 
 
What they are telling us all across Saskatchewan is this 
administration has got to be held accountable. This 
administration is not accountable. This administration does not 
believe in accountability. This administration does not believe 
in responsibility and all of what’s happened here in the last 
weeks of this session points more and more to that all of the 
time. 
 
Channel Lake — the reports you put forward raised nothing but 
more questions rather than answer the questions. These 
questions are about the potential of fraud. These questions have 
been about the potential of a breach of trust, conflict of interest. 
All kinds of allegations have come forward, and have they been 
answered by your administration? Have they been answered by 
you or any member of cabinet who you say speaks for cabinet? 
No. They’re not about that at all. 
 
These are very, very serious charges that have been brought 
forward about your administration. These are about potential 
criminal charges. These are about concerns that taxpayers have 
from all across Saskatchewan. And what kind of response do 
you come forward with? An attack on who is ever in opposition 
to you. In every occasion whenever things get a little bit rough 
in this Assembly bring out the attack. 
 
That’s always been your style. It’s always been the NDP’s 
style. It always has been and I presume it always will be, 
whenever there’s an attack or whenever there’s an attack on 
you, rather than answering the questions in a legitimate fashion, 
strike back. That’s the rallying cry of you and your 
administration. Strike back; pump up the troops; give them that 
big speech; give them that big rallying cry — turncoat, redcoat, 
bluecoat, all of that kind of boloney that you stand up and give 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is we have the respect and the support 
of people across this province. We will come before the people 
of Saskatchewan in the next election campaign when you 
decide to call it. We will be there. We’ll be speaking for the 
interests of the taxpayers of this province. People want us to 
stand up and say no. That’s exactly what we will do, Mr. 
Speaker . . . or Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier. 
 
That’s why, that’s why we think it’s so fundamentally 
important that you answer the questions. Rather than getting 
into this, you get up and give those kind of responses; we get up 
and give the response back. Why don’t you just answer? Why 
don’t you just answer the type of questions that people are 
asking? 
 
You say you didn’t have any responsibility. Lots of evidence 
points in the other direction. You say the ministers didn’t 
inform cabinet. Well if they didn’t inform cabinet they sure as 
heck should have. And if they didn’t inform cabinet they have 
abdicated their responsibility and they have no other, no other 
responsibility than to stand up before this Assembly and say 

they resign. And if they aren’t prepared to do it, you have to do 
what you have always said you would do, and that is to remove 
them. 
 
Mr. Premier, you said that you’ve asked ministers to resign. I 
can’t think of one single example of that — I can’t think of one 
single example of that in your administration. Today earlier you 
said you’ve asked ministers to resign. Can you give us one 
example of that? I don’t think it’s happened. 
 
When the member from — sitting in the back corner over there, 
when he stepped down he resigned, was what happened there. 
He said he resigned and you said he resigned. Every occasion 
that I can think of, with respect to these kinds of things when 
you look at the different ministers responsible, they’ve all 
resigned. They haven’t been asked to resign, or at least you 
have . . . at least you have said you didn’t ask them to resign. 
But that’s what’s happened. 
 
You can’t have it both ways, sir. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, 
you can’t have it both ways. Either you ask them to resign or 
they resign on their own. But the fact of the matter is, is they 
didn’t. They should’ve in this case. The member from P.A. and 
the member from Rosetown should have. I think you know they 
should have. I think they’re toast shortly after this session in a 
cabinet shuffle, as they should be. And I think very likely both 
of them are toast in the next general election. 
 
Certainly, certainly, the one from Rosetown will be. The one 
from Rosetown, the seat occupied by that member will be 
occupied by the gentleman sitting in the gallery that the Premier 
was so interested in bringing into the debate a little earlier 
today. He’s having a little problem having him injected into the 
debate now. It was no problem to do it at that point. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, is that people don’t believe your 
administration on a lot of these things any more, Mr. Premier. 
The fact of the matter is people want to see some changes, 
people want to see responsibility, and you’ve done anything but 
that. I hope you can answer the questions that’ll be before the 
taxpayers again in this province at some point. Did your 
administration do the right thing? I think you didn’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know the hon. 
member thinks that he didn’t, because nothing, especially the 
facts, will convince him — notwithstanding the volumes of the 
report, nothing will do that. 
 
But I just want to close off by saying, if this member’s talking 
about disaster sessions, I’ll tell you where the disaster session 
falls. The Saskatchewan Party was of the view that through 
Channel Lake somehow they would find some sort of a 
smoking gun which would bring this government toppling right 
down. That’s what they were thinking of doing. 
 
And instead, what did they find out? They found out that under 
the auditors’ reports and the accountants’ reports, that Channel 
Lake made a profit of $2 million during the course of its years. 
It found out that Channel Lake’s appraised value is 14 million, 
and was sold for 14.5 million. 
 
It’s true there’s a dispute about the 20 million that the board 
authorized and the actual 14.5. That’s what the committee is 



1894 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

doing its work. But arguably what they found out was there was 
no loss to the taxpayers, given the $2 million profit and the sale 
at the appraised value, and they do not know where to go. 
 
And all of a sudden they’ve realized that the people of 
Saskatchewan know that this government has tabled every 
document, and as I’ve said before, has admitted its errors with 
respect to this particular operation as I’ve indicated before. 
They know that. 
 
And now here’s where the disastrous session comes into place, 
Mr. Chairman. You know what? After 61, 63 days they’re 
saying to themselves, we got off on the wrong issue. Oh yes 
they are. We got off on the wrong issue. 
 
What we should be doing is getting off on the issue of high 
taxation, we should be getting off on the issue of agriculture, we 
should be getting off on the issue of jobs, we should be getting 
off on the issue of comparing ourselves to Alberta, because 
that’s what people want to do. 
 
And no, instead, what they found was the people of 
Saskatchewan know that we made total revelation and the 
Crown Corporations is dealing with the issue. Now that issue is 
going to be dealt with when the report is finished. 
 
But what the people of Saskatchewan have understood is this, 
that long after Channel Lake is gone -- and it is going and gone, 
and I hope we learned the lessons and we never repeat it again 
-- they know one thing that will be behind as the foundations of 
this session. 
 
Two per cent reduction in the personal income tax, second 
reduction in taxes in two years. Five balanced budgets after a 
disastrous debt load by the Conservatives. The highest spending 
budget in health care in the history of the province. More 
people working in the province of Saskatchewan than ever 
before. The leading program on child poverty, and the question 
of building independence. Building safe communities. More 
money for police and prosecutors. And all of a sudden they 
realize, wow, these people are speaking to what the people of 
Saskatchewan want. And they’ve revealed and they’ve learned 
from Channel Lake, and now at day 63 they say, how did we 
get into this mess. 
 
It’s a disastrous session, you’re doggone right it’s a disastrous 
session. It’s a disastrous session for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — YBM as you point out, Mr. Premier, has got 
some problems going on down in the States, and I understand 
that’s true. YBM’s problems sound a lot like Channel Lake’s 
situation with one big exception, an exception that you don’t 
seem to understand. The situation is in the United States with 
YBM that they are being investigated by the FBI, Federal 
Bureau of Investigation. Who’s investigating Channel Lake? 
Who’s investigating it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — We are. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We are? I’m not a criminal investigator. I don’t 
think the member from . . . I don’t think the member . . . I don’t 
think the member from Melfort’s a criminal investigator. I don’t 
think the member from Saltcoats is a criminal investigator. I 

don’t think that the member from Rosthern is a criminal 
investigator. 
 
But the fact of the matter is that things of this nature, and 
obviously the case in the States is with respect to YBM, they’re 
putting people in place that are criminal investigators to see 
whether there was anything wrong. You’ve left no opportunity. 
You’ve denied any opportunity to have a criminal investigation 
here in Saskatchewan. We aren’t going to have that. Oh no, 
because we’re going to have our little dog and pony show 
which we control, run things down here. 
 
Your Crown Corporations Committee is going to investigate 
this. It would be better that way than having trained criminal 
investigators look into this. There’s all kinds of allegations. 
Yes, the Premier says there’s allegations. You’re darn right 
there’s allegations. There’s allegations of potential for fraud. 
There’s allegations of a breach of trust. There’s allegations of 
conflict of interest. And there’s allegations of criminal charges. 
 
I don’t know whether any of them are valid, and that’s why 
there should be an investigation conducted by people who are 
trained in these areas. People who are trained in the areas of 
finding out whether or not there is something wrong here. 
There’s tremendous suspicion that there’s something wrong 
here. An independent public inquiry would have been able to 
ascertain whether there should have been criminal charges or 
not. 
 
(1630) 
 
What happened when we called for that, Mr. Premier? You and 
every other member of your government said no, we won’t have 
a public inquiry; we won’t have the potential for having 
someone with criminal expertise look into situations like this. 
Not going to have that -- oh no, no way. We’re going to have an 
NDP-dominated committee look into this and then say, oh it’s 
the members opposite that are looking into it. 
 
Like as if we’re supposed to be running around here like Dick 
Tracy looking into what’s gone on with this situation. Frankly 
between our responsibilities, responsibilities as MLAs and as 
opposition, we don’t have time to be Dick Tracy, sir. We would 
wish that there would be a criminal investigation. We said right 
from the very outset that there should have been a public 
inquiry into this situation. Well the fact is, is people think there 
should have been something more done with respect to this, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
Columnists in Saskatchewan, and I think from all over, would 
agree with us that there should have been something. Political 
observers believe that there should have been something more 
done. 
 
YBM, you cite that example as somehow or another justifying 
what you have done here in Saskatchewan. And yet down in the 
United States, what has happened? YBM is under investigation 
all right, but it’s not under investigation in some congressional 
committee, it’s not under investigation by some sort of Senate 
committee, it’s not under investigation by some sort of state 
committee — it’s under investigation by the FBI, just as it 
probably should. 
 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1895 

And I suspect they’ll get their comeuppance just as they should 
get their comeuppance with whatever wrongdoing they did 
down there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Me and the member 
from Battleford, he says somehow we’re involved in this mafia, 
Russian mob thing. 
 
As I recall, our member said, we’ll leave those kind of 
wild-eyed, cockamamie stories and conspiracy theories to that 
member. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well you just said they’d get their 
comeuppance. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well they’ll get their comeuppance all right. 
They’ll get them all right. The fact of the matter is, is that was 
their allegation. We play no role in that. The day that that took 
place . . . the day that took place we were surprised that there 
wasn’t a few boys rolling up in a Russian Lada to have a few 
words with that member. We take no responsibility for those 
strange and haphazard remarks by that member. 
 
It’s no wonder that that member hasn’t risen since that 
statement in the Assembly. I’m sure you and all members of 
your party were assigned some good lines to deal with him. We 
were not a part of that. We take no responsibility for that. 
That’s craziness at its extreme. 
 
YBM is being investigated by the FBI. There should have been 
an investigation into Channel Lake here, Mr. Premier. There 
should have been a public inquiry into this to get to the bottom 
of this. There is allegations about all kinds of responsibility. 
Who is responsibility . . . who has responsibility? Who is 
accountable? But we don’t see any of that coming from your 
administration. 
 
Mr. Premier, why have you not committed to a public inquiry? 
There’s the cost issue, yes. There’s a cost issue to it — of 
course there is. Every time we do something in this legislature 
there’s a cost issue associated with things of this nature. 
 
But there is also a cost to democracy. There is also a price that 
we have to pay if we’re going to have responsibility and 
accountability. There is a price to that, sir. The people of 
Saskatchewan I think were prepared to pay that price with 
respect to this situation. I think you deserve them . . . and you 
deserve to give them an explanation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think of all of the 
arguments that the hon. member has mounted today and 
previously, this is probably the weakest one of all and the most 
repetitively boring one of all. If the hon. member gets up and 
alludes to “potential of fraud” thinking, you know that by those 
use of the words he’s going to avoid any potential legal 
culpability if he repeats them outside. I can tell him as a lawyer, 
forget about it. 
 
Look, let’s just cut right to the chase. If you or your colleague 
from Melfort or anybody in the Saskatchewan Party has one 
example or one piece of evidence which leads to an allegation 
of criminality, take it to the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) and repeat it outside. That’s all. That’s all. You haven’t 
done it. 
 

No, what you do is flatter everybody and not only that — here’s 
this member from Rosthern piping up — not only that, here you 
have one of the most prominent lawyers in Saskatchewan with 
his law partners, Mr. Gerald Gerrand, Gerry Gerrand, testifying 
at length, testifying at length on his report all kinds of 
allegations of criminality. And the one thing he told you folks 
in cold, simple language was forget it, there’s no evidence of 
criminality. He told you that. 
 
It doesn’t prohibit you from getting up again and repeating it all 
over again in the hopes that somebody from the Conrad Black 
press will pick it up and blow it up all over again. I mean this is 
ridiculous. You’ve got Deloitte Touche doing an audit of the 
books, you got Gerrand doing the interviews and the laws, 
you’ve got Crown Investments Corporation and their officials 
doing all of this business, and he says we’re not criminal 
investigators. 
 
You’re doggone right you’re not criminal investigators. Why 
make criminal allegations of wrongdoing if you’re not criminal 
investigators. Why do it in that basis? 
 
You say you’re not Dick Tracy. You doggone right you’re not 
Dick Tracy. You’re not even as good as Inspector Clouseau. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Premier, if the SaskPower board, or CIC, 
believes that fraud or a breach of trust was involved in the 
Channel Lake scandal, they have a responsibility to the 
taxpayers to apply to the courts to set aside the Channel Lake 
sale. Do you think that that is a responsibility that they have? 
Do you think that they have some responsibility in this 
situation? Why hasn’t this been done to this point? 
 
Do you plan on taking any actions . . . does your government 
plan on taking any actions to recover the Channel Lake assets? 
Are we just going to get into this “who said what said” kind of 
thing, or are we going to actually try and get to the bottom of 
this situation? 
 
The Channel Lake inquiry is going on. We think, and we have 
held to the fundamental principle right from the very outset, that 
there should have been a public inquiry, and we’ll stand to that. 
We’ll stand the test of time with respect to that. 
 
And yes, we’ll continue to bring forward the concerns of 
Saskatchewan people just as is our responsibility. But don’t 
abdicate your responsibility, sir. And don’t ask CIC to do it for 
you, or SaskPower, or the members on that board for you. 
Because I think that’s what’s happened to this point. 
 
You don’t want to take responsibility for this because you know 
you are responsible and it will create a problem for you 
electorally. I think so, sir. You whiff at that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why didn’t your boy run in Saskatoon 
Eastview? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — You whiff at that, you whiff at that. Mr. 
Hermanson is going to run in the constituency where he lives. Is 
there anything wrong with that? Is there anything wrong with 
that? 
 
I know you don’t have any problem . . . I know you don’t have 



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

any problem with running in a constituency you don’t live in, 
but some of us do, some of us do. He’s going to run in a 
constituency that he lives in. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. If the committee wants to 
do it properly and get the remarks on the record, then we have 
to one speak and the other listen, and then the other speak and 
the others listen. And I would ask both sides to do that. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, you’re 
always interested in getting into these wild games of chicken. 
That’s about what it amounts to. When you were kids, 
remember those kinds of things? I dare you to do this, I don’t 
think you got the guts to do this. 
 
I don’t think, sir, I don’t think — why didn’t you run him in this 
constituency? The fact is that the Saskatchewan Party will make 
their own determinations about what we do not you or the NDP. 
We won’t be goaded into anything by you. We won’t be goaded 
into anything by the NDP Party of Saskatchewan. We won’t be 
goaded by you to say, oh, you have to run in there, because 
somehow or another — that will somehow or another — 
provide the people of Saskatchewan with a window on what the 
Saskatchewan Party is thinking about. We have a candidate in 
Saskatoon. We have a very good candidate in Saskatoon. We 
have a person in that constituency that is the only one that lives 
in that constituency. We didn’t float in some sort of what you 
thought was going to be a star candidate into that constituency 
only to find out that it fell flat on its face. 
 
We aren’t going to engage in those kinds of childish games of 
chicken that you always want to throw out — try to bait people 
into doing what you think would be in their best interests or 
your best interests. That’s the way you govern. That’s the way 
you operate your party. 
 
Well I tell you, sir; we don’t operate that way. We don’t go into 
those constituencies and say to the candidates, the heck with 
what you want, we’re taking over the show now. We had a 
candidate that ran, that is running up there because that 
candidate wants to run in that constituency. 
 
You may be prepared, and your party may be prepared to just 
go in there and elbow them out of the way, but that isn’t the 
way the Saskatchewan Party operates, sir. That isn’t the way the 
Saskatchewan Party runs things. We will stand the test in that 
election campaign. You may be prepared to do that. Jim 
Melenchuk may be prepared to do that. Jim Melenchuk was 
going to run anywhere he thought he might have a chance of 
getting elected. 
 
You know why? Because he thought, he thought that he had 
some sort of, some sort of — almost like a guarantee of a pass, 
a pass from the NDP to this Assembly. You guys did an 
ultimate job in that respect — a tremendous sell job. You 
sucked that guy in big time. You have to admit you’re good; 
you’re really good at that kind of game, really, really good at it. 
 
You talked this guy into running. You talked this poor son of a 
gun into running; you talk him into running and say to them, 
we’re not going to go too hard on you Jim. We’re just going to 
back off a little bit and we’re going to allow you to slip through 
the cracks and you’ll be the Leader of the Liberal Party in all of 

its grandeur, sitting in the Assembly. 
 
That’s what I think happened here, Mr. Premier. But we’re not 
buying into that game that you like to play all of the time of 
trying to goad your opponents into doing whatever you think is 
in your best interests. The Saskatchewan Party will do what we 
think is in our best interests. We’ll continue to do what we think 
is in the party’s best interests and in the interests of the 
taxpayers of this province. And we won’t be taking any advice 
from you, sir, with respect to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The people here of this province still believe, sir, 
that you’re headed in many, many directions. And the Premier 
says that only at this late date in the debate in this session . . . 
that we want to bring forward and continue to bring forward 
other issues. We brought forward Channel Lake — yes. We 
brought forward Guyana. We brought forward concerns about 
health care. We brought forward concerns about highways. We 
brought forward concerns about justice. We brought forward 
concerns about agriculture. We brought forward concerns about 
taxes. We brought forward concerns about accountability — 
just to list a few of the things that this opposition brought to the 
Assembly. 
 
I think we’ve done a pretty good job representing the taxpayers 
of this province. Immodestly I think we’ve done a pretty good 
job. Were we perfect in opposition? No. Were you perfect in 
government? Were you perfect in government? No. Were you 
perfect in this administration of Channel Lake? No. You take 
any responsibility for it? No. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’ll take my place at this point and allow my 
colleagues to ask additional questions but I think your record 
will stand for itself on this question. Your record in this session 
will be tested by the people of Saskatchewan in the next 
election. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, it’s 
certainly a pleasure to get up in this Assembly and have the 
privilege . . . I should say to stand in the Assembly and address 
issues to, certainly I believe, the individual who should be in 
charge in the province of Saskatchewan, not only of Executive 
Council. 
 
But I believe, Mr. Chairman, when it comes right down to it, 
the buck stops at the Premier’s doorstep whether it’s a health 
issue, whether it’s an educational issue, whether it’s an 
agricultural issue, whether it has to do with Channel Lake or 
Guyana. Any issue that this government is involved in, any 
circumstance that they’re dealing with, any situation that they 
find themselves mired in eventually ends up at the door of the 
Premier of the province when it comes to debate in this 
Assembly. 
 
(1645) 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, it certainly is the responsibility of the 
opposition to not only hold the ministers responsible and 
accountable in their areas of expertise or the areas of 
responsibility that they are carrying, but it’s also our 
responsibility to hold the Premier accountable because the 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1897 

Premier is the one who actually has delegated the authority to 
each one of the members to hold those positions of 
responsibility. 
 
And when it comes to health care, Mr. Premier, while it’s been 
unfortunate that the member from Yorkton has had to bear most 
of the brunt, or if it isn’t the member from Yorkton carrying the 
brunt of the health care questions, the government places the 
blame . . . where do they place the blame? They place the blame 
on the district health boards. 
 
If they can’t get away with placing the blame on the district 
health boards then they place the blame on the federal 
government or per chance, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, 
they placed the blame on some other government. They placed 
the blame on governments of the past. For some reason, Mr. 
Chairman, this government, and this Premier, even as we’ve 
seen today, finds it very interesting and challenging to just place 
the blame some place else. 
 
Always point the finger and unfortunately when they’re 
pointing the finger, they forget about the fact — or the Premier 
anyway — forgets about the fact that on most occasions he’s 
got three fingers pointing back at him, basically saying he’s the 
one responsible. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier is responsible for the state of health care 
in the province today. I was hoping the Premier would stand up 
today and acknowledge that there have been mistakes made. I 
was hoping that the Premier would stand up today and say; yes 
health care is not working the way we want it to. In fact, I 
shouldn’t say was . . . I’ll have to give the benefit of the doubt 
because we haven’t had the opportunity the Premier responding 
to health care concerns yet. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, we will find out in a few moments as to 
what the responses will be in regards to health care. We will 
find out whether or not the Premier will accept responsibility. 
 
My guess, Mr. Chairman, the first thing the Premier’s going to 
do is stand up in his place and he is going to talk about all the 
virtues of health care that the NDP have espoused in the past. 
He’s going to talk about the medicare debate that took place in 
the early ’60s. He’s going to talk about what Tommy Douglas 
has done for health care and the leadership given by the 
province of Saskatchewan. He is going to forget everything all 
about the fact, actual facts, taking place today about how people 
do not believe health care is working for them. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it was interesting yesterday calling an individual 
who — some of my colleagues and number of people who are 
currently campaigning in the Saskatoon Eastview by-election 
have left some calls and asked me to call a few people in 
regards to health care . . . people that they’ve met on the 
doorstep who — has raised some very serious concerns. 
 
And one specific lady in particular, Constance McRobbie, who 
I called yesterday. And because she had some very major 
concerns, a situation where her husband was admitted to City 
Hospital back in September of 1997 and a few weeks later was 
transferred to Royal University, laid on a gurney in the 
emergency ward from 10:30 p.m. till 11:30 a.m. and out of her 
frustration, she finally let out a holler and suggested that if her 

husband was somebody else, he would be able to get a bed. The 
unfortunate part, Mr. Chairman, by the time everything was 
said and done . . . shortly after, her husband passed away. And 
then to add insult to injury the hospital then sent a letter in 
February indicating that her husband now had an appointment 
to see a specialist. 
 
You know what, Mr. Chairman, you know what the lady, what 
Mrs. McRobbie said to me. She said she would love to have the 
opportunity to be able to come down to Regina and speak to the 
Premier face to face and tell him exactly what she believes of 
his wellness program, of his wellness model. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, I can just see the Premier 
standing up in a few short minutes and just espousing the 
virtues of health care, and telling us how much Tommy Douglas 
has done for this province, what the NDP have done and their 
former associates, the CCF, have done in delivering a solid — 
one of the best and top rate — form of health care in the 
province. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, what we’re hearing from people is that 
health care is not meeting what people are expecting of their tax 
dollars when it comes to health care. Mr. Chairman — and I 
think the Premier will acknowledge that — Mr. Chairman, 
$1.72 billion, I believe, is what the government is putting into 
health care this year. 
 
And the Premier will say they’ve increased their spending in 
health care. The unfortunate part, even with the increase of $88 
million this year, of that $88 million, very little if any money 
will end up in the hands of district boards. That would allow 
them to provide the individuals, whether it’s a nursing positions 
or some of the other positions, needed to provide the direct 
services to the individuals of this province, the taxpayers of this 
province who rely on health care to meet their health needs. 
 
And if health care is doing so well, Mr. Chairman, why have we 
had so many headlines in the papers in recent months telling us, 
and basically reiterating the fact of what individuals are telling 
us, that health care is not working. That this wellness model that 
somebody on the NDP side of the House, whether it was the 
Premier, or whether it was the former Minister of Health, the 
Hon. Louise Simard, dreamed up in the dead of night, decided 
we’ve got to come out with something different. Or as the 
former member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg commented, the 
fact that he just got a note just prior to the 1991 election that 
they were coming out with what would be a wellness model. 
And when he had called NDP campaign office to ask what this 
meant, he was told, don’t worry about it, who really cares, it 
doesn’t really matter, we’ll figure it out when the election 
campaign is over. 
 
Well what has a wellness model done for people? As the 
headline says here: “Health care has increased discomfort.” 
More and more people are finding themselves in a situation of 
having to deal with discomfort, having to deal with pain, having 
to be on long waiting-lists for a procedure that may give them 
the ability to finally have a quality of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, when it comes right down to it, I 
don’t believe in having to be on a waiting-list. As the lady from 
Leask recently called me indicating that she was informed 



1898 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

almost a year ago now that she would have an operation by this 
June, June of 1998, and only just recently was informed that it 
might be in the fall now. Mr. Chairman, that June of 1997 — 
it’s a year ago. Now she’s told that it’s maybe four or five 
months more down the road. Mr. Chairman, that is 12, that’s 
18, 17 to 18 months, could be even longer. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I wonder if that’s how the Premier would want 
to be treated. If the Premier was faced — even if it wasn’t a 
life-threatening situation — I’m wondering if that’s how the 
Premier would like to be treated. Would he like to have to put 
up with the discomfort? Would he like to have to live with 
discomfort knowing that the longer that his body is — there’s 
pain in his body from whatever condition he may be facing — 
that it may create other problems that would be magnified down 
the road; that by the time an operation was finally achieved, 
you’ve got to deal with other medical problems? I don’t think 
so. 
 
I would hope that as the media have indicated that the Premier 
will show indeed some compassion today. I would hope the 
Premier would finally, as one of the headlines says, “NDP loses 
compassion test.” I think this afternoon the Premier has the 
opportunity and has certainly . . . is being given that ability to 
finally show that he does have some compassion, that he is 
listening, Mr. Chair — that the Premier is listening to the 
current concerns that are being raised by individuals across this 
province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, when it comes to talking about health care, it’s 
not just the Saskatchewan Party official opposition that’s been 
raising this concern. Mr. Chairman, SARM delegates, and I’m 
sure that — in fact I know — I know for a fact the Premier 
heard at the recent SARM convention that health care is a major 
concern, that health care is an issue, that health care is 
something that SARM delegates are very concerned in. In fact, 
quoting from one of the articles, the Leader-Post on March 
12th, “Health cuts hurt rural residents: SARM delegates”. “It’s 
the rural people who are going . . . ”, and I’m quoting, “It’s the 
rural people who are going to lose out when this facility closes, 
says the RM of Redburn delegate.” 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, he’s referring to the Plains Health Centre. 
In interviews earlier this week, several delegates said, while the 
Plains located on a major thoroughfare is easily accessible in an 
emergency, the city’s two inner-city hospitals are more difficult 
to reach. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Premier can agree and can reiterate what the 
Minister of Health has said, that while they’ve spent millions of 
dollars to upgrade the General, while they’ve spent millions of 
dollars to upgrade the Pasqua, the facts are, and yes, that is 
quite possibly true, they have put the money into those two 
facilities that when they close the doors, officially close the 
doors on the Plains Health Centre, that they will have all the 
services available at the other two hospitals. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s unfortunate that the government didn’t take 
and give a little more thought to how they were addressing 
health care, how they were going to provide health care. How 
they were going to guarantee that their health services, our 
health services were available. The Premier will argue that 
we’ve got the highest level of beds in Saskatchewan versus 

other provinces. 
 
Now a report yesterday I think in Maclean’s talked about 6.1, 
but the Minister of Health indicated last night that we actually 
in this province have 3,117 I believe acute care beds in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Acute care beds I believe are the 
beds that are available to put that individual, that are utilized in 
order to provide the procedures, that are necessary to meet the 
needs. Now 3.1 is quite a distance from the 6.9 beds I believe 
the Premier was talking about earlier. 
 
Mr. Premier, for your government and for you to stand here 
today and say that health care is working, basically flies against 
what many people across the province have been saying . . . as 
the individuals down at Shaunavon said when they had a 
number of individuals that I met when I was down to the 
meeting in Shaunavon, or whether it was people in Whitewood, 
or people in Indian Head. And what I found very interesting, 
Mr. Premier, certainly the community of Whitewood was an 
example that really surprised me because to be very honest with 
you . . . while I do have a lot of support, it tends to have a more 
majority of support for your party. 
 
I ran into individuals who I didn’t dream would ever speak 
against your government at that meeting in Whitewood. And 
one individual who is a long-time Pool member, in fact a Pool 
delegate got up and was thanking the opposition parties for 
having raised the concern of the Plains Health Centre and hold a 
public meeting. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s very interesting. And I find it hard to believe 
that you can stand here and suggest that you are doing 
everything to provide adequate and supportive health care in the 
province of Saskatchewan when your own people do not 
believe you. And we hear them more and more. And while I 
cannot at the end of the day just jump on the bandwagon and 
say people are going to vote for the Saskatchewan Party or 
going to vote for an opposition parties, because somehow or 
other I know while NDP members become angry, at the end of 
the day there are so many NDP members who are so tied to the 
party, that they will vote for you regardless, even if they’re 
angry. 
 
So that’s one thing that you can be thankful for, grateful for. 
The elections over the years have shown that at least 35 per cent 
of this population, the population of this province, will 
continually vote for you despite Channel Lake, despite Guyana, 
despite what’s happening in health care. 
 
Mr. Premier, when we look at health care and we talk about 
what’s happening in health care, we talk about delivery of 
services, the Saskatoon Eastview by-election comes to mind. 
And it’s very interesting, Mr. Premier, it is very interesting that 
just prior to the announcement, or just after the announcement 
of the Saskatoon by-election — or just prior to, pardon me — 
and the announcement of, Mr. Chair, the announcement of Ms. 
Judy Junor’s seeking the NDP nomination in Saskatoon 
Eastview, there wasn’t a hint, wasn’t a hint of any more funding 
for nursing care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And yet I’m sure, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, you’ve been 
hearing — your Minister of Health, you as the Premier of this 
province, your government back-benchers — your ministers 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

have been hearing time and time again that one of the problems 
with health care today is the lack of front-line workers. That’s 
what Constance McRobbie mentioned, the lack of front-line 
workers, the fact that the nurses were running off their feet. 
 
And I’ve chatted with a number of nurses. I’ve chatted with 
many nurses who find themselves just being run off their feet, 
run ragged, and in fact being asked to put in overtime because 
of the fact that there aren’t enough nurses in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So what do we have before, just on the eve of the Saskatoon 
Eastview by-election, just on the eve of Judy Junor’s 
announcement that she will seek the NDP nomination and carry 
the NDP banner, if nominated to carry that banner, we find the 
Minister of Health all of a sudden finds $9 million — $9 
million and announces 200 new nursing positions. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have to ask you, Mr. Premier, if indeed 200 . . . 
First of all, how did you know that 200 positions, new nursing 
positions, is the number? Is it 200 positions, is it more, is it 
less? Where does the 200 come from? 
 
Mr. Chair, I thought the district boards were in charge. I 
thought the district boards had the responsibility of hiring. I 
thought the district boards had the responsibility of making sure 
there were enough front-line workers. But all of a sudden, while 
the boards are being basically accused of all the other, and 
blamed for all the other problems, the Minister of Health finds 
$9 million for 200 nursing positions in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1700) 
 
I guess, Mr. Premier, the proof will be in the pudding. We’ll see 
after the June 24 by-election whether or not there are any new 
nursing positions showing up in the province of Saskatchewan. 
In fact, I don’t think there will be too many showing up before 
September as we see a cut-back in the number of beds that will 
be open during the summer months. 
 
So that’ll give the government a bit of a reprieve. So we’re 
going to probably have to wait until the month of September to 
find out whether or not this government is actually keeping 
their word, whether or not this is just another misleading 
statement by the Minister of Health and the Premier in regards 
to health care delivery and health care services in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our health care system in the minds of many 
people, many people across this province, is in crisis. And what 
is your government doing? The government says they’re 
throwing $88 million more. It ends up in capital construction. It 
ends up in SHIN. It ends up going to district boards. In fact the 
amount that’s going to district boards is less than the amount 
the boards are in debt right now. So how much more money is 
actually going into patient care? 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, if we are spending more on health 
care today than ever, more than we spend in any other 
budgetary item — and I fully expect that you will be finding out 
the fact that eats up almost a third or better than a third of the 
budget of the province of Saskatchewan — what are you doing 

wrong? 
 
Because clearly the money that you are spending in health care 
today, Mr. Premier, in the minds of many individuals, and some 
that I’ve mentioned here today because they have indicated they 
have no problem in me using their name, have indicated is not 
meeting the needs of individuals and providing the delivery of 
service that the people of this province have come to expect. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I say with the greatest 
of respect and admiration for the hon. member opposite, for 
whom I do have a great deal of admiration and respect, but I’m 
really nonplussed to where to start by way of a response to that 
question or speech. But I should perhaps make my answer short 
and to the point. 
 
I’ll tell you where we will not start. We do not work on the 
assumption that the health care system is as you portray it. And 
even if it were, we would not start as your candidate Francis 
Krieser — I hope I pronounced his name correctly . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Krieser, when he starts. 
 
Here’s his pamphlet. Health care. Reviewing the health care 
system including the appointment of a health ombudsman. I 
might say to that, that’s an area where we may start. Improving 
the accountability and effectiveness of district health boards. 
We may start. 
 
But here’s where we will not start. Note this. Allowing private 
health services in order to reduce the load on public facilities. I 
repeat, Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan Party is campaigning 
on this platform allowing private health services in order to 
reduce the load on public facilities. 
 
Now, Mr. Member, you might just tell the House and the people 
of Saskatchewan what kinds, number, nature of private health 
services will you allow if you should be in the government? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier. I find it 
interesting, Mr. Premier, when you start talking about private 
health care system. And most of the time, Mr. Premier, 
basically the argument you talk about is a two-tier system. You 
say we don’t have a two-tier system. The facts are, Mr. Premier, 
we do have a two-tier system in this province already. In fact 
we’ve got a multi-tier system in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, if we didn’t have, as you say, if we only have one 
level of health care in the province of Saskatchewan, why are 
Saskatchewan residents going outside of the province to seek 
services that you say are available in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
In fact, Mr. Premier, other than the fact . . . I haven’t chatted 
with the individuals so I won’t release names, but one 
individual just very close to us indicated that she was having a 
major problem with lower back pain. She had basically had hip 
and knee surgery but had ongoing problems. 
 
And her sister finally said, when she was visiting, why don’t 
you swallow your pride and go across the line, get that MRI 
(magnetic resonance imaging) that she was scheduled . . . Back 
in May of 1997 she had an appointment for an MRI in 
Saskatoon to determine what needed to be done to address her 



1900 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

condition. May of 1997 to November of 1997. 
 
Guess what, Mr. Premier. She did decide, well maybe she’ll try 
it. She went across to Minot. Yes it did cost her a little bit. But 
also, Mr. Premier, she had an operation performed in June of 
1997. She didn’t wait till November for that MRI. 
 
Mr. Premier, if indeed you’re saying that the health care system 
we have in this province is working for all people, why are 
people already going outside of this province to receive a 
service that you’re telling us is immediately available to 
individuals? Why should someone have to suffer with an 
aggravated back that could be addressed through a minor 
operation that basically you need the services of the MRI. Well 
I acknowledge the only place at that time was Saskatoon. 
 
And if I’m not mistaken, Mr. Premier, the MRI machine in 
Saskatoon operates about eight hours a day. Why is it not 
operating 12 or 16 hours a day, Mr. Premier, to meet the needs 
that put on the services of that machine? And yes I 
acknowledge and I will give you credit for the fact that there 
will be an MRI available in southern Saskatchewan in the near 
future; we’ve talked about that for a long time. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, when you went to say that there isn’t a 
two-tier system today is not being truthful with the people of 
Saskatchewan because so many people are going outside of this 
province. And because of a result of going outside of the 
province, they’re actually receiving the medical attention that 
they fully expected to receive in this province yesterday, not 12 
months or so down the road, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member from 
Moosomin is building his case for private health care very, very 
effectively as a Saskatchewan Party member, Tory Party 
member. I repeat again that Francis Krieser has in his new 
priorities pamphlet in Saskatoon Eastview the following 
statement: “Allowing private health services in order to reduce 
the load on public facilities.” 

 
And I ask that hon. member to tell us what private health 
services would be permitted. He didn’t give me a direct answer, 
but he gave me an indirect answer. His indirect answer was an 
MRI. Translated, his answer said this: you get immediate health 
care if you’ve got the money to buy it in Minot or anywhere 
else. You got the money, you got the health care. Two-tier — 
yes. Two-tier according to you, based on capacity to pay, not on 
need or medical assessment. 
 
And your leader is going to have to detail for us very shortly 
because we will be hounding him and you to tell us what 
private health services will you allow in order to reduce the load 
on public facilities. 
 
I bet you I know one of them. You will allow private, for-profit 
hospitals for those who’ve got the money to get into those 
hospitals and diminish the public hospital system. Tell me that 
that isn’t so. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I find it interesting. Mr. 
Chairman, what we have from the Premier right now, we ask a 
question. The health care is in shambles; all he’s interested in is 
all of a sudden deflecting. I just told you earlier, Mr. Chair, that 

the Premier certainly would deflect. He would deflect all the 
criticism. He would start pointing the finger again. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Premier talks about this health care system 
that is working well for the people of Saskatchewan. He talks 
about a wellness model that everyone has total access to at any 
time of the day or night. And yet we find, Mr. Chairman, that 
people are telling us that they do not have that access to that 
service. 
 
Then the Premier wants to tell us that there isn’t a two-tier 
system in the province of Saskatchewan, and we keep telling 
him people are telling us it’s a multi-tiered system. Mr. Premier, 
as I’ve indicated earlier, people are not going to wait the 18 
months or the 12 months or whatever, the 360 days or the 400 
days to get surgery to relieve a condition. 
 
Because of your actions, Mr. Premier, individuals — and 
unfortunately that might be true — individuals who can afford 
it are seeking services outside of the province so that they don’t 
have to live with a health care condition that makes it difficult 
for them to enjoy a quality of life. 
 
Mr. Premier, the responsibility is yours to provide that quality 
health care system that doesn’t force people to go outside of this 
province. Mr. Premier, if you had a health care system that was 
meeting the needs, you wouldn’t have people going elsewhere. 
Why are you not providing that service today, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well now, so you’re telling me this 
then, that under your government, the Tory government, 
Saskatchewan Party government, they wouldn’t have to go 
outside of the province of Saskatchewan. Instead they’d have 
private, public health services – private, public health services 
in Saskatchewan. That’s your argument. 
 
They don’t have to go to Minot. They don’t have to go to 
Calgary. But under Mr. Krieser’s campaign, you would have a 
private health service in order to reduce the load on public 
facilities. Tell me where. Tell me what that includes. 
 
I’ll put another proposition to you. You say I’m deflecting. I’m 
not deflecting. I’m going to give you my answer. I do not 
believe the health care system in Saskatchewan is in crisis. I 
think it is the best health care system in this country. And this 
province leads the reform in this country, and that is measured 
by independent observers inside and outside this province who 
know that to be the case. And I believe that the record, the 
$1.72 million you talked about . . . you gave me all the answers 
I had to give. That is my answer; I’m not deflecting. 
 
Who’s deflecting? You are deflecting. Get up and tell me where 
it is that private health services will be allowed. Where? Where 
will they be? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Dialysis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Dialysis? Let me give you another 
quotation to help you answer this question for us. Saskatchewan 
Party convention, November 17, 1997, constitution policy 
platform, okay. From the Regina Leader-Post, “A plan to invite 
private health providers to the province to reduce waiting-lists.” 
 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1901 

I’ll stop there from the quotation, Mr. Chairman. To reduce 
waiting-lists. Where do waiting-lists come? Hospitals. A plan to 
invite private health providers to the province to reduce 
waiting-lists was one of the policies that passed without any 
opposition at your convention. I repeat, is one of your private, 
public health facilities to reduce waiting-lists mean, as I hereby 
accuse you that it means, private, for-profit hospitals, as they’re 
talking in Alberta? Tell me, yes or no. And if it doesn’t, then 
tell me what it does include. Don’t deflect. 
 
And then I’m reading from this point of view. And here’s this: 
 

During a panel discussion Saturday (get this, Mr. 
Chairman, during a panel discussion Saturday), party 
organizer Brian Fitzgerald called the five fundamental 
principles behind medicare (called the five fundamental 
principles behind medicare) mindless slogans that stand in 
the way of innovative health care solutions like private 
clinics. 

 
That’s what you said. So I ask you right now — and consult 
your leader, if you will — come down here and tell us where 
the private health facilities will be, in what areas, to ease the 
burden off the public load; where the waiting-lists are going to 
be eased, with specifics; and tell this House, and tell the people 
of Saskatchewan whether the five fundamental principles of 
medicare are mindless slogans preventing private, for-profit 
clinics, as you and your Tory/Saskatchewan Party have adopted 
as policy. As you and your leader have adopted as policy. 
 
Tell us where they’re going to be; ‘fess up that you believe in 
private, for-profit health care and with it the destruction of 
medicare. Because the moment that you do it — you’ve already 
said it now — you will not, not one of you will be re-elected to 
this Legislative Assembly, I guarantee you. Not one of you. 
 
(1715) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I find 
it very interesting . . . Mr. Chairman, what I find very 
interesting in this whole debate is the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well let’s talk about the truth. Let’s talk about 
the truth. 
 
Which party said in a by-election that they will not close any 
hospitals? And then shortly after they form government, guess 
what. The hospitals are all closed. In fact, they didn’t just close 
five in the Shaunavon constituency, Mr. Chairman, they closed 
52 hospitals including the hospital, the Plains Health Centre, 
sitting here in Regina. And the Premier has the audacity to talk 
about the member from Saskatoon, has the audacity to talk 
about telling the truth, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in fact just for the information of the Premier, 
the Premier likes to wave brochures. One of the most recent 
brochures that’s been put out by Mr. Krieser . . . and I’d just 
like to read a few comments in regards to this. And it goes 
along with what the Saskatchewan Party has been addressing in 
the Legislative Assembly in regards health care, what it’s been 
talking about — one clear choice for health care. 
 
The NDP is spending 1.7 billion on health care, yet hospitals 
are closing. Doctors are leaving. Nurses and front-line staff are 

burning out. NDP health reforms have been a disaster, yet the 
government refuses to admit there’s a problem. Federal Liberals 
have cut $7 billion from health funding to the provinces, but 
Saskatchewan Liberals refuse to lobby Ottawa to restore the 
funding. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party solution — the Saskatchewan Party 
will push the federal Liberal government to reinstate that health 
funding. I believe the Premier’s even been calling for that. The 
Saskatchewan Party will establish fully elected health district 
boards. That way Saskatoon people, not just Saskatoon people 
but people across this province will have a real opportunity to 
decide how their health funding will be allocated. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party will provide adequate block funding to 
district health boards with no strings attached. The 
Saskatchewan Party will appoint a health ombudsman. But I’m 
pleased to hear this afternoon that the Premier even believes 
that a Saskatchewan health ombudsman might be a good thing. 
 
In fact, Mr. Chairman, to the Premier, the more I think about it, 
I think I even agree even more wholeheartedly with the 
Saskatchewan health ombudsman in view of some of the 
concerns that have been raised with SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) and the problems with 
SAHO and their own board of inquiry. And a health 
ombudsman, Mr. Chair, at least would be able to listen to the 
concerns being raised by individuals when they are continually 
being turned down or ridiculed by SAHO and their board. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I believe, and the Premier knows, the 
Saskatchewan Party has laid out a plan regarding health care in 
the province of Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Party has laid 
out . . . and if the Premier wants to, he can show some 
compassion by moving some of the legislation that’s currently 
in the legislature by fully electing boards rather than having his 
hand-picked individuals continue to manipulate district boards 
— not just the Regina district board or Saskatoon, but the other 
30 district boards across the province. 
 
If the Premier is not afraid of district boards doing their jobs, 
why doesn’t the Premier take the leadership even today, even in 
this Assembly, and announce that as of tomorrow or June 21 or 
July 1 there will be no more appointees. All the appointed 
positions will be eliminated. We now have in place a 
mechanism whereby the elected positions can continue to 
function and operate — that would be a saving that would be 
able to address some of the shortfalls in health spending in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, the choice is yours — it’s very clear the choice is 
yours. You have that opportunity to show some leadership. But 
unfortunately as we see, openness is it not . . . while it’s on the 
tip of your tongue, while it’s rhetoric, the actual fact of 
openness is certainly far from reality. 
 
In fact I’m just going to go through . . . read from a column, an 
editorial “No free and open discussion by MLAs” — talking 
about the Plains health care centre. In fact there was no talk in 
the NDP caucus. And this was, and this was written by a former 
colleague of yours. An individual, an individual who ran for 
you. And then all of a sudden you didn’t like what he was 
saying, that he was standing up for his constituents — and Mr. 



1902 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

Chair, he was standing up for the electorate of this province. 
 
So what did you do? You ran somebody against him to make 
sure he was not your candidate because he was one individual 
who was not afraid to stand up in caucus. And I’m sure, Mr. 
Chair, if the Premier would’ve been more than willing and open 
to hold a free vote in this Assembly when he was a member, he 
would’ve also stood up with the opposition on issues that he 
opposed, and the direction that his government was going. 
 
But let me quote from this article: 
 

In fact, there was no talk in the NDP caucus about health 
care or hospital closures immediately after the 1991 
election either, Draper said. “Several months later at a 
caucus meeting, Louise Simard dropped the bombshell.” 
 
There had been no caucus debate on whether this move . . . 
(would) be made. There was no consultation with (their) 
rural MLAs — not even the one who happened to have 
three decades experience practising medicine in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Despite this lack of discussion, a vote in caucus was taken 
on the rural hospital issue. Draper said he was the only one 
of the 55 NDP MLAs who voted against the closures. 
“Everybody voted for it, including the great defector from 
Shaunavon (Glen McPherson, who joined the Liberals),” 
the former NDP MLA said. 
 

The member from Shaunavon, the great defector who joined the 
Liberals. 
 

The only time (Mr. Chairman) the NDP caucus was ever 
consulted on health care policy, Draper said, was when 
they were asked by Premier Roy Romanow “to suggest the 
propaganda” (when they were asked by Premier Roy 
Romanow “to suggest the propaganda”) that would be used 
to sell to the public their already-decided-upon policy. 

 
That was decided, it was decided by the Premier and his 
colleagues. In fact . . . and your Cabinet. I don’t believe the 
back-benchers, as Mr. Draper said, had any involvement in it. 
Certainly the boards did not have involvement. They were just 
approached when they were asked how do we sell this policy of 
closing? Just with a swipe or with a flick of the pen —closing 
52 hospitals in the province of Saskatchewan. Talk about open 
and free discussion. 
 

Draper said he knows of no such discussion or vote on the 
1993 closure of Plains before he left caucus in 1995. But in 
an indirect way, the issue did occasionally come up, 
Draper recalls. 

 
Mr. Chairman, he closes by saying: 
 

“The great thing was to shove it on the backs of the district 
boards and let them do the dirty work,” . . . Evidently, that 
must be the free and open discussions Serby talked about. 

 
Mr. Chairman, the Premier talks about openness. He talks about 
accountability. He talks about freedom for members to choose, 
but we have one of his former colleagues telling us about 

openness and accountability and being honest with the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, whether it’s someone looking for the services of 
the Gimbel eye clinic, whether it’s chiropractor, dentist, I don’t 
believe . . . I believe dentists fall under health. They all have 
their own clinics. And you’re saying that there’s no two-tiered 
system in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, what you have is a number of services that are 
available under health care that run their own clinic. 
Chiropractic, they don’t operate out of hospitals. Dentists, they 
don’t operate out of hospitals. People, Mr. Premier, will seek 
the services that they feel will meet the need. And if they 
choose to — because you’re not providing that service — they 
will choose to seek those services elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s time you accepted responsibility for your 
actions. Are you going to stand up and say that Mr. Draper 
doesn’t know — the former member from Shaunavon — 
doesn’t know what he’s talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m still waiting, and 
I’m still waiting. I want to know where the Saskatchewan Tory 
Party is going to allow more private health care facilities. I am 
still waiting. 
 
I’ve told you about our views of health care reform and how I 
believe that it is adequate. Could be better, we’re working to 
make it better. I won’t repeat that. You know my position. 
 
But I haven’t heard your position yet. Allowing private health 
care facilities, allowing . . . The five principles of medicare are 
mindless slogans according to you folks over there . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . and there the member from Rosthern 
supports it. Get up and tell us you support it . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’ll sit down and let him tell me. Go ahead. Tell 
me they’re mindless slogans. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’ll sit down if that member will stand up, show 
the courage to say publicly on the record what he’s been saying 
from his seated position that they’re mindless slogans. The truth 
. . . 
 
Mr. Heppner: — . . . and I make it right now for everyone in 
Saskatchewan. I want the Premier to get up and tell the 6,000 
people that are waiting for operations what good those slogans 
do them. The people, who are dying in hospitals, what good 
slogans do them? Tell all those people that are waiting for 
health care what good slogans do them. When we have that 
answer and those people are happy, then I’ll be satisfied as well. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, that’s not what he was 
saying. I said that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, that’s not 
what he was saying. I said that the convention said they were 
mindless slogans and you said yes they were mindless slogans. 
That’s exactly what you said. That’s exactly what it says in 
black and white and every one of you believe that the principles 
of medicare invented in this Legislative Assembly, fought 
against the KOD (Keep Our Doctors committee) and the 
Liberals outside there. You say they’re mindless slogans. Your 
leader says they’re mindless slogans. You’re going to allow 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1903 

private clinics for profit and private hospitals for profit. Shame 
on you. Not one of you is going to get re-elected with that 
position, I guarantee you. Not one of you. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I am actually quite pleased to be able to have this time 
with the Premier and his officials and I think the time has come 
to restore some modicum of civility to the House as well as 
reduce the rhetoric all the way around, I hope. 
 
My questions are going to cover three topics this evening, Mr. 
Premier. The first is regarding the management of 
Saskatchewan Crowns; the second will be a very short question 
regarding financial accountability; and the third deals with my 
questions regarding justice for people who of course have been 
seeking justice from the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me begin then with the management of our Crowns. Given 
that there are many, many people who have spent precious 
hours over weeks and weeks and weeks in the Crown 
Corporations Committee, I think it would be useful, Mr. 
Premier, if you had an opportunity to discuss what lessons have 
already been learned. And I have three areas of questioning 
within that. 
 
The first is that I’m interested in helping to ensure that 
Saskatchewan Crowns actually work together and I want you to 
comment on the following: since SaskEnergy’s expertise is in 
security of supply and predictability of price for natural gas, 
why wouldn’t SaskPower work more closely with SaskEnergy 
to utilize this expertise? And there are different areas where it 
seems quite bewildering to ordinary people why the group that 
has the accumulated intelligence, if you will, to deal with these 
issues was left out of the loop: first of all, in utilizing their 
expertise when deciding to acquire Channel Lake; secondly, 
when managing the arbitrage; and thirdly, when disposing of 
Channel Lake; and lastly, when negotiating the 10-year contract 
for supply. Now I don’t know how much of that you actually 
got to hear, but it’s quite specific, and I’m going to articulate 
once again what the gist of this is. 
 
I indicated that SaskEnergy’s expertise is in security of supply, 
as well as predictability of price for natural gas. And so it would 
make inherent sense to anyone that SaskPower would utilize the 
skills involved with the people from SaskEnergy in these 
different areas — the acquisition, the sale, the arbitrage, as well 
as the 10-year contract for supply. I’d very much appreciate 
your comments on that, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to this 
specific question, the belief of SaskPower was at the time of the 
establishment of Channel Lake through appropriate studies and 
the like — and a lot of this has come up in testimony — that 
they could get more secure supplies at cheaper price of natural 
gas involving the establishment of Channel Lake. As they had 
been doing by the way prior to SaskEnergy in the 1980s — and 
SaskEnergy being established in the 1980s. That was the 
rationale behind it. 
 
As to the first aspect of the question about what specific 
lessons, I won’t take up the time of the committee, but I can 
send over to you a copy of Mr. Wright’s statements this 
morning made to the Channel Lake hearing, where he sets out 

several, in fact many specific lessons ranging all the way from 
roles and responsibilities of board members; regular evaluation 
of board members; balanced score-card performance for 
management performance; outside directors on subsidiary 
boards, which Channel Lake was; strong Crown board oversight 
and on it goes. 
 
Those are the things which are being actually implemented at 
this stage in the game. I might add not only because of Channel 
Lake. Channel Lake I think has added more impetus for us to do 
this. A lot of this was in the works under the Crown review. 
 
(1730) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well I thank you for sending that to me. 
I’m looking forward to reading it. I guess I go back to my initial 
questions and that is that Mr. Wright has a particular 
responsibility and a particular position. And I’m wanting to 
know what lessons you, as the Premier, have learned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, as Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan I learn lessons every day I hope, 
about something or other. 
 
Now when you ask in general terms I’m not quite sure how to 
respond except to say that the best response I can give you is 
that in the documents we tabled on the opening day of the 
House, there was a plan of corrective measures which were 
articulated, and they have been restated in a different way and 
updated by Mr. Wright in his testimony today. 
 
I take the advice of my officials and I apply my own 
intelligence and my own knowledge and I learn. And on this 
basis, with respect to this specific matter, these are among some 
of the things that this government has adopted and some of the 
things that I have learned. I’m sure there’ll be many more 
things I’ll have to learn as I proceed in my career in public life. 
 
That’s the answer I give you on this particular issue. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I don’t think I was specific enough, to tell 
you the truth, with that last comment saying what have you 
learned. I should have been a tad more specific I would say. I 
guess we could get very specific. 
 
We could talk about Mr. Stengler being put in the position he is, 
was in. We could talk about the appointment to the person in 
charge of SHIN. We could talk about the appointment of the 
individual who is in charge of SaskPower. We could talk about 
a lot of different things in terms of specifics and lessons 
learned. 
 
And I’m wondering if in fact there have been lessons learned 
about the kind of people who have been put in positions of great 
authority and power, who have had a tremendous, I think, 
influence on the direction that this province has gone, not only 
in Crown corporations but in other business enterprises as well. 
 
Now I don’t expect for one moment for you to stand in your 
place and say that these people were not highly competent. But 
I do think that it’s very, very telling when we have had evidence 
that there are people who have applied for the position with 
SHIN who had far, far greater expertise and experience than the 



1904 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

individual who subsequently got that position. 
 
And I’m wondering if any lessons have been learned. That in 
fact, one of the things I most certainly would love to be able to 
see before this Assembly or a committee or something, is a way 
of being able to at least determine the credentials of people, of 
the top three or four people, with their names removed, so that 
we actually know that the most talented and capable people are 
put in positions of running some of the most expensive and 
important entities to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it stands to no reason at all that in this particular case, the 
corporations that should have been working in conjunction with 
one another were working in isolation from one another. I’m 
confused by that. And of course as a result of that, this is 
potentially contrary to the best interests of all the people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I know that I have provided some specifics. I do expect 
some response. I just want you to, please, if you will, tell us if 
there has been some understanding that has come from all of 
this in the way in which people are given positions, in the way 
that corporations ultimately work together. And it’s not simply 
about personalities, I’m sure. I think that it perhaps is even 
broader than that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly want 
to agree with the hon. member on the last statement that it is not 
personality, that it is something greater than that. Because I 
want to say that it is only good politics — if we want to put it in 
political terms, let alone just good common sense — to get the 
best competent people that you can get to advise government at 
whatever order or level of government. That only stands to 
reason, and we try to do that. 
 
I was saying earlier in the afternoon in my little debate with the 
Tory Party, the Saskatchewan Party here next door, that in 
Saskatchewan we’re partly handicapped, mainly handicapped 
with respect to some Crown corporations in terms of what the 
public will accept in terms of payment for CEOs. Three 
hundred and fifty thousand to $450,000 for a SaskTel or a 
SaskPower president by industry standards, I am told, is 
normal. I think if we did that, we would have a lot of political 
trouble on our hands, and in the consequence we are 
conditioned by that. So we have some limitations. 
 
But you mentioned a couple of examples. I can tell you in the 
case of SHIN, the chief executive officer of SHIN was selected 
not by the cabinet or the government or by any direct or indirect 
communication by me, but selected by the board of directors of 
SHIN, composed of SAHO, nurses, doctors, and the providers 
from a list of applicants which the committee of SHIN 
examined and then suggested the choice. I don’t know if they 
gave them three choices or whether there was a one, two, three 
ranking, but that was their decision. And that’s how the 
decision was made in that context. 
 
Even in the case of Jack Messer — which I said earlier this 
afternoon — when he took over at Power Corporation on an 
interim basis after the George Hill dust-up which we had, we 
hired a head-hunting firm. Head-hunting firm went out on a 
nation-wide search, series of applicants, and recommended Jack 
Messer. It happens to be that he was a New Democrat, is a New 

Democrat. I think he did a good job. Channel Lake is a 
problem, but put into perspective as to what he accomplished, 
and I think there’s a pretty impressive record of public service. 
Perhaps I’m still reflecting a bias, but I’m trying to be as 
objective as I can. 
 
So I agree with you. The lessons that one would learn is try to 
be objective. Try to have competent people, but there are 
limitations, limitations in our salary and there are also some 
limitations in terms of ideology. 
 
No premier would want to have, no government would want to 
have, as an example, the head of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, a person who totally and completely believed in 
say massive privatization of the corporation. That may be a 
position that somebody adopts. We do not adopt it. 
 
We don’t demand monolithic conformity to our position but we 
do believe that the very top, the civil servant advisers, must be 
knowledgeable of and in — how should I describe it to be 
delicate — in general support of the ideology and philosophy 
that the government of the day, elected by the people to govern, 
is pursuing. 
 
Now couple that with all kinds of checks and balances pursuant 
to Mr. Wright and the Deloitte Touche report, we might be able 
to have the right combination of the various interests that need 
to be balanced off in this regard. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I find your comments interesting. I’m not 
going to go in that particular direction because it’s going to veer 
away, really digress from what I had started off talking to you 
about, but I just want to make one comment. 
 
I was present during the Crown Corporations Committee and it 
in fact is on the public record that Mr. Messer I think is far 
more leaning toward privatization of a particular Crown than 
probably most people in this room would care to think . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I think, I know I’m right. All we 
have to do is haul out the book, but then of course words don’t 
mean much to people any more, written or otherwise. 
 
I’m wondering if it would help if the government were to put on 
the table its overall plan so that there’s a clear indication — and 
this may be in fact what you’re sending over to me . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I’m saying an overall plan for 
all boards, commissions, Crowns, departments, and agencies so 
that . . . and looking at how they all fit into and can contribute 
overall to this plan. 
 
I’m really asking, what’s in place now as far as ensuring that a 
more holistic approach is used? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well with respect, I think this is a 
very positive suggestion, and I was asking my deputy minister, 
perhaps we could put together something which is readily 
understood in this context. I’d try it again and won’t repeat, in 
the interests of time, what I told my friends in the Tory 
Saskatchewan Party, but the current transition is well under way 
now. 
 
No more ministers on the boards, different kinds of boards, 
more commercially oriented, accountability through the CIC 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1905 

minister and the CIC board, with internal management controls 
à la Mr. Wright. I think that the notion of a schematic chart plus 
description of mandate is something which has a lot of merit. 
We are implementing it because basically the documentation 
does exist. It’s a couple of feet in height based on the Crown 
review study. But as I understand, your suggestion is we should 
put this into something which is a discernible 30, 40, 50-page 
document that can be debated and reviewed. 
 
And I would say to you that I will ask . . . as Dr. Marchildon is 
taking some note of this, we’ll raise this with Mr. Wright and 
Mr. Lingenfelter to see if it can be done. 
 
The Chair: — Order. I just want to remind the Premier not to 
use names of sitting members. Yes . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Understood. The Premier recognized it. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I thought that was one of the more decent 
references to members in the House this afternoon, actually 
calling them by their original name. I thought that was not 
appropriate by rules of the House, but more civilized than some 
things I’ve heard today. 
 
I want to finish off this one section of questioning with a 
particular question regarding what transpired with Channel 
Lake, and then I will try to bring to some conclusion my other 
questions surrounding the Crowns. 
 
In your opinion, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Premier, what was missing 
that allowed this whole thing to happen? It isn’t simply things 
that were present; it was probably things that weren’t. And I’m 
wondering, in the overall analysis, if your government has been 
able to come to some conclusion about . . . was there something 
in particular not in place that needed to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well I have to make this general 
observation. We try very hard, all of us, in our individual lives 
to not make mistakes, but we do make mistakes. And we make 
them in private business. We make them in public business. I 
don’t want to minimize it when I use the word mistakes, 
because there were some pretty serious mistakes made. 
 
I don’t know if I can summarize this into one or two conclusion 
statements, for two reasons. My first reason is that the Crown 
Corporations Committee is still continuing its examination, and 
I think we should await their suggested solutions or ideas as to 
what went wrong and how it could be improved. 
 
And secondly, in slight contradiction of what I’ve just said, 
there are a set of suggested recommendations in Deloitte 
Touche and CIC which point to some of the errors which were 
made. And those I think need to be further tested by further 
evidence and witnesses, and we’ll await the report and then we 
might be able to distil the one or two that are there. 
 
But I don’t think I should go any further than that because if I 
do I’ll be prejudging what the committee would be reporting. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Before I move on, I want to make a 
specific comment about something that you just did that I don’t 
think enough people do. And I know that there were political 
reasons why, at least people could claim there are political 
reasons why the proclamation was made about Channel Lake 

and information brought forward and so forth. But it is 
absolutely imperative that people in leadership roles have the 
courage to do what you did again today, and that was to admit 
that something went wrong, that mistakes can be made. And I 
don’t think that’s done often enough to say, this happened, it 
was wrong, we’re sorry, and this is what we’ve done to fix it. 
 
So I want to take this opportunity to be on the public record of 
saying thank you for doing that, because I think it’s woefully 
lacking in society overall, let alone amongst people who are in 
leadership roles. 
 
Moving on to public planning of Crowns, I’m wondering why I 
can’t obtain a summary of the corporate plan for each Crown. 
And why don’t Crowns provide the public with a summary 
corporate plan when every other . . . and in the case of electric 
utilities across Canada actually do. And perhaps this is 
something that the deputy minister can make note of as well. 
 
If I may, I’ll just let you know what I can access. I can go on 
the Internet and get New Brunswick’s plan; I can go on the 
Internet and get Quebec Hydro’s five-year plan, and so forth. In 
fact the federal government gives awards and they’re given for 
the best summary plan and they’re also given for the best 
annual report provided to parliament. It’s in this very city, not 
that long ago, that the Farm Credit Corporation based in Regina 
won the award for the second year in a row. 
 
So why is it that people in other provinces are able to have 
greater access to information about their Crowns and their 
overall plan than we are in Saskatchewan? 
 
(1745) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I think, Mr. Chairman, my response 
and defence would be that with respect to accounting and 
financial bookkeeping and financial records, that those have 
improved in the last several years enormously and substantially 
as the Provincial Auditor and his office himself has stated. 
 
You’re speaking to another dimension of the issue which is 
forward planning, and here I think that we do have work to do. 
I’m advised by the Deputy Premier and the Minister in charge 
of CIC that one of the works in progress at the officials’ level of 
CIC is the notion of annual general meetings of shareholders 
open to the public, whereby there would be a plan or set of 
plans as to where individual Crowns are headed, for discussion 
and for debate. And if that is in fact the case, which makes a lot 
of sense to me, that would go a long way toward I think 
meeting the comment and suggestion that you make. 
 
Right now it isn’t ready, and I can only say that what we’re 
doing here . . . to be very candid with you about this, this is just 
myself speaking. I guess I can’t do it on a personal basis 
because as Premier you speak for the government. 
 
But I think we’ve been caught behind the curve with respect to 
Crown corporations a little bit. We’ve been running Crown 
corporations with ministers as chairs, vice-chairs sometimes, 
and they’ve been closely held and kept closely as part of 
commercial activity and also public policy activity. And there’s 
a good argument to made that a Crown is a commercial entity, 
but it also has a social dimension to it. 



1906 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

And now we see a world which is competitive, global, 
interconnected, deregulated as we see through SaskTel for 
example. And this is where we’re behind the curve a bit in 
terms of governance issues. 
 
Channel Lake is an example, question of forward planning, 
accountability, yardsticks of measurement and the like. The 
Crown review started us on the direction of getting ourselves 
modernized and updated. We’ve got a lot of work yet to do. 
Channel Lake has added a little more fire power behind the 
urgency for doing it, but it is a large task which can’t be done 
over night. 
 
And I guess my answer to you is that if what the Deputy 
Premier tells me is true — I have no reason to doubt that it isn’t 
true — then with good reporting numbers we should be in a 
much better position. I can’t say when, but a few years or 
shorter down the road than we are today, although we have 
made great strides in the meantime anyway. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I thank you very much for your response, 
and I’m hoping that when there’s going to be this movement 
toward looking at more holistic approach with boards and 
commissions and departments and agencies and Crowns that 
this might be one thing that will enhance that whole process as 
well. The best way to know where you’re going is to have an 
articulated plan. And if everybody knows where they’re going, 
on the same journey to the same end and how they fit into that 
overall plan, I think it makes a substantive difference. 
 
I want you to know that the sorts of things that are available on 
the Internet are not things that disclose sensitive information, 
but they most certainly are worthwhile to look at. And I see no 
reason, with the kind of talent and expertise that we have in 
Crowns here, that we aren’t doing it. 
 
I take it . . . although I don’t access to the copy of Mr. Wright’s 
comments yet, I am interested in exploring the role of the board 
of directors. And I’m assuming that much of what he discusses 
there or makes reference to and perhaps suggestions for relate to 
precisely what I’m talking about, so this might be redundant. 
 
I’m wondering what the view of your government is for the 
responsibility of boards of directors and how this relates to the 
view of the responsibilities of cabinet, of CIC overall, and of 
the role of the CEO. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — This, Mr. Chairman, is a very 
wide-ranging question. I don’t mean to be critical of it by 
saying it. But being wide ranging, I’m not sure that it can be 
answered in a very succinct and precise way. 
 
But I will endeavour to do so by giving you my interpretation of 
the lines of communication and authority and responsibility in 
the future, I’m talking about, as opposed to the past. In the past, 
as we know, we had a minister in charge of Power, and he 
answered questions or she answered questions on Power, 
SaskTel, and so forth. 
 
Now with the new system, what is happening is as follows. 
Number one, the boards will be more entrepreneurial and more 
commercially dictated and mandated. The boards will be 
composed of people with expertise in this area. This is not to be 

critical of any of the board members who have served so well in 
previous years for previous governments, but I think in the 
competitiveness of the society today, they have to bring a 
certain expertise. 
 
We hope to have Chairs of the boards of directors who bring 
expertise and knowledge of the business world involving labour 
relations and involving human resources and the whole plethora 
of issues, even as far as environment is concerned. 
 
We are moving closer to the question of director’s liability, 
which is somewhat akin to director’s liability in private law, 
where directors are ultimately responsible to shareholders, 
although this is a different kind of an animal that we’re talking 
about in terms of a public Crown corporation. But we want to 
be able to, in the day-to-day management, let’s say in the case 
of Power Corporation, for the board of directors — who by the 
way will have greater control over the CEO and the officials 
because it will be less politicized — to be able to do the kind of 
things economically and managerially and entrepreneurially that 
should be done in the interest of the corporation. 
 
And that means more freedom. It may mean more risk. It may 
mean some winners and some losers. It may mean some 
political difficulty for us in the losses. It rarely benefits us if 
there’s a political win on a good investment, but nonetheless, 
that is the way to go if we believe in public ownership because 
they’ve got to expand in the world of tomorrow. 
 
Now how do we square the circle without simply saying, 
through privatization, they’re free as a bird to do whatever they 
want to do? And the way to do that is accountability, 
democratic accountability, and under the current system that 
will lie with the minister in charge of the Crown Investments 
Corporation. As Mr. Wright says in his statement, which I have 
now delivered over to you, this will be a large oversight board, 
not a micromanagement board. It will not be a day-to-day 
management board, but an oversight board and it will answer to 
the House, through the minister, major areas of policy. Note the 
words I use, major areas of policy, respecting individual 
Crowns. 
 
If the legislature descends into, and I use that word advisedly, 
the Minister of CIC under the new arrangement getting into 
micro answers about micro issues — if I can describe it that 
way — micromanage the situation, then we’re back into the old 
system. And if we’re back into the old system and we’re going 
to get all the political heat for all the decisions we should or 
should not have done in Guyana, you name it, then we might as 
well go back to the board members and the politicians there. I 
don’t think that’s the way the Crown corporations of tomorrow, 
publicly owned in Saskatchewan, are going to thrive and 
survive. 
 
So the squaring of the circle is in the way that I’ve described it 
to you and the reporting mechanism to the House will be in the 
way that I’ve described it to you. One alternative of course, 
which is what I know that the Saskatchewan Tory Party 
believes in, perhaps even the Liberal Party believes in, as it’s 
currently structured in any event, is out and out privatization. 
That would be a simple answer. It’s gone to the TSE (Toronto 
Stock Exchange) and all the private rules of governance and 
direction and mandate apply. We don’t subscribe to that. Our 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1907 

Crown review says that it should not be the case and thus, this 
is the mechanism that we’re generally putting into place in 
order to achieve our objectives. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Premier . . . Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, 
there’s a decision-making grid provided to boards which 
outlines when they assumed advisory roles versus when they 
have decision-making authority. And on the following key 
issues, I’d like to know which of the four groups, the board . . . 
I’ll start again . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All right, this isn’t 
that long. In fact you can say A, B, C, D . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Okay. 
 
There’s a decision-making grid provided to boards which 
outlines when they assume an advisory role versus when they 
have decision-making authority. And on the following key 
issues, which of the four groups — the board, CIC, the cabinet, 
or the CEO — has the decision-making authority and 
responsibility for: (1) utility rate hikes, and (2) the hiring of the 
CEO? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — With respect to the utility-rate hikes, 
theoretically — and I don’t mean this in any . . . I mean it in its 
best sense of the word, theoretically — that should be in the 
hands of the board of directors of the Crown corporation 
involved, and theoretically it is. The tradition has been, 
however, over many, many years — Conservative, Liberal, and 
NDP, and CCF — that the rate-hike increase gets a cabinet 
oversight. 
 
Now comes the problem of what level of other additional 
oversights should there be. Some have argued for a public 
utilities review commission, take it right out of the hands of 
cabinet, and for that matter out of the hands of the board of 
directors. Some have argued, put it in the legislative utilities 
review commission — a LURC. 
 
Some have, because I have felt both of those two alternatives 
are flawed, 45-day review, which the opposition says is a sham. 
Ultimately there is, so long as the shareholder is the 
Government of Saskatchewan . . . Sorry, the shareholders are 
represented by the elected members of this Legislative 
Assembly on the behalf of the shareholders, the taxpayers, we 
have to have a say on this kind of an issue. 
 
Now traditionally CEOs have been, theoretically, approved by 
the board of directors, evaluated by the board of directors, 
maintained by the board of directors. But CEOs are in many 
ways like deputy ministers. I said in response to the 
Saskatchewan Party earlier this afternoon, every premier I know 
of — at least I know in the case of premier Blakeney, and I 
believe this is good public administration — the premier always 
reserves onto himself or herself the right to consult and to 
approve or disapprove of the appointment of a deputy minister, 
as he does or she does with respect to the appointment of a 
minister. Just the way it works federally and the way it works 
provincially. 
 
And the purpose of it is that there’d be cohesion, a collectivity, 
a collegiality, in the decision-making matters which pertain to 
either the regular business of government or the regular 
business of Crowns or the individual business of Crowns. 
 

Now that, with respect to deputies, I suspect will remain. With 
respect to Crown corporations, I think that’ll be greatly 
diminished. Why? Because as I’ve explained, greater 
independence, no political interference, no political chairs, 
commerciality, dictates of commerciality — future CEOs are 
going to be the choices of the boards more than they will be of 
cabinet or premiers, as final decision-making operations. 
 
Can we take the break now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You 
have another question? 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Chair, I have one final question in this 
section and I thought perhaps what you might want to do, if it’s 
at all possible, is simply finish that question. And then we can 
proceed with the remainder after the break. Is that to your 
satisfaction? 
 
Mr. Premier, the SaskPower board of directors seems to have 
been painted with a brush that they were negligent. And in your 
opinion, can a board of directors of a Saskatchewan Crown ever 
have the responsibility for all key decisions when in fact they 
have to be cabinet decisions? And it begs the question, should 
Crown boards be reconstituted and called advisory boards? 
 
With that I will simply place the last couple of questions that fit 
with this. Is it not true that as Premier and with your cabinet 
that the decisions must be final? And should we not be moving 
to a place where cabinet clearly states this ultimate 
responsibility, because if not, then there most certainly is an 
argument for privatization. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well by the way I’ve just been handed 
by, again, the minister in charge of CIC, Deputy Premier . . . the 
CIC ’97 annual report on page 34 talks about new initiatives on 
governance. I can mail that to . . . not mail it but deliver it to the 
hon. member opposite and it outlines the pre-Crown-review 
procedure and the new governance model procedure for further 
and greater elaboration of what I’ve tried to say. And where 
I’ve been in error verbally in my report, take the printed word 
as the one that applies. 
 
With respect to cabinet, the truth of the matter is that cabinet is 
very, very, very limitedly involved in major decisions with 
respect to the Crown corporations. Channel Lake is an example. 
We get involved in certain purchases over a certain dollar value. 
We get involved in the appointment of the boards of directors. 
We have had, as I’ve explained, the traditional role in the 
appointment of the CEOs. We do have some influence on rates, 
or discussion of rates, and that’s about it. 
 
The corporation in 99 per cent of their work operates as a 
corporation, qua corporation, and has its board of agenda 
meetings dealing with those issues. 
 
So I don’t see it as being so intrusive into the integrity and the 
independence of the board of directors of Crowns by cabinet 
that we might as well just simply take it over totally or, in the 
alternative, privatize it. 
 
It is always a tricky balance of making sure that you have the 
commerciality and proper decision-making processes with 
accountability to you folks, to the shareholders who own the 
Crown corporations. It’s not an easy circle to square and not an 



1908 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

easy balance. 
 
(1800) 
 
And there have been, if I may say so, not portraying myself as 
any expert in this area . . . But when I retired from politics 
momentarily in 1982, with the consent of the majority of the 
voters in my constituency, I spent some time with the Canadian 
Institute of Resources Law in Calgary, Alberta, studying 
governance of Crown corporations and, particularly, studying 
the case study of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I 
don’t say it’s a great piece of written work, but nonetheless 
there are four or five published pieces about this. And others 
who preceded me describe the complexity of . . . the TVA is an 
example — Tennessee Valley Authority down in the United 
States — another example of the governance roles. There will 
be these difficulties that always ensue. 
 
All I’m saying is we’re moving in a different way for the 
reasons that we are, and that should eliminate those areas where 
there’s a perceived, how shall I describe it, a perceived conflict. 
 
Could I ask members of the House for a three-minute break? 
 
The Chair: — The Premier has requested leave for a three-to 
five-minute recess. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I will 
begin by thanking you for the comments that you’ve made this 
evening and I will go over Hansard with great interest, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
I have one question that arose from something that I had 
submitted as a written question during this session. And I was 
somewhat perplexed by the response. And I think that you’ll 
have an opinion about it as well, Mr. Premier. I’m going to read 
the question and I’m going to read the answer. This is the 
second time I submitted this question to the government for a 
response and I will tell you that I still don’t have a response 
even though they gave me, supposedly, a response the first 
time. 
 

To the Government: As of March 31, 1997 the reported 
accumulated deficit in the Summary Financial Statements 
was $9.3 billion. (1) What is the forecasted accumulated 
deficit of the government as a whole (not just the General 
Revenue Fund) as of March 31, 1998? (2) What is the 
forecasted accumulated deficit of the government as a 
whole for March 31, 1999? 

 
The second response that I received from your government, Mr. 
Premier, stated as follows: 
 

(1) The information is not known because the Provincial 
budget is based on the operations of the General Revenue 
Fund, not the summary financial statement entity. As 
indicated on page 10 of the Estimates and page 64 of the 
budget Address, the Provincial budget forecasts an 
accumulated deficit of $7.194 billion as of March 31, 1998, 

and $7.088 billion at March 31, 1999. 
 
And, of course, as you know, those numbers are not based on 
the overall accumulated deficit of the government but rather 
again a repeat of the General Revenue Fund. The answer to 
number (2) stated simply, “Same as above.” 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, do you believe that your government 
should be able to answer what the forecasted accumulated 
deficit for the government as a whole, is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chair, I think the answer in 
general terms is . . . obviously there can be an answer given, an 
estimate, perhaps in a direct answer, if you combine the GRF 
(General Revenue Fund) with the Crown corporation debt 
which is not part of this number. It however works out that as a 
matter of long-standing practice in the development of the 
budget, the answer is truthful; we work on the question of the 
GRF. I know your question is, give us the cumulative total. 
We’ve been bandying about — bandying about has been a bad 
word — but I’ve been using a cumulative total now for quite a 
number of years. I think it’s at about 12 billion if my memory 
serves me correctly, counting the Crown corporations. 
 
And I think we can provide that easily enough . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Pardon me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No 
that . . . Well he’s asking whether it’s gross versus net. The 
answer is we have more assets in the Crown than we have debt 
in the Crown, so the figure that I’m taking out is the debt on the 
Crown and adding it to the 9.3 billion figure that you have, 
which roughly approximates 12 to $13 billion. 
 
We can do that, and in fact in some ways the rating agencies 
when they come by to rate our debt capacity, they say there’s no 
difference between the GRF or the CIC cumulative Crown debt. 
It’s just that in the accounting of the circumstances of our 
budget, we have traditionally and always carried out this way. 
Not a very good answer. Maybe it’s time to put it in some sort 
of cumulative approach, but that’s the way it’s worked. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well I’ll sum this area up. I don’t have a 
number of questions on this. I just found it somewhat confusing 
and couldn’t understand why it was such a tough question. 
 
I know that there have been a lot of concerns about not having 
pension liabilities taken into consideration when we’re dealing 
with the overall accumulated deficit for the province. 
 
But one of the things that the government has done since 1991 
for which it has received, I think not only deserving credit but 
has been followed by other governments, is with the summary 
financial statements. They’re tremendously useful. Far more 
valuable in fact than dealing with simply the numbers that we 
get from the budget. 
 
And I just hope that in future that one would be able to just 
simply say, yes, this is how much the people of the province 
owe. However we can define what our assets are; these are the 
assets that we have. We’re in a better position than we are in a 
bad position and get on with it. Because that’s precisely what 
each and everyone of us has to do whether we’re doing it as part 
of a small business — it’s what corporations have to do, and 
individuals have to do. So I appreciate that you tried to answer 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1909 

this question this evening. 
 
I’m going to move now into the third area of questioning that I 
mentioned earlier. And it probably, Mr. Premier, will not 
surprise you at all that I’m going to talk with you about the 
disenfranchised widows and widowers of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m going to begin by quoting from a letter that was sent to 
you three days ago. It was not simply sent to you, it was sent as 
well to the Minister of Finance, the Leader of the Official 
Opposition. It was sent to the Minister of Justice, the Minister 
of Health, and myself. I’m sorry, the bottom is cut off so I don’t 
know if there were other people. 
 
I’m just going to read a few paragraphs from this letter. I don’t 
expect you to have it with you. And it’s to the hon., I’ll just say, 
the Minister of Labour. 
 
(1815) 
 

To date you’ve not committed yourself with a reply to the 
disenfranchised widows and it appears that this sitting of 
the legislature is coming to an end soon, thus anticipating 
an end to a reply to us. 
 
The lives of most widows was so very difficult and in 
many cases nothing has changed except . . . years later. I 
was widowed on January 20, 1975, gave birth to my 
daughter on February 1, 1975, and had to undergo surgery 
February 23, 1975. 
 
Today my five adult children can openly discuss how 
much their lives were affected by the death of their dad. To 
avoid concern, worry and sorrow to me, because of fear of 
losing another parent, they withheld their emotions until 
now when we all can talk about it freely. 
 
My eldest daughter, aged 39 years, still refuses to visit her 
dad’s grave site because she was robbed of a dad at the age 
of 15. Raising five children by myself was a real challenge 
— emotionally, financially, and spiritually. My only son 
gave up his dream of dentistry to avoid a financial burden 
to me. 
 
The children and I had to give up many things in life that a 
two-parent family enjoys and often takes for granted. We 
feel robbed. 
 
Today so many special interest groups, and in many cases, 
some who have contributed little to society, have become 
totally dependant upon government and society and this 
appears to be acceptable. 
 
All Canadians are supposed to be equal under Section 15 
of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Why have the 
Saskatchewan disenfranchised widows been singled out as 
unworthy of equality? 
 

Now I’m not going to read the rest of this letter. But I want you 
to know that I know that your Minister of Labour, and perhaps 
your own office, and numerous other people who are members 
of this Legislative Assembly, have received letter, upon letter, 
upon letter like this, where it really does put the human face on 

what is a tremendous injustice. 
 
When the Workers’ Compensation Board legislation was 
changed in 1985, the widows and widowers of workers killed 
on the job and remarried prior to 1985 had their pensions 
revoked upon remarriage. Those who remarried after 1985 
continue to receive their pensions to this very day 
 
The widows who remarried after 1985 were in effect 
disenfranchised and discriminated against on the basis of a 
marital status prior to a certain date. The widows have 
petitioned the Workers’ Compensation Board, and by extension 
the Government of Saskatchewan, for the restoration of benefits 
for surviving spouses. 
 
And while the restoration of the benefits is a major objective, 
the primary reason for the petition is the fact that these people 
— primarily women — believe that their constitutional rights 
have been denied. 
 
Section 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 
subparagraph (1) calls for “non-discrimination.” And given 
these circumstances, Mr. Premier, I would very much 
appreciate — as well as all of the people who have worked so 
hard to bring this issue to the attention of the public and your 
government — I would like you to state on the public record 
your government’s position in dealing with the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s no doubt 
about it that the hon. member from Greystone has certainly 
brought this to our attention and to the public attention — there 
can be no doubt about that — as she has done again this 
evening. 
 
You asked the position of the government. I can give you the 
position of the government only as of this moment. And it is 
that the Workers’ Compensation Board in assessing the issue of 
its statutory obligations and rights and powers, in the context of 
the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, in the context of what 
other jurisdictions may or may not be doing . . . completed a 
report on or about April 24 of 1998 — that’s approaching two 
months from now. 
 
There are, as well, actuarial reports involving Watson and 
Wyatt, the two people who were doing the actuarial report. And 
what I’m advised by my officials is that the Department of 
Labour, Justice — because it’s a constitutional and human 
rights issue — they are now in the process of preparing a 
recommendation to be moved to cabinet at the earliest possible 
date as to how to resolve this issue. 
 
And it’s a tough one for me to answer because the argument 
based on principle with respect to equality under the Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms might make it a black and white 
consideration — might, I underline that word might. On the 
other hand, it also carries with it enormous implications to the 
philosophy and principle of the WCB (Workers’ Compensation 
Board), and with it financial implications which attach thereto. 
 
British Columbia has moved, but under different circumstances 
— I don’t mean to diminish their movement — but they’ve 
moved under different circumstances; other provinces are in the 



1910 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

same position that we’re in. And all I can say is that because of 
your concern, because of the issue, it is being moved forward. 
Not as quickly as you would like or those who have written the 
letter — I have not seen this letter but I’ll read it — it’s being 
moved forward for an early deliberation and decision by 
cabinet. I can’t give you a date but it is a commitment by the 
Minister of Labour that it’ll be on the agenda, our agenda, as 
soon as he can be ready to prepare a recommendation. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well I think that you should know, Mr. 
Premier, that your words this evening are probably the only 
sense of hope that any one of these women has heard to date. 
 
When they approached the Workers’ Compensation Board on 
October 27 of 1997, they were led to believe that there would 
be not only action taken but that it would come much more 
promptly than it has. They were under the understanding that 
specific things were being done according to a specific timeline. 
And I don’t expect that people would have unrealistic 
expectations when they have waited for some time, if they 
weren’t given unrealistic expectations. 
 
I know what they have told me in terms of what would be done 
by December. It doesn’t mean the monies would come forward, 
but there most certainly would be action taken. Then they were 
told February, then they were told March, they were told that 
the actuary would be done by a particular date and then they 
were put off again. So the fact that you are indicating that the 
minister is determined to bring this before the cabinet is 
something that will have these people feeling a great sense of 
relief — that there will be some discussion at that level of 
government about their situation. 
 
Over the last nine months, these people have actually 
undertaken themselves to search for widows from 
Saskatchewan who would fit into this category. And their 
responses to date total 45 women. Now the actuarial report 
indicates that there is a total number of widows at about the 302 
level. This is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 304. This is the 
number I think that the Minister of Labour raised this past 
week. 
 
Now that total, Mr. Premier, I want you to know, goes back to 
the year 1930. So if a woman were widowed at the age of 30 in 
1930 she would be 98 years old now. It is on the basis of these 
304 files that the Workers’ Compensation Board has arrived at 
a figure of $74 million in compensation. The number of 304 
raises a number of questions that the Workers’ Compensation 
Board and I believe the minister responsible have not addressed 
regardless of my questions. 
 
And these questions are how many widows of that number are 
still living? How many widows of this number did not remarry 
and are still in receipt of their pensions? And I mean, one could 
go on and on given the restrictions that were placed on people 
whether there were common-law relationships and so forth. 
 
I guess, Mr. Premier, what I’d like to know is, if the Workers’ 
Compensation Board has done an analysis to be able to answer 
these kinds of questions. I think that it’s very, very important 
that this information be made available to people who are sort 
of living this night and day and day and night. 
 

And if they haven’t done this kind of analysis to know who 
continues to be in receipt of their pensions, who are people who 
are no longer with us and so forth, it begs the question if they 
haven’t done it, then why haven’t they done it? And I’m hoping 
that what you will do is to give instruction or some guidance to 
the Minister of Labour and have him instruct the Workers’ 
Compensation Board to do the analysis and provide these 
results to the widows. 
 
I know what it is they want. And what I want to do is to share 
that with you because they believe that they have been very, 
very diligent in collecting information, collating information, 
and providing support to one another . . . That is, really made it 
possible for them to go through all of the times that they’ve 
been experiencing lately . . . and to try to help overcome — 
through a sense of camaraderie and the fact that they have had a 
common tragic experience — to try to overcome some of what 
their history has brought to them. 
 
I know that what they want is access to this information. I know 
that what they want is not only what they believe is deemed 
morally and legally theirs, but they want to know that there’s 
movement going forward. They want to have access to the 
information that has been accumulated. And they are going to 
ask I know, and be willing to negotiate as well because they 
most certainly aren’t people who are thinking, oh gosh, we’re 
going to come into some windfall. Let’s just rip off, you know 
as much money as we can. I haven’t heard that from anyone. 
 
What they want is to say, for those of us who are clearly 
identified and have been ready, willing, and able to move 
forward now, will you please consider us and settle with us? 
Not to the exclusion of others who may come about in future 
but with the 45 people who actually do exist. I’m going to skip 
through this and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I’ll undertake to the hon. member that 
I will ask Dr. Marchildon to contact the WCB officials and to 
do the analysis that you have described for us in this exchange. 
I want to put one caveat to this — unless there is some legal 
prohibition or impediment, we will be in communication with at 
least you, as the person who has raised this, as quickly as 
possible, to answer the question of the evaluation of the 
numbers. And the earlier comment I made respecting the 
principle and the issues of principle still applies. 
 
(1830) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — You’re making me happier as the night 
goes on. You’re either getting weary and not knowing what 
you’re saying or you’re just honing in on what makes me a 
happy person. 
 
I do want to raise something that is of grave concern to them 
and get your comments on this. One of the things that all of 
these individuals have said who were present one day . . . And 
by the way, I didn’t invite them here. I was very pleased that 
they came on their own fruition and I was delighted that the 
Minister of Labour got to his feet during introduction of guests 
and invited them to meet with him. I had no intention of even 
asking him if he would meet with them. And it seemed to be a 
very good meeting. I think a lot of things were stated that 
needed to be. But one of the things they’re concerned about is 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

that delays mean that there is a strategy to simply wear them 
down and that they’re very concerned that they’re going to be 
forced into litigation, as what happened in British Columbia 
with the government there. 
 
I don’t know if you know how that unfolded in B.C., but the 
government not only forced the disenfranchised widows there 
into litigation, the government lost their case and then they 
appealed it and they lost it again in the Supreme Court of 
B.C. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I’m delighted to hear 
that. That’s not the way it’s been written up and I’m sure that 
you’re information’s correct. 
 
I guess the more important thing is this: that if we could have 
from you some reassurance to them that there is no intent that 
people who are already — many of whom are elderly, many 
have no resources and many are in ill health — that this is 
something that they will not have to be concerned with, taking 
their own government to court. 
 
If they could have that reassurance from you this evening, I 
know that it would make a tremendous, tremendous difference 
to their level of stress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — That’s a tougher question to answer, 
Madam Chair, because I need to take advice from legal people. 
I hate to sound legalistic on an issue which really is an issue of 
compassion and rights, but I do have to take some advice from 
them as to what impediments, if any, there may or may not be 
to this solution that the member advocates. 
 
I’m just going through some briefing notes here which are not 
very helpful to me. I do know that under our statute there is a 
Limitation of Actions Act, and that may be an impediment. I 
don’t know whether that requires an amendment. 
 
All that I can tell you is that as a general policy we don’t like to 
be sued. We don’t like to have our people sue us. It doesn’t 
make sense. As a general principle, as a lawyer, when I 
practised law, all long these many years ago, I took the position 
that, not a perfect settlement was better than a doggone good 
lawsuit. If you try to work on principles with a little bit of give 
and take and compromise and on what is the correct and proper 
thing to do, we can come to a conclusion. 
 
So my answer would be to say what I said to you earlier, 
namely, we will ask the Minister of Labour to speed up the 
recommendation to cabinet on the principles of the issue. In the 
interim, and before that time, we will ask the WCB to give the 
analysis of the 302 as you’ve described it, which is a very 
powerful argument the way you describe it in the computation. I 
want to see if they’ve done that. 
 
And with respect to the question about no lawsuits, our hope 
would be that it would not be a lawsuit. 
 
But I cannot guarantee that, I have to be clear about that. I 
simply don’t have legal advice in this regard. But I want to 
communicate our intent to see if we can come to some 
satisfactory resolution of the issue. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would just simply 
like to say to the Premier that I know that these individuals 

would enter into dialogue with you, your government, or any 
representatives thereof, any time, any place, at anyone else’s 
convenience actually. 
 
And I want to take this opportunity to extend my thanks to you 
for your candour this evening and your cooperation. And I look 
forward to future opportunities for discussion. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
coming back to an issue that you were raising earlier on this 
evening and asking the question about . . . Mr. Minister or Mr. 
Premier . . . Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, do we have any private 
clinics operating currently in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Chair, the answer is yes, but . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes a big but. We introduced 
legislation . . . we introduced legislation which said they had to 
be publicly administered. You people opposed it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the Premier for 
acknowledging the fact that we do have private clinics in the 
province because certainly the minister . . . the Premier will 
know that in the Saskatoon Health District manual on page 129 
we do have the Gimbel eye clinic that is currently operating and 
providing a service in the province of Saskatchewan — a 
limited service, I might add. If I’m not mistaken, Mr. Chair, or 
Deputy Chair, I don’t believe it provides the full services that 
the Gimbel Eye Clinic in Calgary provides. 
 
Also, Mr. Chair, in a very recent article, “Straight Talk”, on 
Saturday, June 6, the article talks about a crisis in health care 
. . . but also brings into the debate about the crisis in health care 
about services that the Free Trade Medical president Doug 
Hitchlock claims he can virtually find almost anywhere in 
North America for Canadian citizens. 
 
He also . . . the article says: 
 

What he and others like him are suggesting is a 
combination of public and private health care, where 
brokers would help insurance companies and worker’s 
compensation boards cut their costs through finding 
medical services in the U.S. 
 
Another wrinkle on that idea might be to establish a private 
MRI clinic in Saskatchewan, an idea Hitchlock says he’s 
already talked to Saskatchewan health care administrators 
about. 

 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, are you aware of any discussions 
that have taken place with the Department of Health in regards 
to a private MRI clinic in Saskatchewan? Are you aware of any 
discussion in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not aware of 
discussion with respect to a MRI in that regard. I do not deny 
that it has taken place; I do not agree that it has taken place; I 
simply do not know. 
 
But the principle of my argument, which I am responding to the 
member of the Saskatchewan Party is this: all of these so-called 
private clinics which you are trying to justify as your health 
policy, by our legislation, need to be publicly administered. 



1912 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

No two-tiering, because one of the five principles of medicare, 
which your convention calls mindless slogans, apart from 
universality and comprehensiveness, is public administration. 
You could not operate the system outside of public 
administration without it being penalized by the Canada Health 
Act. The Canada Health Act, being a law of Canada, says if you 
break the five principles you get penalized. We’ve had little 
dust-ups in Alberta in this regard from time to time. 
 
There is where the fundamental difference between us and 
medicare and health care is, and you are. You argue because 
these “private clinics” exist, and conveniently ignore, under 
public administration, that somehow we condone it. We don’t. 
We condone the five principles of the Canada Health Act, one 
of which is public administration. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Premier, I find it interesting 
when you talk about public administration and the types of 
services that are administered or aren’t administered, and the 
reasons for some of the insured procedures that are available, 
some that aren’t insured, because, Mr. Premier, we’ll go back to 
an election . . . two elections ago where almost two-thirds of the 
province of Saskatchewan suggested that we should be 
de-insuring abortion funding at that time. 
 
I look in the most recent annual statistics report, Saskatchewan 
Health ’96-97, and it talks about a number of procedures that 
have been de-insured over time, Mr. Premier. So it seems to me 
that there . . . while we can argue on one hand that the under the 
Canada Health Act you cannot, you cannot take services or not 
insure services, there seems to be a number of services even 
since you’ve been in government that have been de-insured in 
the province of Saskatchewan, which certainly goes against the 
fact of your argument —even the fact of de-insuring publicly 
funded abortions. But, Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, in regards to the 
Gimbel Eye Clinic operating in Calgary, Alberta it seems to me 
that that clinic is certainly providing a very positive function. I 
do not know if that is a publicly administered clinic but it 
certainly provides and meets a need. 
 
And indeed residents of Saskatchewan continue to go to 
Calgary because of the fact that even the Gimbel Eye Clinic that 
is available here in Saskatoon does not provide all the services 
that are provided in Calgary. 
 
I think, Mr. Premier, and whether you agree or not, we can 
agree to disagree on this. Mr. Premier, I think it’s time, as the 
article says, it’s time to stop harping about sacred cows and find 
solutions that the province either can’t or won’t look for. 
 
Mr. Premier, I will not dispute the fact that you have stood for a 
long time and you’ve argued the principles of medicare. You’ve 
argued the principles of an accessible and universal health care 
program. You’ve stood in this Assembly and you’ve argued 
about any changes at all, that they would be seen as private, that 
they would not work. 
 
I think the fact that people across this province, just by leaving 
the province to find the quality of care they’re looking for, have 
shown that some of those services can work or are working to 
meet that specific need. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, as well if I’m not mistaken, in regards to the 

chiropractic service, the province insures a level of care and I 
believe the patient does pay for some of the services. I’m not 
exactly sure about the Gimbel Eye Clinic in Saskatoon, whether 
all of the care that is currently being offered there is insured or 
whether or not the patient pays for some of those services. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, I had a discussion with your colleague, 
the Minister of Health, the other day in regard to a number of 
issues and one of the discussions centred around specific 
diseases or conditions where you may not have a lot of 
individuals in Saskatchewan that are suffering with that. 
 
And we talked about the fact of interprovincial agreements 
where we start working with other provinces. And if provinces 
have the expertise, have the medical services available, have the 
specialists who have worked in those fields, that rather than the 
province of Saskatchewan taking its few resources and starting 
a similar clinic but really not having enough patients to justify 
the clinic, that we look at these alternatives, that we work 
together with other provinces, other jurisdictions, so that we 
indeed at the end of the day, Mr. Premier, can provide — Mr. 
Chair, Mr. Premier — can provide that level of health care and 
health service that the public of Saskatchewan are looking for. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, in our discussions certainly with the Minister 
of Health, the Minister of Health in his opinion as well had 
indicated that there might be areas or avenues that we could 
pursue. I think those are some of the discussions we need to get 
into. I think that some of the argument about the sacred cow, 
Mr. Premier, that we talk about, the fact that we’re so tied 
ideologically in this province to a certain form of health care, 
that we are limiting the ability that Saskatchewan residents have 
to access quality health care. And rather than tying up the few 
dollars we have in continuing to provide all the services, let’s 
begin to work with other jurisdictions, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, I think, if you will, you could even give some 
leadership in that matter. Mr. Premier, you could take the lead 
in that matter. You could say, we in Saskatchewan have built a 
health care system that we believe is just probably the best 
health care system. And certainly that’s what you would argue, 
while many residents say it’s going downhill. 
 
Mr. Premier, you could certainly, by looking at some . . . 
working together with other jurisdictions and looking at 
reaching out, we could indeed build a health care system that is 
not just tied to Saskatchewan, but, Mr. Premier, is reaching out, 
not only providing services for residents of Saskatchewan, not 
only addressing the waiting-lists, but is giving Saskatchewan 
people the most optimum quality health care program we can 
offer. And those are some of the suggestions that the Minister 
of Health and I had. I just wanted to make certain as well, Mr. 
Premier, that you were aware of those. 
 
And I think there is some very good, positive methods of health 
care delivery that we can look at without always saying, the 
only way we can deliver it . . . and because we don’t have the 
money, we de-insure more services. 
 
Mr. Premier, let’s look at building and offering our citizens 
access to quality health care, whether it’s delivered in the city of 
Regina, whether it’s delivered in a hospital in Saskatoon or 
Humboldt. If that service is . . . and it isn’t feasible for us to 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1913 

start our own research and try to get specialists in, Mr. Premier. 
Let’s not bury our heads in the sand and say we can’t look at 
working with other jurisdictions. 
 
(1845) 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, when you look at, when we talk 
about health care, we talk about closure of the Plains health care 
centre, and for the past number of months there’s been a major 
debate taking place in this province in regards to the closure of 
the Plains health care centre. 
 
Mr. Premier, over the period of time we have been asking you 
to free your members and to give them an opportunity to vote 
freely in regards to the closure of the Plains health care centre. 
Now we see the member from Regina South . . . You have 
argued on a number of occasions, Mr. Chair, the Premier has 
argued on a number of occasions that you have had that vote. 
You’ve had a free vote in caucus. I’ve just quoted to you earlier, 
some of the discussion that a former colleague of yours had, 
and his views regarding that open vote. 
 
You’ve said that the people of the province had an opportunity 
to vote in the 1995 election, but we have examples where even 
some of your own colleagues currently sitting in this Assembly 
stood at Plains rallies and said that they would, if elected, they 
would stand up and they would stand for the . . . to maintain the 
current position of the Plains health care centre. 
 
Mr. Premier, it seems highly irregular to continue to argue that 
you provide open government; you provide opportunity for a 
free voice, but not allowing that free voice to take place. And if 
there’s a place, Mr. Chair, for that free voice to take place, this 
is the place for it to take place, not behind closed doors. 
 
Whether it’s our caucus, your caucus, or the Liberal caucus or 
any other caucus, that is not . . . Well we could argue that we do 
have the free votes, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, I think you will 
also acknowledge, yes. But when you leave the caucus, you 
generally leave with the consensus that was reached, while it 
may not have been the view of all the members. 
 
And on many occasions I’m sure, Mr. Premier, if there was the 
opportunity to have even an ability to speak in this Assembly, it 
would certainly open up the door for many members, but not 
necessarily mean that the government is going to lose. In fact I 
would think that would be one way, Mr. Premier, of again 
showing to the public of Saskatchewan that you are listening 
and that you are indeed providing that open and that accessible 
. . . and showing access to your members and also showing 
some compassion and listening to what people are saying. 
 
Mr. Premier, so in regards to the debate on the Plains, I 
acknowledged the fact that your government has probably, in 
fact I would have to say has made the final decision, the final 
choice. You’ve made that final choice and I suppose the next 
general election there will be a major debate. My guess is that 
the public will speak at that time. 
 
A lot of people, even though they didn’t take the time publicly 
to come out, Mr. Chair, and support a number of the meetings, 
have written letters. We’ve got thousands of letters in our 
office. People signed petitions. Other members of this 

Assembly have had petitions and letters in regards to the Plains 
health care centre. 
 
And so the proof again will be in the pudding whether or not 
you have made the right choice. And the public, when the 
opportunity to vote in the next general election, will certainly 
voice their opinions. And at that time it maybe a split decision 
as well for that matter, because I recognize the fact that the 
debate on the Plains health care centre certainly is more intense 
in this southern part of the province where the services of the 
Plains health care centre have been utilized. 
 
Mr. Premier, when we look at health care and we talk about 
health care, for some reason and for far too long we probably 
associated health care in the last number of years, when we look 
at the closures of hospitals and the number of bed closures in 
the province of Saskatchewan, we’ve . . . Basically I would 
suggest, health care delivery has been almost the centre of the 
debate and focused in the two major centres of Regina and 
Saskatoon. And that’s one of the reasons for the major debate 
on the Plains health care centre. 
 
You talk to people in my constituency, Mr. Premier, and Mr. 
Chair, individuals who have lost acute care beds and looking for 
access to . . . I’ve chatted, Mr. Premier, with a number of 
ambulance attendants who have been forced, even as they’ve 
been on their way with the patient to the city, have been chased 
from one hospital to the next because of the lack of beds. And 
that’s one of the reasons, Mr. Premier, it has become such an 
intense debate in the province of Saskatchewan and certainly in 
the southern part of the province. 
 
Your minister has said 675 beds is all we need. That may be 
true; I don’t really know. But I know, Mr. Premier, that unless 
you start addressing waiting-lists, unless you start addressing 
some of the major concerns the public have, I don’t believe the 
public will buy 675 or the fact that the services are available 
and will be available in the General and the Pasqua as being 
good enough, or will they see the health system as really 
providing the needs and meeting the needs of the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, as well I’d like to address an issue in regards to 
hepatitis C. Now your minister, the Minister of Health in this 
province, has been the Chair of the federal ministers. There’s 
been an ongoing debate in regards to hepatitis C. And the 
people, individuals infected with hepatitis C, have been looking 
not only to the Minister of Health, but when it comes right 
down to the bottom line, Mr. Premier, they’re looking to you. 
They’re looking to the Prime Minister on the national scene. 
And I agree; the federal government has to accept its share of 
the responsibility as well. 
 
Mr. Premier, when you look at the number of individuals who, 
prior to 1986 and since 1990, have been infected with hepatitis 
C and the fact that they’re receiving no compensation, it’s 
basically a slap in their face. What you’re saying to them, Mr. 
Premier, is we really don’t care. 
 
Mr. Premier, not everyone has full-fledged hepatitis C, and 
right now I’m not exactly sure of the percentage that are 
directly affected and having major complications healthwise 
with regards to hepatitis C. But for anyone who is, Mr. Premier, 



1914 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

it not only becomes a medical problem they’re facing, Mr. 
Premier, but it also becomes a financial burden, not only to 
them but to their families. 
 
Mr. Premier, what leadership role are you taking to address the 
problems that individuals who have been infected with hepatitis 
C prior to ’86 and since 1990, what, as far as what they can 
look forward to in the future to address the very real concerns 
that they have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
touched on many matters. I’ll be very brief on the key ones as I 
see them. 
 
I have no problems with interprovincial cooperation. The 
member may or may not know that the Royal University 
Hospital in Saskatoon, we basically do all of the cardiac surgery 
for babies, infants, from Winnipeg, Manitoba. That’s how we 
cooperate; we do that. That’s been going for some time. And 
any way that we can co-operate in this way, I’m all for it. 
 
So there’s not a question of being a sacred cow in that regard. 
Where the sacred cows come in is on the five principles of 
medicare. We don’t think, we don’t think that they’re mindless 
slogans. We think public administration and the four other 
principles of the Canada Health Act are principles — principles 
at the heart of medicare. 
 
Accessibility, yes accessibility, the fact we have the highest 
beds of anybody in this country, this province, per capita basis 
— the highest. And for months, you and the Liberals are going 
around spreading mistruths about the bed issue, like you do on 
all other issues. 
 
So I mean you simply don’t have any credibility in this regard 
whatsoever. Maclean’s magazine tells us about highest bed 
capacity. The Plains decision’s been made. We’re moving 
ahead. 
 
With respect to hepatitis C, we have an agreement which has 
been made by the federal, provincial, territorial governments 
which provides for 1986, and right now the deputy ministers are 
working at this to see if they can be further refined. Let’s just 
let them do their work. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Premier, you talk about the number of beds 
available and you talk about how good our health care system 
is. Can you talk about what you’re doing for hepatitis C victims. 
Mr. Premier, what leadership role are you taking on this issue? 
 
Other premiers across the province have already come forward. 
They are taking a leadership role. Other health ministers are 
taking a leadership role. Is it true that Saskatchewan is one of 
the few provinces holding out in this whole debate about 
compensation for hepatitis C victims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I mean how ludicrous can this 
question get — one of the few provinces. Eight out of ten 
provinces still support the original federal-provincial agreement 
— 8 out 10 plus Ottawa. Ontario and Quebec, for their own 
reasons, have decided that there should be full complete 
compensation for pre-’86 and post-1990. 
 

What’s happening now, based on the Ontario and Quebec 
decision, is a further re-examination to see what options there 
are. 
 
What leadership role are we taking? We’re participating; we’re 
offering our views and our input in its operation. Eight out of 10 
provinces and one federal government and two territorial 
governments are on side with the deal which was made. We’re 
working at what other options there may or may not be open to 
us and we’ll consider them at the appropriate time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Premier, as I’m aware, I believe other 
provinces are certainly looking at it. Well you say they’re on 
side. It seems to me there is some indication that other 
provinces, if the federal government would make a move, 
would be more than willing to offer some support, additional 
support, to hepatitis C victims. 
 
Mr. Premier, are not hepatitis C patients victims of a medical 
problem that they had no control over? Would it not be 
appropriate to show some compensation, recognize the 
problems that they have, especially for those who are dealing 
with the serious cases of full-blown hepatitis C, and recognize 
the difficulties that they’re facing. 
 
Mr. Premier, you could certainly give some leadership in this 
area. Why don’t you take that opportunity to give leadership. I 
think, Mr. Chairman, what the Premier’s afraid of, he’s going to 
be standing and saying, if I were to do it for one, I’d have to do 
it for all. 
 
Now I don’t know what the total parameters were for the 
agreement between ’86 and 1990, but I think, Mr. Premier, 
what the public are saying, we need to think of the people 
infected and not necessarily everyone. I think the program in 
place should be addressing those who now have to face the 
full-blown problems as a result of hepatitis C. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I’ve given my answer, Mr. Speaker. 
This government is very concerned about the patients and 
persons affected by hepatitis C. We have an agreement in place; 
two provinces want it examined and re-examined. The officials 
are examining it. We’re contributing and taking part on it. 
 
For the time being, the agreement stands: eight provincial 
governments, two territorial governments, and Canada. The two 
provincial governments which have pulled out of the agreement 
are coming to the table as the rest of us are. Let’s see what those 
deliberations produce. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, you recently 
announced with great fanfare the implementation or putting in 
place a new agency called SHIN or the Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network, talking about having access to medical 
information. And as I understand it, that whole process is on 
hold right now as we try to deal with and address concerns that 
the medical association is pointing out — the fear that they do 
not believe that SHIN itself will indeed be able to address the 
issue of confidentiality. 
 
And in that regard, Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, I certainly 
commend the minister for having taken the time to at least listen 
to those concerns and review the whole program. 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

But first of all, Mr. Premier, in the budget, and in the budget of 
Health, of the $88 million, $20 million was targeted to the 
SHIN program of which now $9 million for this year has been 
directed to 200 nursing positions. And as I indicated earlier, 200 
nursing positions, I guess, which will have to wait and see 
whether or not they actually become a reality. 
 
The question down the road is also once those positions are in 
place and using $9 million out of the SHIN program, who is 
going, or how are you going to pay for the 200 nursing 
positions next year, Mr. Premier? Are you going to take a 
further $9 million until you deplete the budget that’s been put 
aside for the SHIN program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The hon. member perhaps doesn’t 
understand the term that I shall use here, flow accounting. 
When we put a certain amount in there for budgeting for SHIN, 
this is expended as requirements would call it to be expended 
for the SHIN project. 
 
For the moment we have, as the member’s identified, an issue 
related to privacy. And in the consequence for the consultation 
of professionals when this issue has taken place and in the 
further consequence, the expenditures of SHIN have 
accordingly been slowed down. 
 
Taking a look at that development, taking a look at the 200 
nurses which will be delivered whatever the outcome of the 
June 24 by-election, we’re not like Tories or Saskatchewan 
Party people; we deliver on our promises. Those nurses will be 
there. The funding will be looked after with SHIN as needed at 
the appropriate time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, the public will believe it 
when they see it. What was your promise in the North 
Battleford by-election, Wasn’t there a promise for a long-term 
care facility in that community? What has happened to that 
long-term care facility, Mr. Premier? Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, 
those are the types of reasons that people are very reluctant to 
believe you when you say you’re going to do this. They will 
believe you when, as I’ve said earlier, when the proof is in the 
pudding. 
 
(1900) 
 
But coming back to the SHIN board, Mr. Premier. When you 
announced SHIN, at that time, shortly after the announcement 
of the SHIN program, you announced that you were looking for 
a CEO. But before the announcement really came out, we find 
that it appears one of your closest friends was given the job 
over 37 other candidates — Gord Nystuen. 
 
Mr. Premier, earlier this afternoon you had indicated that we 
need professional and competent people to run the Crowns. 
You’d said that. You said that we have to start looking for . . . 
and that’s what you were looking for when you were looking 
for leadership for the Crown corporations in the province of 
Saskatchewan back in 1991. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, we’ve been contacted by a couple of the 
individuals who did respond to the application or the tender for 
the position of CEO. And I’m not exactly sure about all of the 
candidates, or the other five short listed, but I’ve seen the 

résumé of one of the individuals who interviewed for the job. 
 
And my question is this, Mr. Premier, who do we want running 
the health information computer network? The one individual 
I’m talking about has a master’s degree and Ph.D. in medical 
physics from the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, is that what we’re looking for, or are we looking 
for an NDP hack with experience in liquor and gaming. A 
former director of nuclear medicine at Winnipeg General 
Hospital, or your NDP bagman. A person who is recognized 
internationally for his contribution to the application of 
computers in nuclear medicine, and has extensive experience in 
the telecommunications and information technology sectors, or 
an NDP CEO who even with STC, actually shut down the 
computers because they had not sent out bills and we lost 
$750,000. 
 
Mr. Premier, if indeed what you were saying earlier this 
afternoon is true, if indeed you’re looking for the most 
competent and professional person to run an agency like SHIN, 
Mr. Premier, why did you appoint Mr. Gord Nystuen to the 
CEO position versus a number of the applications, and in 
particular one of the applications we looked at which seems to 
have a résumé that would indicate he had all the qualifications 
— even more than the current CEO for SHIN. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the member must have 
been out of the House when I answered that question earlier. 
The government did not appoint Mr. Gord Nystuen. The 
appointment of the CEO to SHIN was made by the SHIN board, 
headed by a conglomeration of people in the health care field — 
from SAHO, nurses, doctors, professional body. Those were all 
tabled there after due and careful application. 
 
And the fact of the matter is that people have many 
qualifications, but when you’re a CEO one of the key 
qualifications is to be able to manage — that is what is required. 
You may not be able to be manager, even though you have an 
expertise standing with respect to a particular field of academia. 
That was the decision of the SHIN board. 
 
If somebody complains to you about the fact that they were 
overlooked, I would suggest that you or the complainant write 
directly to the SHIN board and ask for a re-review of the 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, it was very interesting 
because shortly after the question was raised, one of the 
individuals that had contacted us actually was in this province 
to give a presentation to a health forum in this province, which I 
think is a strong indication of the qualifications of the 
individual. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I did ask the Minister of Health for a list of 
the board members. I did ask the Minister of Health for the 
criteria. And we're looking forward to receiving that 
information shortly so we can review it. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, I find it very interesting that of 37 
candidates, Gordon Nystuen would all of a sudden qualify. It 
seems to me, Mr. Premier, that when you’re looking at 37 
candidates and some very impressive resumes it’s . . . well you 



1916 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

would argue that you had no control over it, that the board did 
it, made the recommendation and the decision. I don’t know if 
the public buy it. I don’t believe the public are buying the fact 
that Mr. Nystuen, whose long-time association with the NDP, 
didn’t get the job simply because of his affiliation with the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
Now Mr. Premier, when we talk about health care, we talk 
about the need for personnel to provide the services. We talked 
about the need for nursing positions. We just mentioned a 
moment ago about the 200 positions you plan to . . . you’re 
putting the funding aside for. And there are a number of 
concerns about the fact as to whether or not we really have 200 
individuals in the province of Saskatchewan to even fill the 
positions that are there. There’s concerns by the profession 
itself. There’s concerns by the medical profession. There’s 
concerns by professionals in the health care field that we are 
losing quality people — we may not have the individuals who 
can fill all these positions. 
 
Mr. Premier, I think part of that all boils down to the fact that 
the province of Saskatchewan, while you say, has the best 
health care system in the world, many people are having a 
major problem with that. 
 
And when we argue that, Mr. Premier, you talk about . . . you 
talk about what we have to offer. You neglect to mention the 
fact that you moved the deductible on the drug plan from $135 
a year to $1,700 a year and then 35 per cent above that. Many 
people in the province of Saskatchewan found themselves with 
major drug bills as a result of your changes. You call this 
wellness. You call this . . . you call this providing adequate 
service for the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, at the end of the day, as I indicated earlier, the 
public will certainly judge, and they will determine whether or 
not you are providing that health care system. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you doing, what leadership are you 
providing to make sure that we indeed can attract physicians to 
this province to provide the services such as most recently the 
concern raised regarding oncologists and an individual in 
Saskatoon who required the services of an oncologist and was 
given such a short period of time to live unless his cancer was 
addressed immediately? What leadership are you doing to 
guarantee that we can bring quality physicians in to the 
province, that we can certainly attract individuals into the 
nursing profession so that we have individuals . . . so that we 
have the personnel in this province who will be able to respond 
to the notices that are going out, respond to the job applications, 
and indeed fill all these positions. 
 
Mr. Premier, what leadership are you giving in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — This government is providing all the 
leadership that it can provide, which is considerable. 
 
By the way, before I give any specific answer on the physicians, 
let me tell the hon. member — he keeps on repeating the public 
will decide. And I am looking forward to that day — on a 
health care fight with your party, which has begun now — I am 
looking forward to that day. 
 

And I was wanting, as I indicated today, and from this day 
forward, you will be asked repeatedly to tell us where the 
private health facilities that you’re going to be providing will 
come from and what your resolutions are about. 
 
So don’t worry about that. You’re going to be talking about 
health care and you’re going to be talking about it, big time, — 
big time. 
 
I’ll give you one other guarantee too: 10 times out of 10, they’ll 
never pick a Tory or a Saskatchewan Party person, or call 
yourselves whatever you will, and entrust you with health care, 
given the fact that you find the five principles of the Canada 
Health Act to be mindless slogans, given the fact that you 
support the private health care system. 
 
Now what have we announced? We’ve announced increased 
support for rural doctors and incentives for rural doctors. The 
Minister of Health has announced his increase strategies to get 
specialists required in the province of Saskatchewan, much in 
competition not only with respect to other provinces but other 
jurisdictions in North America and the world in that regard. 
And in this context, we need to do more, but we do have a fairly 
good complement of doctors, surgeons who can provide what I 
believe is the finest form of health care in Canada, right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, if the Premier thinks we’re trying 
to run from a debate on health care, he’s sorely mistaken. And 
in fact, Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan Party is looking 
forward to that day. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, as well, the Premier will be surprised at 
how many people will be supporting the Saskatchewan Party 
when it comes to the debate on health care, and whether it starts 
in the rural, or where it starts, people have already started 
looking and they’ve already made their choice, and in many 
cases, Mr. Chairman, to the Premier, they are beginning to say 
in droves, no, to the Premier’s form of wellness. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well that’s fine. We’ll welcome you 
on this very much. The debate is enjoyed, don’t you be worried 
about that. 
 
And this is one where again, I should let you have the last word 
because that’s always the way it goes in estimates — you can 
have it. But believe me on this — believe me, my friend, on this 
one — and you know it . . . with all of the mistakes we may 
have made in health care . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh you finally admitted you’re making 
some. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — No. Yes, we’ve made mistakes. Not 
finally, I’ve said that right from day one. I don’t know where 
you’ve been, but we’ve said that. We’ve made mistakes. For all 
of those that we have made, I will guarantee you one thing — 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan will entrust the 
New Democratic Party with the care and support and 
maintenance of the health care system ten times out of ten over 
the Saskatchewan Tory Party. 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1917 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, as you are 
well aware, Mr. Premier, there are many families in 
Saskatchewan who are struggling unbelievably due to poverty. 
In addition to this struggle that these families are going through, 
there are hundreds and hundreds of poor children and youth 
who do not have the benefit of caring parents. They are 
virtually left on their own to fend for themselves, and there are 
many homeless youth, Mr. Premier, youth who have been 
driven from their homes for one reason or another by their 
parents or who have run away from homes because they can no 
longer endure cruel and dehumanizing treatment. 
 
Mr. Premier, many of these vulnerable young people are 
coerced into a form of slavery that I’ve spoken about before in 
this House. They are being sexually, physically, emotionally, 
and spiritually exploited through the child prostitution trade. 
Most of the young people who are subjected to this horrific 
treatment are in your constituency of Riversdale in Saskatoon 
and in the Deputy Premier’s constituency in Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, these destructive forces have an 
immediate and long-term devastating impact on our children. 
They send a message to children that they are worthless and that 
their body and their sexuality is valued only as a commodity. A 
sense of their own beauty is lost, Mr. Premier, and their ability 
to achieve self-fulfilment is forever suppressed because their 
experiences are so abhorrent. 
 
Mr. Premier, every human being has been given the gift of 
choice, and it’s a wonderful, wonderful gift. And it’s up to each 
of us to use that gift in order to learn and gain wisdom and to 
appreciate how wonderful it is to be alive. But when a child’s 
choices are limited, or an adult forces a child into a degrading 
and dehumanizing state, that child’s life is forever diminished. 
And, Mr. Premier, she or he cannot ever come to realize the 
gloriously beautiful gift of life that they possess. At the end of 
my comments, Mr. Premier, you will be able to exercise choice. 
 
Mr. Premier, the average life span of those in the prostitution 
trade is seven years — seven short years. For a child forced into 
prostitution at the age of 10 that means that by 17 they will die 
of disease. In many cases their bodies are decimated due to drug 
and alcohol abuse and they actually starve to death because of 
malnutrition. For others, Mr. Premier, physical abuse results in 
death. 
 
It’s up to us as adults to protect children, Mr. Premier. And it’s 
the responsibility of governments to protect children from 
sexual exploitation whenever necessary and wherever possible. 
According to the United Nations declaration on the rights of the 
child, it’s up to states, which means provinces and countries, to 
protect children from this heinous crime. 
 
Mr. Premier, you claim to have taken the lead to impress on 
other provinces and the federal government the need for a 
national child benefit. Why, why will you not take the lead or at 
least follow the lead of other provinces in their efforts to 
eradicate the sexual abuse of children? 
 
The Minister of Social Services stated in this House that proper 

process must take place, and he tells me that that will take 
another year. That statement condemns hundreds of young girls 
and boys to a life of total misery. I don’t understand, Mr. 
Premier, how anyone who knows that there are children being 
hurt beyond measure, within arm’s reach, would not 
immediately do everything possible to protect them. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Premier, the need to follow proper process was not 
considered when your government decided to hire 200 more 
nurses. Neither the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, nor SAHO, 
nor district health boards were consulted. That decision 
disregarded proper process. But as an excuse for inaction to 
help children on the streets, your government deems it 
necessary to go through more process. 
 
Mr. Premier, there is still time to pass the legislation that I 
tabled this session that would immediately afford protection to 
sexually-abused children and would act as a major deterrent to 
those exploiting them. 
 
Mr. Premier, don’t make them wait. Please don’t make them 
wait. Don’t make these children at risk wait until just before the 
next provincial election to get help. Will you as the Premier 
show the courage necessary? Prove your commitment to 
disadvantaged children and pass the Bill entitled The Protection 
of Children Involved in Prostitution Act immediately, this very 
day. 
 
When it was deemed that it was necessary to pass the Ipsco Bill 
in one day, you listened and you did it, Mr. Premier and this is 
the power and choice of yourself, the Premier of this province. 
Mr. Premier, will you exercise the same power and choice 
today on behalf of disadvantaged children? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, we have been around 
this issue of the member’s Bill which — if I may say so, I’m 
sure is well intentioned — but it is in her mind obviously and 
by her statements the panacea solution to this very complicated 
issue. 
 
I’ve not heard her talk about children’s action plan. I’ve not 
heard her talk about child poverty. I’ve not heard her talk about 
child benefit other than casually and sarcastically about our 
involvement or otherwise. I’ve not heard her talk about the 
question of parenting. I’ve not heard her talk about the question 
of cultural and other differences. I’ve not heard her talk about 
poverty — any of these issues which are all tied into the 
question of child poverty. 
 
What I hear her talk about is a Bill. It may help; it may not help. 
But I’ll tell you one thing. This is not the total answer by a long 
shot. If we are to do what we want to do with respect to these 
children that you talk about so passionately, and I’d like to 
think that I talk about passionately too, we need to have in place 
a variety of programs and knowing how they fit one to the other 
in order to, if not eliminate, for sure minimize the impact of this 
thing that you talk about. 
 
And still — I say this with the greatest of respect — the fixation 
on the Bill which you have, the fixation that you have, is just 
too narrow. It’s not a large enough time horizon. It is an 



1918 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

incomplete picture of the situation. It is misleading and I think 
quite frankly gives a false sense of hope to people out there on 
the streets who are struggling with this on a day-to-day basis, 
on a community basis, a volunteer basis, on an NGO 
(non-governmental organizations) basis, through children’s 
action, through Department of Social Services, through your 
efforts, and other efforts. 
 
So this is not a question of process. This is a question of 
tackling the problem. And this government has done more in 
the last couple of years in tackling this problem than any 
government has in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
Is there a long way to go? You’re doggone right there’s a long 
way to go. But we’re determined to do it and we’re going to do 
it in a way which has concrete results. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, to the Premier. Mr. Premier, I have 
never, ever, ever indicated to yourself or the Minister of Social 
Services or anyone in this House that this Bill is a panacea, the 
be-all and the end-all. It is part of the equation. Every other 
province that I have mentioned in this House that is doing 
something concrete about this has recognized that it is a part of 
the puzzle to have legislation in place that will deter those 
people, deter them in a manner that is going to really hurt, and 
deter them to the point that they will think twice about what 
they’re doing. And they know, and they knew in Alberta and 
they knew in other provinces that it was important to do this, 
that legislation is part of it, and that the protection of our 
children on the streets, we know in Saskatchewan can take on 
another form. And that’s also in the Bill I presented. 
 
You have mentioned that health care reform evolved, you 
know. You did the best you could. It was a model; it needed to 
be developed. And you took that piece by piece and you’re 
getting a lot of flak for it but you did it anyway because you 
started where you knew how to start and you believed the rest 
would happen. I’m asking you to start somewhere here. Yes, 
there has been money put into people that are helping children 
on the streets, but that is only part of the equation also. That is 
only part of the equation. This legislation needs to come to 
fruition. It needs to, if we in fact care about those children. 
Other provinces see it. I cannot see how we cannot see it. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, or Mr. Premier, rather, I expect from your 
comments that you’re not going to take action on this and I find 
that personally very inexcusable, when something could be 
done that wouldn’t cost your government one red cent, that 
would just indeed help the children on the streets. There is no 
doubt about it. I expect that nothing will be done. And I want to 
tell you, Mr. Premier, that I have talked to some young women 
that have escaped the streets, and we came up with all kinds of 
discussion and ideas. And the last word they said to me was, 
stop those that are looking for the supply. That’s what you need 
to do. You need to get those people off the streets. 
 
So I’m telling you, Mr. Premier, from people who have really 
gone through the mill with this, that’s what they’re 
recommending. They know that has to be happening and 
they’re concerned because, even though they have been able to 
escape the streets to some extent, they’re in fear for their lives. 
And you know what? They have got brothers and sisters out 
there on the streets that are younger than they are yet, that they 
are completely concerned about. 

So, Mr. Premier, it’s your prerogative. It’s your choice to take 
the time . . . or to take this time to do something about that, 
about this very serious crime that’s happening on our streets; 
the crime that’s destroying people’s lives, young children’s 
lives that have no one else to look to them. And so be it, it is 
your choice. We all have choice and that’s your choice. 
 
So you do whatever you feel is necessary for you. But if and 
when you bring in legislation next year, when your government 
does that as the Minister of Social Services indicated, I expect it 
to be at least as strong and as effective as what is tabled this 
session. And I’ll hold you accountable, Mr. Premier, if it’s not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chair, I want to say this with 
civility, but you’re not the only one who’s talked to people 
affected, about child prostitution — far from it. And I say with 
the greatest respect, I don’t need any little lecture from you 
about what takes place in the inner core of Saskatoon or Regina 
or Prince Albert, because I have had experiences and 
discussions with families and the tragedy that has affected, that 
is afflicted by this, just as well as you have. 
 
And you can have an army of police officers out there — an 
army — and if anything tells us about history, history will tell 
us you’ll never fully stop this situation the way it takes place. 
The demand you’ve got to tackle, but you have to make sure 
there is no supply too. 
 
And that means that those youngsters who are being exploited, 
young girls, young women who are being exploited because 
they don’t have the money, they don’t have the education, they 
don’t have the parental support, they don’t have all of the other 
things which your children or my children or others may have 
in society, that’s the other side of the equation. 
 
And that is where the other provinces that you point to that we 
should follow, do not follow us. That’s where the children’s 
action plan, at $50 million a year comes into play. That’s where 
the Child Benefit comes into play. That’s where the whole 
plethora of non-governmental organizations come into play — 
an army of volunteers and concerned parents and concerned 
politicians, as much as you. Don’t bother about holding me 
accountable. You’re just as accountable. They all take into 
account all of those social and other considerations. 
 
So when you point to Manitoba, tell me what they’ve done 
about a children’s action plan, and then you can speak to me 
with some authority about this legislation. When you say start 
somewhere, I tell you $50 million for kids. I tell you $40 
million on the Child Benefit for Saskatchewan, for 
Saskatchewan alone. I tell you everybody who exploits sexually 
or otherwise, a child, gets caught, and is convicted in 
accordance to law, should be punished to the full extent of the 
law. I say more for police and more for prosecutors not only in 
this area, but in every area. 
 
But it is a much more complex situation than that and it 
demands — I’ll change the word, demands — it begs of you, of 
me, of all of us to put aside the politics on this thing and work 
to the interest of the Saskatchewan kids in a non-political way. 
That’s what it does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

Ms. Julé: — Well, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Premier, I’m not quite 
sure if there’s anything else than can be said to impress on you 
the necessity of taking every step that needs to be taken. 
 
Mr. Chair, there is no, no excuse for not doing everything 
possible. That’s all I’m asking the Premier to do. The child 
action plan is certainly taking care of some of the poverty issues 
but it’s not taking care of the issue of children enslaved through 
the child prostitution trade. 
 
It is as simple as that. The Premier has made his statement, the 
people of Saskatchewan have listened, and I guess probably 
they’re going to make their own judgement. 
 
I have nothing else that I can say, and I thank you for this 
opportunity, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, and to your 
officials. Mr. Premier, this is the third Executive Council 
estimates that I’ve been in since I was elected. And it’s the first 
time I’ve had the opportunity to get up and directly speak to 
you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh it is wonderful. And 
probably you would notice, because I can attribute the fact that 
I’m standing here tonight because of where I am standing, and 
that is with the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And earlier this afternoon you talked about — I won’t go into 
that. So I won’t tell you why it is really the first time that I’ve 
had a chance to get up and speak. But I look forward to telling 
you about some of the concerns the people of 
Kelvington-Wadena have, and most of them are referring to 
living in rural Saskatchewan and the type of things that are 
happening out there. 
 
But before I go into that, I’d like to talk to you about another 
issue, and that is one of them that I had the critic responsibility 
for, and that is aboriginal and Metis affairs. I’ve certainly had 
my eyes opened since I was given that critic’s responsibility, 
and I guess you could probably say it was a rather rude 
awakening. 
 
I believe that one of the biggest issues facing us in 
Saskatchewan when we move into the next millennium is issues 
surrounding native people. It isn’t an issue of race, and it isn’t 
an issue of politics. It’s an issue of equality. I believe that 
everyone is equal, and I believe that everyone is special. And so 
if we’re all starting from that same playing-field, I believe that 
we have some work to do. 
 
I believe that by singling out groups and saying that there are 
different rules for different groups, we’re not only allowing but 
we are encouraging and ensuring that people feel resentment 
and frustration and even anger towards other groups. I believe 
the division that happens then and that this government is 
allowing to happen, is encouraging and causing racism. The 
more we make groups different, the more the racism grows. It is 
increasing because of decisions of governments and of the 
attitudes of governments. 
 
I’m not raising this issue to make politics in this Assembly or in 
the aboriginal community, and I’m not raising them to be 
derogatory or complimentary. I’m raising them because I’ve 
been asked to do so by the people of the aboriginal community. 

That’s what the Saskatchewan Party is all about, Mr. Premier. 
We listen to and we raise the issues of the grass roots people of 
Saskatchewan, regardless of their colour or of their skin or of 
their gender or of their income level. There are a lot of difficult 
questions out there to be answered. The questions have been 
avoided for too long because they are politically sensitive or 
politically incorrect. And you know what happens when we do 
that? The problems don’t go away; they just get worse. 
 
(1930) 
 
I listened to the member from Athabasca this year talk about 
understanding issues surrounding aboriginal people, and I had 
the feeling that he believed that it was only he that knew or 
understood problems dealing with aboriginal people. He stood 
up in the House for three sessions and talked about them, and I 
believe he must be failing them because the people are coming 
to us now. They’re coming to the Saskatchewan Party and not 
to him. And he knows very well that I care deeply about them. 
 
If we’re going to move forward as a society, we’re going to 
have to work together to solve some of the very tough social 
issues facing Saskatchewan and all of Canada. And I look 
forward to the day when the Assembly equally represents all 
segments of our society, men and women and aboriginals and 
non-aboriginals. But until that time, it’s important that those 
who are here speak on behalf of the people who are not just 
exactly like we are here. 
 
Mr. Premier, my first question is this. When do you plan to 
work ahead and see what’s going on in the aboriginal 
community and develop a plan to deal with the inequities and 
the social problems in Saskatchewan that are involving our 
aboriginal people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the question is — how 
should I describe it? — so disconnected to the preamble that it 
is impossible to give the answer to the question. But I have to 
make a comment to the preamble. 
 
This hon. member talks about the principle of equality, 
something which of course is the foundation of democracy and 
a cornerstone of how our system and our society should work. 
But it is an ideal — note the word that I use. It’s an ideal. 
 
Let the member stand up in her place and tell us about the 
equality that the Indian youth age 14 or 15 or 13 has at 
Pinehouse, Saskatchewan compared to one of her children or 
her grandchildren with her background. What equality is that? 
What equality is it to say to this Indian child from the inner core 
of Regina or Saskatoon, get out there and compete fairly and 
equally, even though you might just have grade 4 education, 
with every other child that’s got university or grade 12. Some 
equality. 
 
You know what it is? It reminds me of the argument when I was 
attorney general. We set up something called the special Indian 
constable program. Note the word. I hope it doesn’t drive the 
Saskatchewan Party over the wall — special Indian constable 
program. 
 
You know what we said? We said to the RCMP, will you join 
with us in partners to bring into the RCMP aboriginal police 



1920 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

officers who will help in policing aboriginal communities, 
themselves being members of the aboriginal community and 
knowing the culture and knowing the distinction is there. 
 
Do you know what the first response of the RCMP was? Well 
everybody has got an equal chance of getting into the RCMP. 
But you have to have a grade 12 education; you have to be five 
foot, ten and a half inches; you have to have this qualification 
and that qualification. And lo and behold, wouldn’t you know 
it, aboriginal RCMP weren’t members of the force because we 
applied the principle of equality. 
 
It’s a kind of a comment that the late Tommy Douglas used to 
describe about Liberals, and now I use it again about you, this 
argument of equality. We’re all equal said the elephant, as he 
danced amongst the chickens — all equal. 
 
We know that’s not the case. We know in Saskatchewan that 
we have excessive challenges respecting aboriginals in order to 
get integration, equality of opportunity for them and for all kids 
— Ukrainian background kids, Canadian-born kids, wherever 
they come from — but in a lot of areas, to bring out their 
special talents which require special efforts. 
 
Go to Pinehouse. Fourteen hundred people live in Pinehouse. I 
say this to the Leader of the Opposition, who is an educator -- 
650 approximately of those kids in Pinehouse are in the ages of 
K to 10. What are they going to do, let alone after they get K to 
12 -- finish grade 12 in Pinehouse and area? Are they going to 
stay there? Are they going to move to the cities? If they move to 
the cities, what housing requirements do we need to provide for 
them? What are the equalities that are applicable in that 
situation? 
 
So when you use the word equality, which is a word nobody 
can dispute in theoretical and principle terms, you are ignoring 
the reality that not only in this jurisdiction but in many other 
jurisdictions in this country, there needs to be recognition of 
historic, constitutional, cultural, educational differences and 
programs working in partnership with those people to give them 
true equality. Not just the word of equality, not the equal right 
to starve, not the equal right not to have good housing, not the 
equal right not to have three square meals a day, but the equal 
right to be educated, to have their place in society, to be fed and 
clothed and housed with full equality and full opportunity. 
 
And your party doesn’t advocate that. Your party says equality, 
regardless of what treaty rights say, equality regardless of what 
historic constitutional provisions are, equality regardless of 
what the economic and social circumstances of the people in 
this province are. 
 
And in doing so, I say you play a sentiment and a reaction 
which is destructive of what we ought to be, all of us, regardless 
of what our political ideology’s working for, namely a large, 
growing centre of community in Saskatchewan where 
everybody, regardless of colour or background, can be the very 
best that he or she can be. And that means sometimes giving 
unequal treatment in order to achieve equality. 
 
That’s what it means, and that’s what we’re doing. We’re 
having programs on aboriginal employment, northern strategy. 
I’m going up to Wollaston. I’ll tell you right now, I’m meeting 

on June 18, Wollaston, with the northern leaders — aboriginal 
— and I’m going to talk about how we can give arrangements 
with respect to revenue sharing and other economic 
opportunities for them. That’s not equal, but it’s going to lead to 
equality. That’s what it’s going to do. It’s going to lead to a 
more generous, more kind, more gentle, and more prosperous 
society for all of us. 
 
And go right down the line on it — whether it’s housing, 
whether it’s education, or whatever the issues happen to be. 
You may win an election on a short-term basis on the argument 
of equality, but believe me, in the long run you will sow the 
seeds of destruction of one of the most tolerant, civilized, 
decent societies and provinces, if not places in the world, in 
which to live. This one right here, which celebrates differences, 
compromises, accommodates, makes concessions in order to 
make sure that the level of standards for people are the very best 
and the very equal that they can be for all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, I don’t think 
that what I’m saying is so much different that what you’re 
saying. We want the very best for everyone. I have also been to 
Pinehouse and I have been to Beauval and I have been to 
Pelican Narrows and I’ve been to Sandy Bay and I’ve been to 
La Loche— I’ve been to all those places as well. Not only that, 
I’ve been to the reserves in my area — that’s Kiniston and 
Fishing Lake and Yellowquill. And those people have various 
concerns too. 
 
And they’re living in a community where their children go off 
the reserve to go to school and then they find out that they have 
problems trying to work out their life on the reserve, their life 
off the reserve. And they know that at the end of the day, we all 
have the same goals. We all want our children to prosper. We 
all want them to have a better life than supposedly we have. 
And they’re relying on us to help them with that. 
 
I think that racism increases, Mr. Premier, when we say to you, 
you’re different than I am so I’m going to treat you a whole lot 
differently. You know what happens then? People don’t have 
the same respect for each other. They don’t know how to walk 
across the street and deal with them in the same way. 
 
Mr. Premier, the aboriginal accountability issue is a federal 
issue for natives on reserves. And I know that you’ve had 
delegations, just as we have, that say to you, we are living in 
third world conditions right now; we have no one to listen to us. 
Everybody is saying I’m not responsible for you. That 
responsibility belongs to the provincial government or it 
belongs to your band council or it belongs to somebody else. 
 
And at the end of the day there are a lot of people who don’t 
have any place to turn, and they’re not getting anywhere further 
in their life because nobody is listening to them. Their MPs 
(Member of Parliament) are in Ottawa, or some place far away, 
and they have no one to turn except us that are standing here 
right now. 
 
When they’re living on a reserve, they don’t have the same 
people around them to help them with the concerns that they 
have. And you know what happens? They leave the reserves 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1921 

then and they go into the towns and cities, and they, most of the 
time, end up going onto welfare, and they become a provincial 
responsibility, and they don’t feel like they really have any 
roots any place, anywhere. 
 
Mr. Premier, when the Prime Minister was in town, I was 
wondering if you were talking to him about this very important 
issue. We know that as our native population increases, this is 
going to be a problem that is growing, not just in Saskatchewan, 
but right across Canada. I think that we had an opportunity to 
lead the country when we talked about the unity debate. 
 
We’ve brought forward issues of other people and special 
rights, right across Canada. And right now I think you have a 
huge responsibility because of the number of native people in 
Saskatchewan, to say look, we’ve got to develop some kind of a 
program so that everybody is . . . at the end of the day, we’re 
working towards the same goal so that we all have an 
opportunity to live a good life. 
 
And what I’m asking you, Mr. Premier, is what are you doing to 
make sure that the aboriginal people that are living here in 
Saskatchewan have got the same opportunities that I do, that my 
children have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can find my 
little list which will probably take about a half an hour to recite, 
of our various initiatives which the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Aboriginal Affairs has given 
already to the House. If you want me to repeat them, I can 
certainly do that, ranging all the way from employment 
opportunities to housing initiatives and the like. I’m sure that 
the hon. member does not want me to do that. 
 
She did raise however another issue, and that is a question of 
accountability of how funds on reserves are spent. Excuse me, 
Mr. Chairman, I take the position, the government takes the 
position that public funds need to be accounted for fully and 
completely and accurately and lawfully. And public funds, 
which are given by Ottawa to any organization, be it aboriginal 
or otherwise, have to be spent and accounted for. And if there is 
a problem with respect to accountability on reserve, then it is 
the obligation of those who have evidence that warrants the 
investigation of the proper authorities, to bring it to the attention 
of the proper authorities. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Premier, that’s what I am saying. In lots of 
cases the people that are trying to say that they are being 
wrongly done to, don’t have the opportunity. They don’t have 
the people to go to that are listening to them, that will listen to 
them. In lots of cases, the authorities will say, okay, in order to 
look at that I’m going to have to go to the chief, to the elected 
people, and that’s the very people that are not listening to them. 
And that’s why I’m saying that there has to be some 
responsibility some place else. 
 
Mr. Premier, we talk about taxation, and that’s one issue that I 
know that there was a big fuss made over when the 
Saskatchewan Party set forth some of their platforms. And I just 
wanted to give the people some information about taxation 
across Canada. 
 
Saskatchewan is the most generous of all provinces when it 

comes to charging PST to status Indians off reserve. An 
exemption is made on all off-reserve purchases if an individual 
presents an Indian status card. In each of the other provinces, 
exemptions is made only if there’s some proof the goods will be 
used on the reserve, whether that be delivered or proof that the 
individual lives on the reserve. 
 
In British Columbia, PST is charged on all off-reserve 
purchases unless the goods are delivered to the reserve by the 
seller or by a common carrier to reserve land. In Alberta, of 
course, there is no sales tax. In Manitoba, PST is charged on all 
off-reserve purchases unless the goods are delivered to the 
reserve by the seller. In Ontario, PST exemption is made for all 
status Indians on off-reserve purchases if they can prove they 
live on a reserve. 
 
In Quebec, PST exemption is made for status Indians on 
off-reserve purchases if they can prove they reside on a reserve. 
In Prince Edward Island, PST exemption is made for status 
Indians on off-reserve purchases if the goods are delivered to 
the reserve. If the individual can produce a status card with a 
reserve address, they can qualify. And in New Brunswick, Nova 
Scotia, and Newfoundland, these three provinces are 
harmonized, so the HST (harmonized sales tax) is charged on 
all off-reserve purchases unless they deliver to the reserve. 
 
Mr. Premier, we have . . . yesterday in the House, I heard the 
member from Athabasca talk about asking the natives to pay 
down the debt with the taxes that we were asking them to pay, 
which didn’t of course didn’t make any sense at all. What we’re 
trying to do, Mr. Premier, is to make sure that we can cut back 
on the racism, that people can grow together. We believe that 
there is an opportunity here to make sure that our native people 
are treated equally and that they feel like they are part of the 
Saskatchewan . . . Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Does your government have . . . what does your government 
have in the works at this time dealing with PST for natives in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to read this 
note, which is succinct. Otherwise I would elaborate and 
perhaps take up too much time in the committee. 
 
I want to begin by saying that Indian taxation is obviously a 
complex issue with many facets that are not often readily 
apparent. 
 
One aspect that is not understood by some people, and perhaps 
by the member opposite, is that Indian people do pay taxes. The 
long-standing arrangement that allows status Indian people to 
not pay the 7 per cent E & H (education and health) also results 
in the status Indian people paying tobacco and fuel taxes even if 
these commodities are purchased on reserve. It’s a trade-off, a 
compromise. 
 
In addition, provincial income taxes are generally paid on 
income earned by Indians off the reserve. Corporations owned 
by individual Indians or by Indian bands also pay provincial 
corporation taxes. 
 



1922 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

Overall, about 50 per cent of the status Indian population in 
Saskatchewan lives off reserve. As a result, many Indian people 
pay income taxes on off-reserve employment income. They also 
pay property taxes to local government, directly when they own 
their property, and indirectly when they rent property. 
 
Furthermore Metis and non-status Indian people have no special 
tax exemptions — no special tax exemptions — and as a result 
are subject to local, provincial, and federal taxes. Now that’s the 
compromise. 
 
This government continues to interpret the current 
administrative arrangements involving the E&H tax, tobacco, 
and fuel tax as an overall package, as a part of an arrangement, 
which has got to be considered if there is going to be any 
rearrangement of that particular arrangement. 
 
We’re involved in a fiscal table with the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations and the Government of Canada, 
because status-treaty Indians are the responsibility of the 
Government of Canada, to seeing where we might resolve any 
outstanding issues. During these current negotiations, our 
government continues to meet the challenges of the province’s 
tax system with the appropriate enforcement measures — 
underline that: with the appropriate enforcement measures — to 
protect the overall provincial tax base for the good of all 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Now what’s wrong with that arrangement and what’s wrong 
with that approach? What don’t you like about it? 
 
I know what you don’t like about it because you’ve said it 
publicly. You want, notwithstanding what the constitutional and 
other provisions are, to unilaterally impose upon aboriginal 
people full payment of PST on-reserve, off-reserve, 
everywhere, under the aegis, under that word, that magic word, 
“equal treatment”. 
 
That’s what you want to do — equal treatment — without 
making my speech over again, to the persons on the reserve, the 
reserve that you claim you visit — equal treatment for that 
person with the housing conditions and the water conditions and 
all the lack of employment or other opportunities. That’s what 
you want to impose — impose — not even discuss, but impose. 
 
Well I think that we should sit down around the fiscal common 
table and work out a common arrangement for solutions to this 
thing in order to minimize — you use the word racism, I’ll use 
it — to minimize racism not exacerbate it. Don’t use it under 
code words like equality. Minimize, and let us live in this 
province harmoniously as we have since 1905 and before 1905. 
Don’t play this card. I urge you — don’t play this card. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier. I agree there is 
negotiations to be done. There is lots of work to be done. And 
as we have the number of urban reserves growing — we have 
two of them right now in the city of Saskatoon, we’ll be up to 
10 of them in the next few years — we have to have an 
opportunity to make sure that these work within our cities, so 
that we don’t increase the tension and the problems with people 
living right in the same area, within the same city. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have one other issue to talk to you about today, 

and that is the issue of the Secretariat. People of this province 
have been asking for tax relief and they ask for smaller 
government. But I believe your government doesn’t seem to 
think that any of the programs are expendable. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party firmly believes in smaller 
government. We believe the things the government does, and 
we’re asking ourselves . . . We’re always questioning what the 
government is doing, and we ask ourselves why they are doing 
this and if they’re really achieving any goals? 
 
Quite clearly the Women’s Secretariat is a token department to 
make the Premier feel like he’s doing something for women. 
Most women will tell you they don’t want to be singled out. 
They don’t want to be treated differently. And they certainly 
don’t feel this government is committed to women just because 
they have a Women’s Secretariat. 
 
This isn’t to say that we have achieved equality in the 
workforce, because we certainly haven’t. It’s also not to say 
there aren’t deeper social problems that predominantly deal 
with women, like domestic violence, because these problems 
exist and we have to deal with it. But instead how does this 
government choose to use the Women’s Secretariat? We let 
them hook up to the Internet. Now I think that’s a real joke. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you think for a moment this is the right way to 
spend taxpayers’ dollars instead of properly funding women’s 
shelters in this province? My question is this: what do you see 
as the role of the Women’s Secretariat, and do you think you’ve 
been accomplishing it through the Secretariat? If it’s not being 
accomplished then we are wasting taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I can assume . . . This 
has been a wonderful exchange for me on estimates, which I 
know will continue for the next couple of days or more because 
some major division lines are now clear for me on health care, 
and now on this particular issue. Because this member has said 
in effect, abolish the Women’s Secretariat. That’s what you’ve 
said. 
 
You’ve also not said, but by your attack under the rubric of 
equality you’ve in effect said abolish the intergovernmental 
affairs, aboriginal side, under the rubric of course of trying to 
cut down on the size of government. So we know where you 
stand. And I’m welcoming this very much because this is a 
clear definition of exactly where you people are coming from. 
 
Now what you’ve asked me is what do I believe the role of the 
Women’s Secretariat is? Well let me ask you this, and I’ll 
continue to answer my question: do you think that two-thirds of 
what a man makes — and that’s what the average a woman 
makes — is that fairness in society? She said no. And who does 
she . . . the Leader of the Opposition says no. Fine, I accept that 
word. 
 
Who do you think then, members of the Saskatchewan Party, 
should be advocates for the elimination of that disparity? Who 
do you think should be the advocates for programs pertaining to 
women’s issues which are more than pay equity; issues related 
to home and work. Whose responsibility is it? Because I will 
tell you this one simple fact, everybody’s business is nobody’s 
business. You put it to every minister or to any MLAs, and they 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

continually get shuffled off to the back. 
 
And what the Women’s Secretariat does effectively is it 
highlights and researches these issues, communicates 
recommendations for implementation, raises the necessary 
profile for these issues, puts the pressure on the government. 
And as importantly, has around the Cabinet table a voice for 
women — specifically designated to speak for women. As we 
have a voice designated specifically to speak for the interests of 
aboriginal people, a specific voice. 
 
You don’t want that. You’re going to do away with it because 
you want less government. I have news for you. According to 
the Investment Dealers Association of Canada, this government 
in Saskatchewan has the leanest per capita government civil 
service of any provincial government already, already. And do 
you know what? We’ve done it still in defence and in support of 
women’s issues, and in defence and in support of the just causes 
of aboriginal people, unlike you folks, the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I doubt very 
sincerely whether, I doubt sincerely if the chamber of 
commerce agrees that you have the leanest, meanest 
government. I know that you have not heard that from them. 
You’ve not heard that from the business people in this province 
who are tying to make a living out here. You haven’t heard it 
from the taxpayers who take home their pay cheques or 
whatever is left of it at the end of the year. You haven’t heard it 
from a lot of people out there who are trying to make a living in 
this province. 
 
I’m saying that by having a token secretariat, you are not 
making a big difference out there. They’re making brochures. 
But we still have only . . . We still have women making 66 or 
69 cents for every dollar a man is making. I don’t see any big 
moves on that. 
 
If you really care about it, you’re going to have every 
department caring about it. You’re going to have that as 
something that’s brought forward every time you sit at the 
Cabinet table. You’re not going to have one person saying I’m 
sticking up for the women in this province. You should all be 
looking at this as an issue that it’s something that we should be 
doing as taxpayers because every women out here is working 
very hard to make sure that they can make a living so that they, 
with the help of their spouse or their partner, can take home a 
pay cheque at the end of the month that will make it go around 
so we can raise our families. 
 
It’s not helping if we have one little group over there saying I’m 
responsible for women. We are all responsible for them. And if 
you don’t believe that then you haven’t been talking to women. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, you see, Mr. Chairman, this is 
. . . again, this is a wonderful division line. In the 1990s these 
people are going to do . . . By the way, are you in favour of 
doing away with the Human Rights Commission? Or have you 
changed your position on that? They favour doing away with 
the Human Rights Commission, Mr. Chairman. They want to 
do away with the Human Rights Commission. They’re going to 
do away with the Women’s Secretariat. They’ll do away with 
aboriginal rights. 
 

And here’s their attitude. Here’s their attitude toward the civil 
service. This is what they’re going to do. This is the World 
Spectator, Moosomin, Saskatchewan, March 23, 1998, where 
the candidates stand — Saskatchewan Party leadership hopefuls 
explain their views. Elwin Hermanson: “Before I agreed to run 
for the leadership, I asked the MLAs, do you know who the 
dead wood are?’’ That’s what he says about our civil service. 
“Do you know who the skunks are? They assured me they know 
who those people are. Civil servants can be very powerful, Mr. 
Hermanson said; look what they did to the Devine 
government.” 
 
That’s your approach. Women’s Secretariat, dead woods and 
skunks. Human Rights Commission, dead woods and skunks. 
Aboriginal issues, dead woods and skunks. Stand up and tell us 
what other dead woods and skunks you’re going to do away 
with. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, women are not dead 
woods and skunks. Women are not that. Women are working 
very, very hard, and maybe that’s the problem. Maybe that’s 
what you think of them. Maybe that’s why we do have the 
problems in this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have been working in this province as a business 
person for a number of years. I haven’t been sitting in this 
House making rules. I’ve been out there trying to live under the 
rules that you make, and I know very well what it’s like with a 
tax burden. And I know that this mean, lean government that 
you talk about is not here for the people and the business people 
of this province. 
 
Every day as a business person you look at the workers’ 
compensation rates and fuel tax rates and everything else that 
we have to deal with, and then at the end of the day we have an 
increase in utility rates, power and energy and telephone and all 
the rest of it. And we’re supposed to figure out how we’re going 
to pay the bills at the end of the day. 
 
I’m sure that Mr. Hermanson was talking about the fact that 
there are ways to cut back on government that is still going to 
make it easier for taxpayers to have some pennies in their 
pocket so that you aren’t the only one that decides how the 
money is spent. The only thing we have left in our pockets at 
the end of the day is whatever it takes to just pay the power bill 
and the phone bill. That’s not living; that’s survival. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — No, with the greatest respect to the 
member, that’s not what Mr. Hermanson had in mind because 
the quotation said this from Mr. Hermanson. This is a direct 
quote from him. He said he asked you, so he must have asked 
you. He said this, “I asked the MLAs.” I’m assuming all the 
MLAs because your party believes in equality. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Right. The member from Cannington 
said yes. So maybe he could offer what he told Mr. Hermanson 
this . . . He said do you know who the dead wood are and do 
you know who the skunks are. And then he said . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Jack Messer. 
 



1924 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Go ahead, name them, name them. 
Continue. 
 

They assured me they know who those people are. Civil 
servants can be very powerful. Look what they did to the 
Devine government. 

 
I didn’t use those words. Mr. Hermanson used those words. 
And you told Mr. Hermanson where the dead wood and the 
skunks are. 
 
And here you are in these estimates and you’re saying do away 
with the Women’s Secretariat, do away with the aboriginal 
secretariat, do away with the Human Rights Commission. Bring 
in private-for-profit hospitals under health care. Boy, I can 
hardly wait for that election to take place provincially. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome 
Mr. Premier tonight and your officials. I’m glad to have the 
opportunity to get up tonight. 
 
I just want to touch on one thing you said here a minute ago, 
Mr. Premier, that you run the leanest, meanest ship we’ve ever 
seen in this province. Aren’t you the same person, the same 
Premier when you ran in ’91 that said anybody can run this 
province on $4 billion? 
 
What are we at now, Mr. Premier — 5.4 billion? Whoops, not 
quite as lean and mean as you really planned on being and 
that’s partly why you got elected. 
 
Mr. Premier, when you started today you made a few comments 
that I have to respond to. You talked about those of us that 
formed the Saskatchewan Party, and I must say I’m very proud 
to be a part of this party. This is without a doubt, in the three 
years I’ve been here, the most enjoyable session I have ever 
had. 
 
Now that’s for a couple of reasons. One, because we’ve done a 
very credible job as being official opposition; but two, because 
you’ve had without a word of a lie the worst session since 1991 
— the NDP Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And that’s not fibbing, Mr. Premier, that’s 
a fact. Behind closed doors I believe you would admit that. 
 
Mr. Premier, you said we’re not accountable to our constituents 
and I have to respond to that. When I went home after August 8 
and we formed the Saskatchewan Party, you’re right, I was kind 
of worried. What would happen when I got home? How would I 
be received by my people? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You should have been worried. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And the member for Lloydminster said I 
should be worried, and I was. But I find out for what reason. 
And I’ll tell you why, Madam Member — 95 per cent of my 
Liberal executive came with me. Now 95 per cent of the 
Conservative executive come with me. 

That’s not all. On top of that, Madam Member, I have, I have, 
Mr. Chairman, the Reform vote behind me in the Saltcoats 
constituency. And you know what the Reform vote did to you 
people in the last federal election. But that’s not it. It doesn’t 
end there, Mr. Premier. Do you know what happened? I’m 
finding that I’ve got a good number of your supporters, die-hard 
NDP supporters. And do you know why, Mr. Premier? Because 
this is something new. They couldn’t vote for the Liberals, they 
couldn’t vote for the Conservatives, they have voted for the 
Reform, surprising enough, and they can and say they are going 
to support the Saskatchewan Party. So, Mr. Premier, it’s not all 
doom and gloom on this side. I would do a little checking 
behind my back if I was you, though. 
 
Mr. Premier, you also, I believe, took Red Square, as you know 
— and I’m sure you’re well aware of that — very lightly in the 
’95 election. And as you remember, that’s when my good friend 
from Canora-Pelly was elected, my friend from Melville was 
elected, and myself in Saltcoats was elected. And what did we 
leave? We left the Minister of Health sitting in Yorkton all by 
himself for four years — no more, only four years. We’ll have 
his this time too, Mr. Premier. So, Mr. Premier, I think what 
I’m saying is you misread Red Square last time, which was a 
stronghold for your party, and I believe you’re misreading the 
whole province right now. 
 
I don’t believe you have any idea what’s going on in rural 
Saskatchewan. I don’t believe you know what the Plains 
hospital closure is doing to the southern MLAs, back-benchers 
in your government, and, for that matter, cabinet ministers. And 
I think right offhand, Mr. Premier, the member for Indian Head, 
the Environment minister, who I believe knows he’s gone after 
the next election. And he’s got company. We’ve got the 
member for Estevan. We’ve got your Highways minister. And 
the list goes on and on and on. And the member for Swift 
Current. We’ve had meetings out there, Mr. Premier. We know 
what we’re talking about. I wonder if you do. Thank you, Mr. 
Premier. I got that off my chest. I just had to respond. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to get into highways now. I don’t know 
how I got sidetracked. Mr. Premier, we’ve had a lot of problems 
and a lot of calls lately and I’m sure the Highways minister has, 
on problems with our highway system out there. And I guess 
the first thing that comes up is something that’s happened this 
week. And I would like you to respond, Mr. Premier; just how 
important you figure a national highways program is to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll answer the one 
serious comment that he makes right off the bat. A national 
transportation system for Saskatchewan and for Canada is very 
important, and I’ve long been an advocate of it as all the 
premiers, I believe all the premiers, have been in this country in 
joint communiqués. And I’ve been such an advocate of it I even 
made the advocacy as early or as late as Monday noon hour, 
speaking to the Federation of Canadian Municipalities. And we 
will continue to boost for it. 
 
I have a memorandum dated May 28, 1998, “Saskatchewan 
renews call for improved national transportation policy.” It was 
done by my colleague, the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs. Our government has a record of this all the way down 
the piece. 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

But I just wanted to respond a little bit because it does make it a 
little bit funny. I enjoy the way the Saskatchewan Party people 
get up, Mr. Chairman, and they say, you know, I know this 
member over here, he is a goner; and I know that member over 
there, she’s a goner; and I know that member over there, he’s a 
goner. I know that . . . and she’s a goner, but hey, don’t ever 
call me arrogant, don’t ever call me arrogant. 
 
And I know, because we’ve got so many people flocking to the 
Saskatchewan Party meetings — so many they had at their 
leadership race, so many they had at their leadership race that it 
almost makes one annual general meeting of the Saskatchewan 
NDP Riversdale constituency meeting. That’s how many people 
they have. And they’re just flocking to you in droves. 
 
And do you know what makes it so attractive? What makes it so 
attractive is that this member, the member from Saltcoats . . . 
When were you the campaign manager for the Conservatives? 
When were you the campaign manager for — what was his 
name? who was the member, the long-time PC (Progressive 
Conservative) you served . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
no. Johnson, Walter Johnson, the late Walter Johnson. 
 
Did you campaign manage for him twice or three times? He 
would have done it for three times but he wasn’t asked. But he’s 
right there in their camp all the way. All the way, and he’s 
never changed his stripes. 
 
And this is why he wants to re-fight 1991 all over again. I’d 
love to re-fight 1991 again. He says I said in 1991 we could run 
the government not on 4.1 — I tell you what I said exactly — 
on $4.3 billion. And you know something? We can. 
 
What you don’t acknowledge is that you add on top of the 4.3 
billion, point 800 million interest payments on the public debt 
that you, as the campaign manager for Walter Johnson, ran up 
and nearly bankrupted this province. Shame on you. 
 
You sure can run this province on 4.3 billion, but you can’t do it 
when you’re paying $800 million in interest payments and 
you’ve got a debt totalling 8 billion on the GRF or 12 to 13 
billion totalling on the other issues. You doggone right I made 
that statement. And I repeat it. 
 
And this comes from an MLA I have here in front of me — and 
this is going to be a great campaign. There’s going to be some 
great campaign ads on this one, great campaigns. Langenburg 
Four-Town Journal, April 10, 1996, headline says, “MLA 
committed to riding” by Bob Bjornerud. Nobody reports it — 
it’s by Bob Bjornerud, MLA . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
I’m reading the report, I’m reading the report, Mr. Chairman. 
He writes it himself. These are his words. No misquote — these 
are his words. 
 

Many of you undoubtedly read or heard press reports last 
week indicating that Liberal caucus members are 
considering defecting to another political party. 
 

Remember writing that? He smiles. Yes, he wrote that. 
 

As ludicrous as these reports are, I want to assure you, (I 
want to assure you) the people of Saltcoats constituency, 
that I remain committed to you, the Liberal Party, and my 

caucus colleagues. 
 
Do you remember writing that? Do you remember writing that? 
And then he writes the following, Mr. Chairman, and all he can 
do is turn I mean beet red and laugh at this. And then he writes 
this: 
 

As a further sign (as a further sign) of my loyalty, (as a 
further sign of my loyalty) and that of my caucus 
colleagues, we have each signed a document in which we 
unequivocally deny any intention of joining any other 
party. 
 

Did you sign that document? Did you write this? Yes you wrote 
this, and this you told to your electorate which had the trust and 
the faith in you by electing you to this Legislative Assembly. 
And you know what you did with that statement? You know 
what you did with that trust? You know what this statement 
here that you made to the people of Saltcoats constituency, you 
know what you did with it? 
 
You went like this — ripped up. That’s what you did to the 
people of Saltcoats, that’s your word, you ripped them up. And 
I tell you if you rip it up on this kind of a statement, giving your 
word, what else is on the agenda? 
 
What else can they believe you or the Saskatchewan Party on 
any issue that you simply won’t take and go like this when it 
suits your agenda to do it. You’ve done it once before, you’ll do 
it again. Some of you are red coats, some of you are blue coats, 
but all of you are turncoats — all of you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank the 
Premier, Mr. Chair, because I haven’t felt this good for a long 
time. I haven’t had this much attention for a long time. 
 
I want to maybe just mention a couple of things to the Premier 
before we get back into Highways, and I keep getting 
distracted, but I want to mention, Mr. Premier, that I believe 
even Tommy Douglas waivered a bit on who he voted for, and I 
think he wandered from the CCF. I call that having a mind, not 
having a mind-set of being locked into one thing and can’t look 
ahead. 
 
Mr. Premier, I would like to mention, too, tonight that I was 
going to get up and say: Mr. Premier, you will. But the last time 
I heard that in here you pretty near popped a vein, and I won’t 
go that way. 
 
Mr. Premier, you say . . . Mr. Chair, the Premier says that he 
values our highway infrastructure and our highway 
transportation system very seriously, and I believe him. I do. 
And I agree with him and I believe the Highway minister does. 
 
I believe where the problem comes in . . . And, Mr. Premier, 
this week we had put an emergency motion forward to debate 
that very issue. We asked the Minister of Highways and your 
members. And why we did that is because the Prime Minister 
was in town, who’s a very good friend of yours, we know. But 
we felt, Mr. Premier, that when would it be a better time to have 
an all-party agreement in this House and put pressure on the 



1926 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

Premier. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, what happened that day, that day when we 
asked for an emergency debate and took for granted that the 
members opposite would support us? I would believe that the 
third party may have had a little problem because probably 
Ralph might not have agreed with it, but I think even they 
would have gone along with it because they saw the reason to it. 
 
Mr. Premier, can you tell me why at that point, your 
government would say no and you would not debate that issue 
when the Prime Minister was in town? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, you know, this is a rule which I 
am going to break. I think it’s the first time I’ve done it in my 
number of years in the legislature, but I’m going to break it. I’m 
going to break it because I don’t believe that negotiations 
amongst officials, and certainly not negotiations amongst House 
leaders about the nature of House business, should be the 
subject of public debate. I’ve never done it, never done it 
before. I’m going to do it. 
 
There was an agreement on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday 
for the agenda of this House, which you could have easily said 
to our people or to their people, let’s negotiate the speciality of 
the debate. We’d have no problem in debating this if there 
wasn’t . . . That wasn’t the case. It was just sprung on us and 
broke the House leaders’ agreement, and thus the argument was 
no — thus the argument was no. 
 
I’ll spare you my little pet grievance, which is very much a 
small, small grievance. I had an obligation, a national obligation 
which I think was a good thing for Saskatchewan; it doesn’t 
matter for New Brunswick. Here I am, thanks to you folks. I 
don’t mind this because this is great stuff for the politics for 
1999, or perhaps even earlier. Here I am on estimates again, 
thanks to another broken agreement by you people. 
 
But that doesn’t matter, you break your word whether you’re 
Liberals or whether you’re Conservatives. And it doesn’t matter 
whether you sign it or whether you don’t sign it. It doesn’t 
matter whatsoever. And so that is why it took place. 
 
Now look, why don’t you Tories get out of your little snit, why 
don’t you get out of your little snit . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’re enjoying this, Mr. Premier, and so 
is the public. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And so I am and so is the public. Get 
out of your little snit, out of your little snit, as somebody who’s 
threatened me ring the bells. Get up! Ring the bells! I challenge 
you! Get up and start to ring the bells! Do it again. Move 
adjournment and ring the bells for ever. Get out of your snit, get 
out of your snit. 
 
We agree with you on a national transportation policy. Let’s 
argue this thing maturely and debate it. We agree with that 
whatsoever. So please, please, please, understand that those are 
the rules of the game. And coming back to substance of this, 
let’s talk intelligently about the debates. We agree with ’98-99. 
There needs to be a national transportation program which takes 
place. 

Anyway let’s not get out of the House business stuff. Let’s 
debate transportation and the like. That’s the reason why we did 
it. Maybe we were in error in doing it, but we did it. For that 
reason, we did it. And I’d ask the Leader of the Opposition who 
also gave his written word and tears it up just like that as well, 
just please to keep quiet while the Minister of Highways . . . the 
critic of the Highways Department and myself have a little 
discussion in this regard. 
 
Don’t be so confident that your friend Elwin, if he ever should 
make it, which I doubt will ever take place, would make you in 
the cabinet. But anyway, there it is. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you Mr. Chair. Well you may be 
right, Mr. Premier, I may not be Minister of Highways, because 
at that point, we’re going to have so many capable members on 
that side of the House, he’ll probably have a real dilemma to 
pick one. 
 
Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, I think we have a problem why 
in this province our funding for federal highways, and for that 
matter health, education, a number of things, why the feds keep 
dumping on us even though now they finally balanced their 
budget. And I believe it boils back to one thing, Mr. Chairman. 
The friendship that the Premier and the Prime Minister have, I 
believe, is costing us money in this province. 
 
You know, Mr. Premier, we go back, and I go back to the 
Tommy Douglas days, didn’t agree . . . I know many people 
maybe didn’t agree with his policies, all of them, but the one 
thing Mr. Douglas had going for them is he had a lot of respect, 
because no one in this country didn’t know where 
Saskatchewan was when Mr. Douglas was premier. Everybody 
knew where it was, and we benefited from that because he 
hollered for Saskatchewan, for Saskatchewan people, for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
I believe what is happening now, Mr. Premier, is that your 
friendship and loyalty to Jean Chrétien is causing you not to 
holler loudly, as it was the other day when he was in town, Mr. 
Chairman. I believe that you will not go out and holler against 
your good friend because, naturally, being friends you don’t 
want to do that. Well I don’t believe until you do, Mr. Premier, 
holler on our behalf, all of us from Saskatchewan, that the 
funding from the federal government ever will come. Why will 
it? 
 
And Mr. Premier, I want to read you some numbers. And these 
numbers are federal numbers from the Transport Canada people 
in Ottawa. And I want to tell you what other provinces are 
getting for highways: Newfoundland, and this is over about a 
five-, six-year span, Mr. Premier, Newfoundland, $671 million; 
Prince Edward Island, 42 million, doesn’t sound like much but, 
Mr. Premier, I have to throw in Confederation bridge, $840 
million — that’s for the little province of P.E.I.; Nova Scotia, 
263 million; New Brunswick, 630 million; Quebec, 447 million. 
Mr. Premier, and I’m sure you saw this, over that same period 
the federal government is putting a grand total projected 35 
million into Saskatchewan. 
 
Now why? What is the reason for that? And, Mr. Premier, I 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

think it boils down to your friendship with the Prime Minister 
because we never hear you holler very loud for Saskatchewan, 
with the federal government, to help support programs like 
highways, education, and health — the same programs that you 
keep whining in this House about, you and members. 
 
The Highways minister is constantly doing that when we ask 
questions, blaming it on the feds. We heard that when we were 
sitting there. We hear that when we’re sitting here. The third 
party hears it every day. You point the finger at the feds in here 
but you do it very quietly within these walls. The minute you 
get outside you forget to talk about it with the Prime Minister. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you feel that there is a problem with you and 
the Prime Minister being good friends and making it hard to 
holler? Is it costing us money in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You know, Mr. Chairman, this really 
is getting from the sublime to the ridiculous. Is there a problem 
with my friendship? Let me make a point that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well there’s a problem for us, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Oh, there’s problems for you, is 
there? Well let me ask you if there’s a problem with you and 
your Reform friends and their friendship with the Bloc 
Québécois, PQ (Parti Québécois) separatists? Tell me about that 
friendship, will you? Go ahead. Let’s hear about it. And what 
about . . . (inaudible) . . . and how you and the separatists are 
going to get together. What do you want — sovereignty 
association for Saskatchewan? Let’s hear your view on that and 
then I’ll give you my additional views on the Prime Minister. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Premier, I’m not quite as friendly or knowledgeable with the 
leader of the Reform or the Bloc or any of them. Actually don’t 
know them by first name at all as you do with the Premier . . . 
or with the Prime Minister, Mr. Premier. So I guess you aren’t 
going to answer that question it looks like. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh yes I am, I am. I’ll answer it right 
now. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Oh, I’m sorry, Mr. Premier, I’m waiting for 
an answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Yes, well I was waiting for your 
answer. But obviously I’m not going to get it. So we’re going to 
tell the people of Saskatchewan about how you, a few moments 
ago, got up and said all the Reformers in Saskatchewan, how 
well they know them, Elwin Hermanson, you know, a former 
Reformer. They’re all coming, flocking to your party. I’m 
asking you about your friendship with all of these people in the 
federal Reform Party talking with the BQ (Bloc Québécois) and 
the PQ. And you refuse to talk about them. 
 
But I’ll tell you about my friendship with the Prime Minister. I 
have been so quiet that I spoke to 1,500 FCM delegates — 
mayors, councillors, everybody elected from one part of this 
country to the other part of this country —calling for a national 
transportation system on highways, the very day of your 
motion. I’ve been calling . . . And I’ll read you here a 

memorandum of May 28, 1998, the following: 
 

At the May 1997 (one year ago) western premiers’ 
conference (western premiers — that’s me, I’m one of 
them) emphasized the importance of working together on 
transportation issues (for us to work together). That 
included a joint call to the federal government to develop 
national highway program proposals, improve the 
performance of the grain handling and transportation 
system, and ensure the Canada Transportation Act 
maintains the competitiveness of producers, shippers, and 
carriers. 

 
That’s how quiet I’ve been. And I could give you receipts and 
press releases and statements that have been in that regard . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well fair enough. 
 
Well what about the Conservatives that you praise? They join 
me. How successful has Ralph Klein been? How successful has 
Gary Filmon been? What are you singling out . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . A heck of a lot. They’ve got zero, the same 
thing as we have. That’s how successful they have been. 
 
All of us have been united in this regard so don’t tell me about 
friendship. My responsibility is to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan and I am proud to say that for the 30-some-odd 
years that I have been in this House, friendship is friendship. 
When it comes down to duty and responsibility to the province 
of Saskatchewan, I’ve always tried to exercise that interest first 
and foremost. And believe me, the Prime Minister knows that 
as it is his duty to exercise it as he sees it from his national point 
of view. 
 
Of course he needs it. He needs us to join. We need him to join 
us in a national transportation program. We’ve been saying it 
over and over again. But tell me when you get up on your feet, 
apart from the BQ connection that you have . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You don’t have any? That’s what you say. 
 
Tell me about any hidden connections that you have. You made 
dead-of-the-night deals in the past in forming the Saskatchewan 
Party, so how do we know about the dead-of-the-night deals 
here? 
 
But leave the BQ out of the picture for the moment. Answer me 
this question. Tell the people on television this question. Why 
did you wait 63 days of this legislative session — that’s how 
concerned you were about national transportation and highways 
program — 63 days before you got up for a special motion? 
Why did you wait? 
 
Check your Hansard. Check your Hansard. Check your 
Hansard. Why not ask it in question period? Check what has 
taken place in this House. And you missed the boat. You talk 
about a disastrous session. It’s been disastrous for the 
Saskatchewan Party and Eastview is going to show it to you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Mr. 
Premier, for that outburst. I still haven’t got my answer. 
 
I want to show you something, Mr. Premier. You said you 
spoke to 1,500 delegates, and I believe the Prime Minister was 
there. And what did we come away with? Don’t count on any 



1928 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

infrastructure money. I rest my case. You speak on our behalf; 
we get nothing. I hope the people of Saskatchewan remember, 
and the old myth is, what have you done for me today? — I 
would say probably absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Premier, part of the problem with that is I believe you’ve 
got your priorities all backwards. When the unity issue came 
and the Calgary accord last year — and it was important, don’t 
get me wrong, it was very important — but you sent every 
MLA in this province to back to their constituencies, had 
meetings, spent dollars, and that was fine. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, where I have a problem, or where the 
problem comes in: I don’t remember you doing that when you 
closed 52 hospitals in this province. One of them was in mine, 
the Langenburg hospital, and what made it even worse — and 
you know this, Mr. Premier — they had money raised to build a 
new hospital and after you got elected you come along and 
closed that. Did you send people, the MLAs from every 
constituency of all parties, from all parties funded by you to 
check to see what our constituents said? No. 
 
Mr. Premier, when you’re closing schools out there, are you 
sending all of us — 58 MLAs, to check with our constituents? 
No. 
 
Mr. Premier, when you’re letting our highway systems crumble 
and fall apart, do you want to know what our people say? 
Should we go out there? Do you send us — say hey, go out 
there like you did with the unity question? Did you send us out? 
No. 
 
And every other issue that’s more important than the unity 
question to my people in my constituency, did you check with 
them? No. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, that’s one reason I’m here. You didn’t check 
with my people, and I say, in this last three years you aren’t 
checking with anybody else in this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’d like to go to your big announcement last year 
when the member for Tisdale was Highway minister and he had 
this big hullabalooing announcement that your government was 
going to put 250 million a year — $2.5 billion into highways 
over the next 10 years. And I thought, good, it’s what we need 
in this province. It’s a good start. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, what happened? Just like your ’91 election 
promises, just like your ’95 election promises, and I think of the 
ones like no more health care cuts, no more bed closures — and 
we saw what happened to that promise. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, your commitment to 250 million a year, a 
year ago, was 208 million. How do you justify that? This year 
you’ve estimated 219 million. That’s a far cry from 250 million. 
Mr. Premier, that’s $80 million short in the first two years of a 
10-year program. When do you plan to catch up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Here we are Tory math again. What 
this person does, he gets up, and he says 2.5 million . . . billion 
over 10 years — 10 into 2.5 — 250 million a year. Just makes 
sense. Automatic. Doesn’t figure out that he can go from . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, we said 2.5 billion over 10 

years; 218, 225, 235, 245 — 2.5 billion. Give you a break. 
Doggone right give you a break. Did we consult with your 
riding and your people in 1991 and ’92, ’93? You doggone 
right. We were out at every one of those 52 areas, and we met 
with them. 
 
Out at Plains hospital rallies, the Minister of Health on our side 
was there. Were you there? You were missing in action, sir. 
You weren’t even at . . . How many meetings of the Plains were 
you at? 
 
An Hon. Member: — More than you, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Yes that’s true. I doubt that you were 
at three. I doubt that three, so you’re three more than me. Don’t 
tell me that you listen to people because you sure don’t listen to 
people either. 
 
You’re like the Bourbons you boys or you people over there. 
You don’t remember anything, and you don’t learn anything. 
And you do your math just like Grant Devine does his math. 
You do your Devine math the same way . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I don’t care how long it is. You continue to 
bankrupt the province. 
 
And you’ve got a list of commitments in this legislature. I’m 
going to at some appropriate time give you this. You have a list 
of commitments already on leaner, meaner government. 
 
And I’ll tell you this, education, March 16, the member for 
Rosthern, Mr. Cool, proposed a 60 per cent provincial funding 
share for K to 12 operating costs — $200 million a year. 
Health, Plains centre . . . what can I say? Hep C, question mark. 
One could go right down the line on all of your tax cuts. And I 
tell you; you people simply have no credibility on either the 
financial side or the integrity side. And the fact that you met in 
the middle of the night in this disgusting way to form this new 
party, how dare you try to appropriate onto yourselves the name 
Saskatchewan Party. That is unbelievable; I can’t understand. 
 
And all you do of course is simply laugh at the people of 
Saskatchewan. Have a good laugh because it isn’t going to last 
for very long in your party. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — No, you’re right, Mr. Premier. Mr. 
Chairman, it won’t last long because we’re going to be 
governing this province and it’s a serious business, and we’ll 
take it that way. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’ve asked you a number of questions tonight, and 
you’ve danced around them. I just asked you one of when are 
you going to honour your commitment and put the $80 million 
that we so badly need into our highway systems, so situations 
like the Brenda Bods of Estevan that had the 10 pound chunk of 
asphalt come through her window . . . Do we have to wait for 
somebody to get killed with an incident like that before you put 
that 80 million in? 
 
And you can say, Mr. Premier, oh well, a 10-year program, and 
that doesn’t cut it because you know as well as I do you aren’t 
going to be anywhere near here in 10 years. When are you 
going to honour that commitment, Mr. Premier? It was easy to 
make. It’s not going to be so easy to honour by the looks of it. 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

When are you going to honour that commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Our commitment, every commitment 
we’ve made . . . eliminate the deficit. We did it. Reduce the 
debt. We did it — your debt and your deficit. Reduce the taxes. 
We did it — not you people. Increase expenditure for health 
care. We did it; not you people. Increase expenditure for 
highways. We made the commitment and we’re doing it. And 
we’re doing it as quickly and as efficiently as we will. And the 
people of Saskatchewan know that the last political party in this 
province to trust for any word, given our track record of what 
we say and what we do, the last party to trust is you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well I still didn’t get an answer, Mr. 
Premier, and I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan heard 
when we’re finally going to get the full 250 million. In fact 
right now you’d probably have to be up to 265, 270 just in the 
last eight years to even come close to honouring your 
commitment. I think most people out there that have driven our 
highways have already given up on your highway program. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Chairman, I would like to go into municipal 
government which is another, I believe, very integral part of our 
system in Saskatchewan — and in rural Saskatchewan and 
urban Saskatchewan, because they’re both represented in 
municipal government. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Premier, you’ve used municipal government as a whipping 
boy to balance your books. I know that and you know that. The 
Minister of Municipal Government; the Minister of Highways 
knows that. At what point, Mr. Premier, do you plan on 
stopping the downloading on municipalities? And have you any 
plans to start back-filling a little of the money that you’ve taken 
away on these people out there for their roads and 
infrastructure? Do you have any plans in the near future? 
 
You’ve talked about balancing five budgets in a row, and that’s 
great. I commend you for that. But now is the time to stop the 
hurting within municipal governments, and that passes on to the 
taxpayers out there. Do you have any plan to start replacing 
some of the money you took away from these people, in the 
near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — As funding becomes available we 
intend to expand the monies to important sectors of our 
community — health, education, highways. Municipal 
government obviously is on that list. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Premier, I don’t know if that’s going to be satisfactory for the 
SARM and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and those people in the RMs (rural municipalities) 
and urban councils in there because they’re hurting badly. They 
have nowhere to pass it on and they’re stuck with what you do 
to them, and they’ve took a lot of punishment in the last seven 
years. 
 
Mr. Premier, I just wonder . . . I’d like to get your opinion on 
the state of . . . How does your government right now get along 
with organizations such as SARM and SUMA? Are you on a 
real good basis with them? Where are we sitting with these 

people? Because the feeling I’m getting is they’re very unhappy 
with what is happening with your government and the treatment 
you’ve been giving them. Where do you feel you sit with those 
people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — We have a good working relationship 
with the folks at SARM and folks at SUMA. We don’t agree on 
all issues; we agree on a lot of issues. We have many new 
initiatives underway. I think the relationship is as good as it’s 
been in quite some time because they, while they represent their 
local governments, are also citizens of Saskatchewan and they 
know the challenges we’ve had to face thanks to the mess that 
you and your pals in the Conservative Party have created, and 
they know how far a distance we have come. 
 
They’ve had to carry their fair share of the burden, maybe more 
than their fair share of the burden, I understand that. But they 
know that they’re citizens of this province and we’re turned the 
corner and they’re prepared to work with us for future solutions. 
And as we get stronger, fiscally, there will be more which will 
be distributed to the people of Saskatchewan. But by the way, 
when that happens, don’t come after me at estimates, on the 
argument that somehow the expenditure for government has 
increased. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Premier, another of the problems that the SARM people sure 
had after their convention was that the value that your 
government puts on agriculture must be very minimal because 
the Agriculture minister didn’t even bother to attend. And I 
think it’s very crucial that the Minister of Agriculture attends 
that convention because he should be answering a lot of these 
questions. These are all farm people. Mr. Premier, are you 
going to see that that doesn’t happen again and that the 
Agriculture minister will attend those things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, I mean I ask of the member, 
give me a break. I know he won’t. We are . . . I’m very proud to 
say, that since 1991 there may be the occasional session where 
we’ve not had a 100 per cent ministerial attendance. This was 
one of them when we didn’t because of other commitments the 
minister simply could not break. Tough to make this kind of a 
judgement call. I agree with you, he should be there at RMs but 
he had other obligations on this one occasion. He’s attended six 
or seven of them prior to that as we have as a cabinet on a 100 
per cent basis, and you’ve singled out the one example and the 
one occasion when he was not there. 
 
My policy is when we bear pit with SARM or SUMA — 100 
per cent cabinet policy —ministers have to turn out unless there 
is a good and valid reason otherwise. So I will assure you that 
we’ll try to get the Ag minister there for sure at the next bear pit 
this coming spring. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 
Premier. Mr. Premier, I’d like to talk just for a minute about 
SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) and I 
know how much of a pain that’s been for you and the Minister 
of Municipal Government and probably for many of the MLAs 
in here because it’s brought many concerns to us and many 
problems to us. 
 
I guess, and I’ve heard you say this before, Mr. Premier, that we 



1930 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

were 30 years behind in updating, SAMA had to do a 
reassessment out there — and I agree with you. But I also think, 
Mr. Premier, you must agree that there’s a number of problems 
with the way SAMA did it and where we got. 
 
I guess as a farmer sitting out there, Mr. Premier, looking back 
in hindsight, if something isn’t broke, why fix it? And I agree 
with you, it had to be updated. But what we have now, Mr. 
Premier, in many cases is far worse. 
 
And I’d like to go from the urban side for a minute, Mr. 
Premier, and my hometown of Saltcoats is a prime example, 
I’m sure you’re aware of that. But just the other day, I had a 
resident of Kamsack come to me and I believe he said, he had 
19 or 20 neighbours that have joined him where two years ago 
their taxes were $2,900, and then last year they’ve gone up to 
about 4,000, and this year the proposed taxes on his house will 
be $5,200, Mr. Premier. I don’t know if you realize what we’re 
doing to the small towns in this province when that happens. 
 
To start with, the gentleman’s biggest concern was that should 
he want to sell his house — who on earth was going to buy a 
house in rural Saskatchewan in one of our communities when 
the taxes are $5,200? And he said it doesn’t really matter what 
the assessment is; it’s what the public will bear, what the buyer 
will bear when he’s buying it, and he’s definitely going to take 
into consideration $5,200 in taxes. 
 
Mr. Premier, that works out to $450 a month roughly. That’s 
more than we used to pay a few years ago on a house payment. 
Mr. Premier, what are we going to do with SAMA and how are 
we going to change the rules so we straighten out this mess and 
we aren’t chasing people out of rural Saskatchewan to the larger 
cities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, there is no doubt that 
when you have a reappraisal which is 30 years late in coming 
there will be some dramatic adjustments. That is inevitable. It’s 
also inevitable, given the complex nature of reassessments, that 
it’s almost like a Rubik’s cube — however if you adjust it to the 
benefit of one sector somebody else gets hurt by that sector. 
 
I’d simply remind the member that it was former premier, Grant 
Devine, in 1989, and I agree with this proposal of his, 
established SAMA in recognition of the fact that there needed 
to be reassessment. SAMA is a nine-person body: three are 
nominated by SARM; three are nominated by SUMA; and three 
are nominated by us. We don’t control it; it’s controlled by 
SARM and SUMA. And at convention, SARM and SUMA 
endorsed it a couple of years ago, and school trustees did as 
well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association) endorsed it as well. That’s true. 
 
And so we went about the task of getting this complex area and 
trying to work out the best mechanism for assessment. I agree 
with the member we have to work out some kinks and some 
inequities which take place. I don’t know this particular 
example that you’re talking about. 
 
SAMA and the officials are telling us that they’re about the task 
of doing it and now that we’ve overcome that 30-year delay and 
that gap, we’re now in a position not to have those kinds of 
distortions in the future and have a modern, up-to-date, fully 

appraised, accurately appraised system of assessment. 
 
By the way, the only principle I think that works is market 
value and we’ve got to make sure that it implements itself 
throughout the entire system. I think it’ll be better next time 
around — by a long shot. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, I 
certainly hope so because I think there’s an awful lot of people 
out there that are very unhappy with the past reassessment. 
There’s a lot of problems caused by it and I believe there’s a lot 
of hardships coming out of it. And I also believe it’s hurt rural 
Saskatchewan drastically because of the shift in the . . . you add 
the education tax on and so on. 
 
Mr. Premier, just one quick question and it was a subject that 
was a hot issue here last year, and I honestly, in the back of my 
mind, don’t believe that you’ve forgot about it, but you’ve put it 
on the back burner. And it’s amalgamation. And I know this 
session, Mr. Premier, that has not come up, and I thank you for 
that. 
 
But I wonder through funding, and you’re cutting the funding 
for all types of municipalities out there, and if in the back of 
your mind in your government you aren’t deciding that this is 
the best way to go, enforcing municipalities to join one and 
another through the funding process. Do you still have 
amalgamation on the top of your list or have you put that out of 
your mind completely, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Amalgamation was not ever at the top 
of my list or the government’s lists. Never has been, isn’t now, 
and I don’t foresee it in the future. We work in a cooperative 
fashion with our local governments. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I surely hope I can 
believe the Premier in this case. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’d like to just touch on a couple of the Crowns 
because a couple of them are my critic area, and I’d just go 
through them really quick. 
 
But I guess with STC I’d like to touch on patronage in STC, 
because I believe they go hand in hand, Mr. Premier. And I 
believe that’s partly why a lot of the problems within our 
Crowns are happening, and that problem is patronage. What did 
we do, Mr. Premier, with STC when it was losing all the money 
it was, and is still for that matter. We put Mr. Glendinning in 
charge, who I believe was an NDP lawyer, Mr. Premier, had no, 
from what I can find, no real background in running a company 
like that. 
 
And what did Mr. Glendinning do? He got a computer system 
set up and running, except the problem being it didn’t send out 
the bills. And, Mr. Premier, it took what? — 9, 10 months 
before Mr. Glendinning and company finally realized that they 
weren’t sending out any bills, and we’re short of money. 
 
All of a sudden I guess Mr. Glendinning got up one morning 
and thought to himself, where on earth is all our funds going? 
We’re losing more money than normal. And he found that 
$750,000 worth of bills weren’t sent out. 
 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

So, Mr. Premier, in your wisdom, or your government’s 
wisdom, what did you do? You moved Mr. Glendinning to 
Liquor and Gaming. What punishment. 
 
Mr. Premier, at what point are we going to quit putting 
patronage appointments in charge of the Crowns and get them 
running like we should, like an ordinary business within the 
private sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have spoken to this I 
think several times tonight. Maybe the member was out of the 
House at the time that I did. I can indicate to the member again 
that we have made, through Crown review, dramatic policy 
changes respecting ministers on the boards of directors. And 
with that will flow the question of CEOs and the like. 
 
And this is not an issue of patronage. It’s a much more complex 
matter than that. In every instance, almost every instance, the 
person so appointed has been appointed to be, because that 
person was found to be the most qualified by the relevant 
people that were involved. 
 
Questions about SHIN, I gave the answer in this regard. So we 
will continue to try to eliminate patronage in the sense that the 
member opposite tries to advocate it, namely putting in political 
people strictly because of political reason. We’ll put people in 
there of competence, regardless of the political stripe. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs on her feet? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Chair, with leave, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you very much to my 
colleagues in the Assembly. We have in your gallery, Mr. 
Chairman, five members of the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation board that have been in Regina today for a 
meeting. 
 
Starting on the left is Steve Tokarski, David MacLeod, Donnet 
Elder, Dan Palsich, and Dennis Zerr. So I’d like to ask members 
to welcome them here as they take in some of the proceedings 
tonight. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Premier, you tell us or you’re trying to convince us that the 
patronage is not happening under your regime, and I believe it 
was one of the big things you ran on in ’91. You said you were 

going to put an end to it. 
 
After the Glendinning episode with STC, and I believe, Mr. 
Premier, you have touched on an answer with Mr. Nystuen, but 
what did you do when you replaced Mr. Glendinning? You put 
Mr. Gord Nystuen in charge. And I’m really worried about this 
man and his qualifications, Mr. Premier. Because the first thing 
he did to resurrect the billing situation with STC, after he went 
in and checked out and tried to find out what was wrong, how 
did he solve the problem? He shut the computers down, Mr. 
Premier, and billed by hand. 
 
Now I guess in the old days that might have been fine. But, Mr. 
Premier, what really worries me is where you’ve put him now. 
You’ve put him in charge of the SHIN program — the most 
important computer network probably this province has seen 
and maybe ever will see. 
 
What qualifications, after not knowing how to fix STC’s 
problem with a computer, would Mr. Nystuen have to set it up 
with the SHIN program? How comfortable should my 
constituents and the people of Saskatchewan be, Mr. Premier, 
that their private information will be kept private with this man 
running the show? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re back at 
this question again and again, and I can give the answer again 
and again. The SHIN board engaged Mr. Nystuen — not the 
government of Saskatchewan, not myself. The SHIN board, 
made up of representatives of the medical association, the 
nurses, the practitioners, the wide representative body which is 
SHIN. They went through the applicants, the list of applicants, 
and decided, based on the curriculum vitae, based on the 
questions of experience, based on qualities of management, that 
Mr. Nystuen should be the SHIN executive director. 
 
If there’s a complaint, take it up with the Chair of the SHIN 
board. If somebody else complains about that, have them direct 
the complaint to the SHIN board. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Premier. 
We will do that. As the member from Moosomin had said 
before, that we have asked for the membership on the SHIN 
board and have not yet received it, and we’ll be waiting for that. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’d also like to touch a little bit on SaskTel. And I 
think that’s one of the big issues here. SaskTel, and I agree, is 
one of the greatest companies we’ve got in this province as a 
Crown. But I have a problem, Mr. Premier, and the problem 
being that every time something comes up with one of our 
Crowns we jack the rates up and then decide to supply the 
service. 
 
And what I’m talking about here is the regional systems that 
we’ve been asking for, Mr. Premier. As you know well, we’re 
happy to hear when we’re going to get larger telephone 
districts. But what has happened, Mr. Premier, and it happens 
every time within the Crowns, we jack the rate up and then we 
take a look and see what we’re going to do out there. 
 
(2045) 
 
And, Mr. Premier, you did it again. Under your leadership we 



1932 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

raised the rates $4 already. Next February we’re told we’re 
going to raise them 2 more. And about 90 per cent of the 
province — 80 per cent at least, Mr. Premier — have not seen 
any movement on larger regional telephone areas. 
 
Mr. Premier, I guess the question I would ask you is why don’t 
we put things like this in place and then jack the rates? Because 
most people — in fact, I believe all people in this province — 
believe you’re only using this as a tax tool. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is an 
unfortunate example to make the point about using it as a tax 
tool because . . . and I’ll tell you why. SaskTel, of all of the 
Crown corporations, is now in wide open competition with the 
world out there — AT&T, MCI, and Sprint. 
 
And one of the arguments against the PURC, by the way, is that 
the pressures aren’t now to increase the rates because of the 
lack of competition; the pressures are to lower the rates because 
of the pressures of competition, at every stage of the game. And 
so the rates you’ll find on long-distance calls in order to make 
sure that SaskTel retains its percentage of the market puts 
downward pressure on rates. 
 
Now we’re all for regionalization. We think it’s good servicing 
and it’s a necessary development. I’m assuming you’re 
accepting it as well. The rates are fixed based on the costs 
pertaining to the region. It is not as you represent it, namely 
regionalized and then jack up the rates. It’s a question of 
economics, judged by the SaskTel management with respect to 
the region that’s affected. 
 
And I close. As I take my chair, keep in mind the overall 
principle which is there. The overall principle is that in the case 
of SaskTel, of any of the Crown corporations, the pressure is 
downward on rates — downward on rates. That will be the 
long-term, short-term, and medium-term pressure even on 
regionalized areas. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Premier. I appreciate that. But I think the problem being out 
there, and I don’t think many people out there probably realize, 
that we have probably 660,000 private lines in this province. 
You do your arithmetic on that, Mr. Premier — I’m sure some 
of them will — that that amounts to about $40 million a year 
increase between the $4 and the $2 increase. 
 
Then, Mr. Premier, at SARM convention I believe you came 
along and said we will be jacking up another dollar on your 
phone rates, on your basic telephone rate for 911, which is a 
good program. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, you add up the increases that you have just 
gone through with SaskTel and you’re looking at $50 million a 
year. And, Mr. Premier, you always say that we’re the ones 
pushing privatization, and yet competition I believe is one of 
the greatest things we can have. 
 
Look at for an example with SaskTel and long distance. They 
lowered the rates, and to SaskTel’s amazement, guess what 
happened. People used the phone more and the loss of revenue 
was not all that great. And, Mr. Premier, the member for 
Rosetown, as I know, been working on a federal fund to get the 

federal government to set up to help subsidize rural rates. And I 
agree with that. 
 
What scares me, Mr. Premier, at the same time he’s running 
around saying, if we don’t get this rural rates, local rates out 
there are going to have to go up probably $100 per phone line. I 
have a problem with that, Mr. Premier. Because as we know 
with your government, what you’re famous for, you come out 
and tell us something’s going to go up, the sky’s the limit, and 
then you jack it up about a fifth of that and say, well aren’t we 
nice guys. 
 
Is this the plan, Mr. Premier, with SaskTel? To scare us with the 
$100 a month increase, and come out in about three years with a 
$20 a year increase and tell us, look how happy we should be 
out there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, some of my 
colleagues are talking about competition, which of course is the 
obvious answer to the member’s question. The member of 
Intergovernmental Affairs advises that on this particular 
application the Manitoba Conservatives are supporting SaskTel. 
Saskatchewan Conservatives are opposing this application. 
 
But this doesn’t particularly surprise me because I have in front 
of me a quotation under date of May 2, 1996. And this is 
written by a very famous journalist in Saskatchewan by the 
name of Murray Mandryk of the Leader-Star Services. And the 
headline is, “Government under fire over Sask deal.” And I’d 
like the member from Saltcoats to listen to this: 
 

Romanow was also asked by Liberal opposition critic . . . 
 
You remember those good old days, don’t you? . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That’s right, and only once. 
 

Romanow was also asked by Liberal opposition critic Bob 
Bjornerud, Saltcoats, why Saskatchewan is not following 
Manitoba’s lead by considering SaskTel. 
 

That’s what you said. So today you get up and you say you 
don’t support that. You’re going to have . . . you’re all for 
selling SaskTel — greatest corporation in the world today. In 
1996 you want to privatize it; we should follow Manitoba’s 
lead. Flip-flop, my goodness! This Saskatchewan Party is 
flip-flop personified, collectively and individually. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Premier, I don’t believe there’s a flip-flop there. You have to 
have . . . Mr. Premier, you would have to have your head in the 
sand if you don’t at least take a look and see what our Crowns 
are doing for us. 
 
Are they doing what they were designed to do when they 
originally were set up? They were there to supply everyone in 
this province with affordable utility rates, whether it’s 
telephone, power, gas. And, Mr. Premier, I would say right now 
with what we’re using them for they’re not only doing that. 
We’re using them as a tax tool to help balance your budget, and 
that’s not what they were set up for to start with. 
 
I honestly believe, Mr. Premier, if SaskTel was ever to be 
looked at and privatized, we should have done it a couple of 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

years ago, Mr. Premier, before competition come in. I myself 
believe we waited too long; probably now we’ve missed the 
boat at SaskTel. But that’s still no reason why we shouldn’t 
take a look at them, make sure they’re doing the job we want 
for the cheapest dollar we can get. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’m pretty well at the end of my questions for you 
tonight. I just want to say that I have the greatest respect for 
you, Mr. Premier, and I believe many people in this province 
do. There has been an aura around you because you are the 
Premier. You’ve been politically respected across this province. 
But I have to say, Mr. Premier, and I know you aren’t going to 
like this, I think your bubble’s cracking. I honestly do. 
 
In ’95 I believe you come around this province in that little 
bubble and you ran your whole campaign on yourself, and you 
got away with it. That isn’t going to happen the next time, Mr. 
Premier, because I think for once you are invincible. You are 
going to be able to be touched . . . not invincible, Mr. Premier, 
I’m sorry. You were invincible; I don’t believe you are any 
more, Mr. Premier, and I’m not sure why. I’m not sure if it’s 
because of your age or the arrogance of your government, or 
you’ve been in here 30 years and that may be five years too 
long. I’m not sure of the problem, Mr. Premier. 
 
All I have to say is I have the greatest respect for you and I wish 
you well, but I think it’s time to pass the torch on. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I can just appreciate 
the great appreciation that the hon. member has for me. And I 
hope that when I reach your age I exhibit a little more mental 
agility and youthfulness than you do. 
 
And may I say that I will note, and in this election campaign 
you will answer to your statement a few moments ago that we 
missed the boat a couple of years ago in not privatizing 
SaskTel. That’s what you said — we missed the boat a couple 
of years ago in not privatizing SaskTel. We missed the boat. 
Hansard will say exactly what you said, and I know exactly 
what you said. 
 
And you might as well also, if you want to come up and follow 
me, or who follows me next . . . Yorkton Review, March 14, 
1998. New style of politics needed, says candidate. This is good 
old Elwin Hermanson, that bundle of dynamism and youth that 
the people of Saskatchewan are just waiting for: 
 

Hermanson said the province needs to review all of its 
Crown corporations. I think after 10 minutes of debate, 
people of Saskatchewan would be willing to sell (willing to 
sell) and apply any profits to the debt, Mr. Hermanson 
said. 

 
That is 1998. In 1996 and 1998, you people will sell off 
Saskatchewan’s heritage, our economic engines, our 
opportunities, our Crown corporations, our productivity. You 
call that new age thinking, my friend? You won’t be around 
after the next election. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, on 
behalf of the Saskatchewan Party, I’d like to welcome the 
people from the water board here as well. I think on this kind of 
a year, the name that you have sounds very exciting and people 

could be looking forward to all sorts of great and wonderful 
things from you. And I hope you can produce at least half of 
what they’re hoping for. 
 
Mr. Premier, thank you for this opportunity. And I’m sure after 
all these hours, it’s fairly intense, and anyone that’s been 
looking to follow you into the premiership from your party has 
probably decided that the kind of job you have tonight may not 
actually be worth it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Worth it! I’m enjoying every moment of 
it. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. Well we’ll keep on having a good time 
over here. First question, Mr. Premier, and it comes out of a 
situation here in Regina. And first of all I guess I want to find 
out what your awareness of it is. Have you been at Mr. Henry 
Ripplinger’s business place called Collections fine arts here in 
Regina and do you understand that situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I do not understand the 
situation other than what I read in the popular press. And for my 
money, what I read in the popular press doesn’t give me any 
basis of understanding for most things. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Understandably so, and you probably missed 
a good shot at the Conrad Black papers here. But you’ll 
probably get that in a minute or two. I had the opportunity this 
week, Mr. Premier, to visit his establishment, talk with him, and 
look around what’s happened there. And I think this is one of 
those situations that might beg for your intervention, might beg 
for your intervention. 
 
The situation is somewhat like this, Mr. Premier, and I didn’t 
get this from the papers. When Mr. Ripplinger decided to create 
the business that he has, he went to city hall and said what do I 
have to do to build the kind of facility that I want to build? City 
hall gave him all the requirements. 
 
So he built his establishment based, Mr. Premier, on what city 
hall told him he should do. He met all of those requirements, 
started his business and, Mr. Premier, I would really strongly 
urge you to go and visit his place. It’s impressive. It’s one of 
those situations that I think every city in Canada would be 
proud to have there, because it’s a real asset to it. He gets a lot 
of tourists come in and it’s a kind of place that I think speaks 
well for all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Anyway, after he’d been in business for some period of time 
there was a complaint lodged with the Human Rights 
Commission that he needed to have a ramp. Well he redesigned 
the place. He built the ramp just the way it was asked that he 
build it. All complaints went away. There hasn’t been a single 
complaint since. So at that point, Mr. Premier, we should think 
that everything was fine and he could continue his business. But 
that’s not the case, Mr. Premier. 
 
What has happened is the Human Rights Commission has 
chosen to walk in and look around without any concerns being 
raised, without any complaints being raised, and look around 
and say well Henry, we think you should do this and this. And 
so now he’s caught in a quandary. He has followed all the 
regulations of the land created by the people who’ve been 



1934 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

elected to do those sorts of things. And along comes the Human 
Rights Commission and tells him that even though they have 
had no complaints they think for whatever reasons he should 
make a lot of changes to his building. 
 
First question, Mr. Premier. How fair does that seem to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to 
answer the question because it’s a question of how fair does it 
seem to me. I can make an opinion, a subjective expression of 
feeling on how something seems or feels to me. But this is a 
legitimate debate and discussion of major policy issues. It’s not 
a question of my feeling. 
 
The question is if the Human Rights Commission under statue 
properly exercising its authority? I don’t know if it has or 
hasn’t, if it hasn’t there’s other remedy — if it has made a 
ruling, then due process of law has been followed. 
 
I think the Ripplinger place from your description and from 
what I’ve heard is very impressive and it is an asset. And I 
understand totally from your explanation and it conforms to 
what you read in the popular press as well that this causes great 
inconvenience. One can feel obviously a great deal of sympathy 
and support for what this person is trying to do, accommodate. 
And yet the HRC, the Human Rights Commission makes 
another ruling. 
 
Having said that though, where does that lead this in the public 
discourse or the public debate. The HRC, Human Rights 
Commission, having made the decision that it has, what now 
happens? What am I going to do? Overrule it? I can’t in any 
event even if I’d want to. Are we going to abolish the Human 
Rights Commission? Are we going to pass some sort of special 
statute or law? I don’t think you’re advocating that. At least I’ll 
know in subsequent questions what you’re advocating. What 
can one do about this? 
 
So one can empathize but no other answers are there. Mr. 
Chairman, may I ask the leave of the committee to have three 
minutes only to depart for a very important matter, namely . . . 
the Chairman saying five minutes, but if I may have three 
minutes. I’ll be back as fast as I can because of my need for 
water. 
 
The Chair: — The request is for recess of five minutes. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you again, Mr. Chairperson. Okay, 
dealing with the answer that you gave, Mr. Premier, and I think 
therein lies some of the problem, where when you said it would 
be an opinion that you would have to give. It would seem to me 
that that’s exactly what happens when the Human Rights 
Commission comes in and overrides the laws that have been 
created by the elected representatives. That is just an opinion. 
 
Like from where do they decide that he needs to change his 

building further when, as I stated earlier on, I think this is the 
critical part of this, Mr. Premier, when there hasn’t been a 
single complaint. So they’re not coming through, and there’s a 
group saying, well, we don’t have access, we demand access, 
we want access, we think we should have access — none of 
that’s happening. 
 
They’re going in totally under their own volition and trying to 
decide what they can look for that he should have to change, 
when no one’s asking it and he’s fulfilled all the laws of the 
land up to that particular point. And as you said, that’s just a 
matter of their opinion. 
 
You stated, Mr. Premier, that it was a situation that you felt you 
probably shouldn’t override, and to some extent that’s true. 
Obviously we wouldn’t want the Premier going around and 
overriding every decision of every group that exists in the 
province. 
 
However, when you have a group that’s there that is acting 
when there aren’t any complaints and they don’t have a set of 
rules or regulations that needs to apply to . . . Mr. Ripplinger in 
this particular case is suffering because of not a single concern 
that’s being raised by anyone in the public. That is unfair. 
 
And I guess my question is, even though you may not want to 
override the Human Rights organization, Commission, what are 
you going to do to ensure that the business people in this 
country, in this province, don’t have to fear the Human Rights 
Commission is going to come in and make some decision, even 
though there are no concerns in their communities and they are 
following all the regulations that exist. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I want to make it clear 
when I use the word, opinion. The opinion of the Human Rights 
Commission in that context, I mean, I’m assuming the opinion 
of the Human Rights Commission at law, in the interpretation 
of the law by the Human Rights Commission . . . which brings 
me to the specific question the member asks here. This is not a 
question of the Human Rights Commission overriding the law. 
If the Human Rights Commission overrides the law — I’m not 
speaking about the Ripplinger case but generally — then there 
are remedies. 
 
One of the remedies is to go to what the lawyers say at a 
superior court — and say this tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction 
because it overrode the law and we’re quashing that decision. 
That’s the remedy that’s available. 
 
So there is no way that they do anything but interpret the law. 
One can agree or disagree with their interpretation, but that’s 
why we set up the Human Rights Commission or the Labour 
Relations Board or Minimum Wage Board — you name the 
various agencies which are around. 
 
So again I repeat: what more can be said about this issue. A 
decision has been rendered. I have my personal feelings about 
this. Mr. Ripplinger’s got to decide, based on legal advice and 
other counsel, what his next moves are. I don’t know what other 
options there are for any of us. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, and you’re right. 
Mr. Ripplinger does have to decide that. And I guess after 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1935 

having been in business numbers of years, he’s finding this very 
frustrating because . . . I think if you would take the time to 
meet with him and look at what happens . . . there’s 20 
employees that he has there. It’s a very fine situation all the way 
around. When something else comes down the pipe and creates 
those kinds of difficulties, we have to very much question 
what’s happening there, and I think what we need is to ensure 
that the Human Rights Commission knows what its boundaries 
are. 
 
It’s much as if you and I, Mr. Premier, bought a car, went to 
SGI, said how do I license it? We license the thing and along 
comes some automobile association and says you’re going to 
have to do this and this to your car before you can drive it. We 
would be very upset because we would say, well we went to 
SGI, did everything they told us to do, and along comes this 
other body and says no but we think something else should 
happen. 
 
That’s what’s been happening here. And it’s unfair, and I think 
it’s the kind of situation that could happen to any other business 
in the area. Had he received complaints from people saying that 
they demanded access or were denied access I think, Mr. 
Premier, we would all feel somewhat differently about it 
because we would say that’s one of the things we’re concerned 
about. 
 
But that’s not what’s been happening with Mr. Ripplinger. And 
I guess in conclusion on that particular matter, I’m just going to 
ask you to go and talk to him and see what’s happening there. 
When he made his changes to put the ramp in, it’s the classiest 
ramp that you will find in Saskatchewan, I’m sure. It isn’t just 
some little boardwalk stuck off in an alley. It’s right up front. 
It’s beautiful. It’s architecturally arranged. He’s done that to a 
credit to himself and the credit of the people that work there and 
that use his facility. So I think it would be good for you to go 
and talk to him and see what actually is going on there. 
 
Okay. Moving on to a somewhat different area and that’s the 
area of Justice and looking at what we’ve discussed a lot in this 
House this session, and that is youth crime. 
 
And admittedly we’ve had people get up and say well there’s 
only 400 young people incarcerated at this time, and most 
young people are good young people, and I would agree with 
both of those. So I think we need to get that out of the way. No 
one’s saying that all the young people in Saskatchewan are bad. 
We’re not saying that most of them are. We’re just saying that 
some of them are . . . and those are the some, Mr. Premier, that 
we need to deal with. 
 
I guess my question comes out of a little bit of background that 
you’ve given to us over the last months and years. We’ve heard 
a lot in this House about how good a place Saskatchewan is to 
live in, Mr. Premier. Well, Mr. Premier, I’m here because I 
want to be here. I live in Saskatchewan because I want to live in 
Saskatchewan. I believe all of us do, especially as MLAs. Well 
there’s maybe one or two moving away, but by and large we’re 
here because we wish to be here, and we love this province. 
 
Having said all that and granting you the statement you’ll 
probably make that Saskatchewan, according to various 
sources, is the best place in the world to live, and in many ways 

I wouldn’t deny that either, and I would support that because I 
love this province. However having said all that, if this is such a 
good place to live and things are so fine out here, how come 
then, Mr. Premier, do we have two of our cities that rank very 
near the top — if not the top — as break-in capitals and car 
theft capitals in Canada? It’s a good place to live. How can that 
happen, Mr. Premier? I think we need an explanation in 
Saskatchewan for that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I think the answer really is one which 
is two-fold. First of all, crime rates fluctuate. They go up, and 
they go down. And so far as I know, there may be studies as to 
why this is the case, an explanation for it. I don’t think anybody 
really has a specific answer. 
 
Our answer is however to say that what we’ve got to do is try to 
have a budget which makes communities safe as possible. I’ll 
spare you all the details about our increased investments to the 
RCMP, the police, and the prosecutors. The question of what to 
do with chronic young offenders, all of that has been publicly 
announced. It’s one of the initiatives taken in this session. This 
is why this session has been such a productive and 
forward-looking session from our perspective. 
 
And to answer your question, let’s not get into, try to read the 
entrails of the increases or decreases. Let’s try to make sure 
we’ve got the kind of social, policing, and other programs in 
place to deal with crime effectively and purposefully as 
required. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Premier, that has to be an 
exceedingly interesting answer when you say let’s not look at 
the entrails, as you call it, of why crime takes place. You’re just 
going to throw money at it. You’re going to hire more police. 
And you’re the one and your people who accuse our party of 
talking about locking up and throwing away the keys. That’s 
exactly what you’re talking about. You’re going to throw more 
money at the police to find more of them. You lock more of 
them up. But you’re not going to look at the entrails. You’re not 
going to look at the real guts of the problem and see why this is 
happening. 
 
Your party, in one form or another for the last half century, has 
been in government in this province, and what do we have as a 
result of that? A break-in capital in Canada and car thief capital 
of Canada. Mr. Premier, we need an explanation from you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
either did not hear me or, if he did, he misunderstood me. I sure 
hope he wasn’t purposefully misrepresenting me. I would never 
accuse that of my dear friends in the Tory Saskatchewan Party. 
However let me just make myself clear again. 
 
(2115) 
 
When I said that the percentage increase in crime, your lead-in 
question to this, I said you can study the entrails, or perhaps I 
should clarify it. But there’s not much that can be gained by 
studying the entrails of those, just of that stat, I agree with you 
that the causes of crime need to be looked at and studied. And 
in my exchange with the member from Saskatoon Humboldt, I 
talked about the question of poverty, I talked the question about 
culture, I talked about the question of regions and 



1936 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

neighbourhoods, education, safe houses — all of those issues 
are factors which enter into crime rates either going up or going 
down. 
 
And therefore, what needs to take place is an initiative at a 
multi-leveled, multi-tiered basis. Some more prosecutors, some 
more police, some changes to Young Offenders Act, children’s 
action plan, nutrition, inner-core kids, making sure they’re off 
the streets, dealing with the question of child prostitution or 
child abuse — all of these and more need to be studied and 
we’re doing the studying. 
 
And all I’m saying is that this province, whether it’s children’s 
action, Child Benefit, whether it’s more police, more 
prosecutors, urging changes to the Young Offenders Act, is 
doing as much if not more than any other province in coming to 
grips with the rise in the percentage of crime that you identify 
— doing its job in guaranteeing safe communities. That’s what 
I was saying. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Some of the things that you mention, Mr. 
Premier, and things that you need to look at, I think are 
sometimes thrown out and they end up being put out as 
solutions but because there are . . . or the causes . . . and 
because there are very few solutions to those, governments like 
yours can sort of keep walking away and say well we haven’t 
solved it yet. When you talk, Mr. Premier, poverty being one of 
those. I’m not quite sure of your background but I’m sure that 
both of us grew up in what would be considered today’s terms 
fairly close to poverty. That didn’t turn either one of us into 
criminals. A lot of that is a matter of choice and I think we need 
to address some other things than just, as I said already earlier 
on, throwing some more money at it. 
 
We do have two districts, Mr. Premier, in this province where 
some of that crime seems to be peculiarly rampant, and one is 
your own jurisdiction of Riversdale, I believe. And I’m 
wondering what is happening in Saskatoon in your constituency 
which is one of the high-rate crime rates in Saskatchewan. 
What’s happening in your constituency? What is this 
government doing in your constituency to improve that 
situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — My government is doing for 
Riversdale what it’s doing for your constituency and for every 
other constituency. We are putting forward a series of 
programs, children’s action — I won’t repeat them again, but 
the ones I just gave you in the previous answer — more 
prosecutors, more police. The demographics change from 
region to region. In some areas it’s a little grave than in other 
areas. That is the nature of Saskatchewan; it’s always been thus. 
 
What are we doing about it? The very program I outlined for 
you earlier, we’ll continue to do that, not only for Riversdale, 
but we’ll continue for Rosthern. We’ll continue to do it Sturgis 
and for Preeceville, and anywhere that it’s needed in the 
province of Saskatchewan in order to guarantee safe 
communities. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Premier, I’m not sure that very 
many people in this province are very convinced that they’re 
going to sleep a whole better because of the programs that 
you’re putting into place. 

Over the past number of months I’ve asked members of Justice 
. . . questions of the Justice minister, and there’s always a very 
unique interaction that happens because as soon as he gets the 
question, the minister in charge of Social Services turns around 
and there’s some fast finger pointing. And almost in every case, 
the Minister of Social Services is the one that’s taken the Justice 
question. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Premier, that because we have those 
two bodies handling the same situation, we have a lack of 
continuity. We have people falling in the cracks. We have the 
kinds of situation develop that we had happen in North 
Battleford. That was a disastrous situation, Mr. Minister. 
 
And you just a minute or two ago on one of your answers 
seemed to say that you were doing all kinds of things, and there 
were some great initiatives that were out there. When that first 
problem originated in North Battleford . . . and it was a very sad 
situation. And we contacted your Justice minister if he would be 
interested in making sure we got to Ottawa in putting some 
pressure on. He wasn’t interested. 
 
And so it was another one of those situations, Mr. Premier, 
where your government had to be dragged, kicking and 
screaming, into a situation to do something. And now today you 
stand up and say you’re providing some leadership. Well I don’t 
think the leadership was there then, and we still are a little 
dubious about whether it’s there now. 
 
Has that government . . . has your government, Mr. Premier, 
really changed its position that drastically from not wanting to 
become involved and going to Ottawa and trying to do 
something significant with the Young Offenders Act to now, as 
you say, providing some leadership? I don’t think so, Mr. 
Premier. And I guess I’m going to ask specifically: what major 
changes to the Young Offenders Act is your government 
pushing for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
knows full well that back in April of this year the Minister of 
Justice of our government announced the establishment of the 
serious and habitual youth offender comprehensive action 
program, SHOCAP as we call it; $1.1 million over two years 
for P.A., Regina, and Saskatoon; dealing with chronic young 
offenders; maintaining comprehensive files on young offenders; 
conducting case planning and sharing information with respect 
to young offenders, and a whole series of other initiatives which 
were outlined therein. Those are programs which are announced 
and those are programs which are being implemented now. 
 
With respect to the question of the prosecutions, we believe that 
our position is a sensible one. Namely that for serious offences, 
the age should be lowered where the person can be possibly 
waived, the youngster can be possibly waived from juvenile 
court or at least out of the adult court . . . into adult court; the 
serious offences being murder, sexual assault, aggravated 
sexual assault, attempted murder; there may be one other as I 
recollect it. And we believe that that discretion should be given 
to the judges to toughen up the proposals and the options which 
were available to the judicial system to deal with young 
offenders. 
 
Now that may not conform to your position. I know it does not 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1937 

conform with some of the Conservative provinces’ positions. 
But we think this is where the moderate balance is between the 
posture that you say at the beginning but I don’t really think 
you really believe — namely, that 99.9 per cent of our kids are 
good kids. They study, they do their homework, they honour 
their parents. About their biggest sin is that they think that 
we’re old-fashioned — and they may be right about it. We’re 
dealing with a small group of people, and we’re trying not to 
overreact one way or the other but to deal with the issue in a 
sensible way. 
 
Plus in addition to toughening things up, prosecutors and the 
like having the whole range of social programs, that’s why the 
Minister of Social Services speaks to young offenders, because 
we’re trying to rehabilitate young boys and girls, young people, 
to still lead a productive life in our community. That’s the 
objective. 
 
And if they can’t be rehabilitated or they won’t be rehabilitated, 
then we have into place as best as Saskatchewan or any 
province can conduct, the proper disciplinary measures to get 
tough with criminals, and we intend to get tough with criminals 
in those circumstances. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Premier, you didn’t even come 
close to answering the specific question I asked, and that is 
what in the Young Offenders Act is your government working 
to get changed in Ottawa. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I did. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — No. When you go to Ottawa or you send your 
minister down there to make some changes, what changes are 
you telling Ottawa you want to see happen in the Young 
Offenders Act? 
 
Now you talked to the one about the age, and that’s all I heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well that’s exactly the primary one. 
That is what the Young Offenders Act is essentially about. The 
Young Offenders Act is the age; some argue that 18 is too high, 
it should be lowered to 16. Some argue that the nature of the 
gravity of the offences require the capacity of the judges to refer 
to adult court. 
 
We’re agreeing in a limited area of offences, the ones that I 
have identified. That’s exactly what the changes to the Young 
Offenders Act is all about. And that’s what our position has 
been and that’s what we’ve been advocating to Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It seems interesting if you now take the 
position you’ve been on a long term, is the impression you’re 
giving, advocating this to Ottawa, why in the middle of winter 
your Justice minister had his feet just mired in the clay right 
here in Saskatchewan and wasn’t going to work together with 
other parties to go ahead and put some extra pressure on there. 
It is very disappointing to the people across Saskatchewan that 
he happened to be as out of sight on that one as he was. And 
you earlier on read from a party brochure, so I guess I’ll do the 
same thing and ask for you to comment. 
 
Citizen neighbourhood patrols is one of the things that in this 
by-election the Saskatchewan Party is dealing with as far as 

safe neighbourhoods are concerned — citizen neighbourhood 
patrols. What is your position, the position of this government, 
on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well I’ve already given that answer at 
question period. I repeat it again. It is the obligation, as I see it, 
of every law-abiding citizen, when he or she sees an offence 
being committed or the probability of an offence being 
committed, to take their civic duty and to inform the appropriate 
law enforcement officials of this particular event that they’re 
actually witnessing and occasioning. On very, very, very rare 
occasions should citizens assume the job of being police 
officers since they’re not trained to be police officers, since they 
may be getting themselves into highly dangerous 
circumstances, and I think that it’s a position which is far too 
extreme. Accordingly, let’s be vigilant, let’s be 
community-minded, neighbourhood-minded, make sure the 
police are our partners. But let’s make sure that we leave the job 
of law enforcement with those who are trained and are best 
capable of doing it, namely the fine men and women who make 
up the police forces of Saskatchewan, RCMP and local. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The concern that you raise about people 
taking the law totally into their own hands, I think no one would 
deny that because probably the only ones that we trust with 
taking the law into our own hands are ourselves and no one else 
has full faith in that particularly. 
 
Manitoba has begun utilizing citizen patrols to help reduce 
crime. Has your government looked at that model and are you 
considering doing something like that, similar to it, or a version 
of it that you may feel suits our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well let me say that any idea which 
has merit, wherever it comes from and from whatever ideology, 
we’ll take a look at. So if the Manitoba idea has some merit I 
will certainly instruct the Minister of Justice to take a hard look 
at it. But I’m told that in Manitoba they’re only going to spend 
$4,647 on the program — $4,600 for this particular program. 
That’s not to diminish it. We’ll take a look at it, and if it can be 
made to work here, fair enough. But for the time being the 
general principle is the one that I articulated to the previous 
question which you asked me. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. We talked earlier 
on a bit about rehabilitation. I think we need to go back to that 
because, in the justice meetings that took place across 
Saskatchewan, in the time that I was ever allotted I always 
made that as one of my priorities. Because I think every time 
we can save a young person from becoming involved in crime, 
we’ve saved a life and we’ve saved ourselves as a province a 
whole lot of expense and hardship by not having another 
criminal in our area. 
 
However I think some of the things that Social Services is doing 
in the area of rehabilitation seem to be relatively 
counter-productive, and I would guess with your background 
you should be able to make some comment on this. 
 
When I go to some places in northern Saskatchewan and find 
out that certain camps have been rented and they bring in a 
group of young offenders to fish and swim for a week, I can 
probably underline that, Mr. Premier. I think just because 



1938 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

they’re young offenders doesn’t mean that they don’t need a 
time to get together, have a good time, and maybe do some 
bonding and those sorts of things. 
 
Except when I talked with people that were watching they said, 
well this wasn’t particularly happening. It was just told: get out 
there and swim or fish, and don’t bother us. At the end of that 
week, Mr. Premier, another group of Social Service types came 
along, picked up this group and went on a fly-in fishing trip. 
 
Mr. Premier, fly-in fishing trips, rehabilitation, your comment 
on that. I think that’s somewhat excessive. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know enough 
of the details of what the member says, and with the greatest of 
respect to the member, I do not think that he’s telling the full 
story. I’m not saying he’s doing it deliberately; I just don’t 
think he knows the full story. He’s representing this as some 
sort of a holiday for young offenders. If it is, I disagree. 
 
If it’s a rehabilitation program, in which case as part of 
rehabilitation there’s a question of recreation, there’s a question 
of discipline, there’s a question of corrections and all of this 
tied into the picture, then I think it’s quite acceptable. 
 
If the hon. member is talking about boot camps for kids, for 
children, if that’s what you’re talking about, well why don’t you 
just tell us that that’s where the Saskatchewan Party stands? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well right now we’re asking you to tell us 
where you stand, and I asked for your position on a fly-in 
fishing trip. And that was not made up and it didn’t come out of 
your Black newspapers. But you seem as if you don’t want to 
answer that. I can get you the information, and I will, and we’ll 
see if you’re going to take any steps on that at that particular 
point. That was in Saskatchewan, it was this last summer. 
 
It’s interesting that suddenly at this particular point, seeing as 
after the North Battleford incident, this government seems to be 
wanting to get tough on crime. And that’s a major, a major 
switch from what we’ve seen in the past. We’ve seen too many 
examples of young offenders committing crimes in custody and 
then the North Battleford one is one that shows up time and 
again. 
 
(2130) 
 
More recently you’re quite aware of the Camp Kenosee one, the 
one that has been . . . (inaudible) . . . as camp walk-away, and 
that was a disastrous situation. And I’m sure we were told that 
that was going to get tightened up. But surely, Mr. Premier, 
your people working in your departments must be able to look 
ahead of the situation somewhat and be able to be a bit more 
proactive in waiting till something comes to the House here and 
have a situation like that nicknamed camp walk-away because 
of all the things that are happening there. Then it gets tightened 
up because it comes through the House. 
 
It makes us wonder how many other things like that are going 
on just because we haven’t heard of them and been able to 
dump them on your doorstep. It’s unfortunate that we have to 
do that to keep things on an even keel. 
 

Mr. Premier, your government has shown absolutely no concern 
for public safety and that’s another component of this. 
Rehabilitation is one. We may come back to that a little later 
on, but public safety is another one. And I guess my question is: 
in view of what’s happened . . . Camp Kenosee is one of them 
and that’s a very recent one which you should have been able to 
correct, that after some of the situations that developed this 
winter, what can you tell the people of Saskatchewan about 
their safety concerns? 
 
And they are concerned about those. I attended four of those 
meetings. And I believe you had ministers at most of those and 
they can bring that back to you. People out there are concerned 
for their safety. Each one of us . . . well probably each one of us 
has had those things happen. Personally I’ve had my house 
broken into. I’ve had my car broken into. I’ve had farm 
buildings broken into. And I don’t think that my situations are 
any unusual from anyone else’s. 
 
What can you go ahead and say that will give the people of this 
province some comfort that they don’t have to lie awake in the 
middle of the night wondering if their property is going to be 
broken into, their cars stolen, or their tires slashed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well what can you recommend that 
we should adopt here? And don’t give me the business that you 
know I’m here to answer the questions. I’m here to answer the 
questions. I asked you about whether or not the Saskatchewan 
Party supports boot camps for youth. I think you do, just like 
you do private hospital care. And your refusal to answer tells 
me that you do support boot camps. 
 
Now if you think that is the answer for making people secure in 
their homes, get up and tell us right now. I think you’re in that 
camp. I think you’re in the boot camp’s approach for young 
people. 
 
Now look, no system that is devised even if you have a boot 
camp under your system — heaven forbid you should ever be in 
office to develop such a regiment that is constructed — isn’t 
fail-safe or fail-proof, is always open to some abuse, somebody 
escaping. You can set up the biggest fourscore, maximum 
security penitentiary in the world, and somebody finds a way to 
escape it. They find a way to get out of it. And then you bring it 
up in the legislature and say, how can people be safe and secure 
in their homes? Well of course we worry about that, but there is 
no perfection in the system at all. 
 
And all that we have said, the minister has said, and I repeat 
again on behalf of the government, if Kenosee is a problem, as 
it happens to have been a problem, we will do all that we can 
and take all the measures that we can to make sure that there is 
no repetition of it. 
 
Will there be a repetition? There may very well be. There is no 
full-proof system of protection, but there is in Saskatchewan as 
good a penitentiary, correctional system, other systems of 
guardianship, of the protection of the people in jeopardy or 
lacking security in their homes as there is in any other province. 
 
That’s our position. We think it’s a question of punishing those 
that need to be punished, and we’re going to do that. And we’re 
going to do it firmly as much as the provincial laws can permit 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1939 

us to do. We’re going to rehabilitate them because we think 
they’re young men and women who deserve a chance, a second 
chance if that’s possible, as much as we can within provincial 
jurisdiction. That’s our approach. 
 
Is yours boot camps? Tell us, yes or no. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, sir, as you know, we can go ahead and 
define boot camps in dozens of different ways. If we think that 
certain crimes and certain misdemeanours after certain numbers 
of occurrences have certain kinds of consequences, and you can 
call them what you wish, so be it. 
 
Your answer is to say that a refusal means agreement. Well, Mr. 
Premier, if we look at the answers you’ve been giving us so far 
throughout this last session and any time you refuse to answer, 
at any time you refuse to answer that means you’re in 
agreement, we could have a very interesting time of it going 
through Hansard to see what you all had to say and what you 
all believe because you refused to answer. So there’s a whole 
long list in Hansard of those sorts of things, and I would 
suggest that you probably better not go there. 
 
But as far as the security’s concerned, we have a break-in 
capital in Canada in one of our cities. And what are we doing 
about that? I haven’t heard you go to the Prime Minister and tell 
him that you want some major changes. You’re prepared to 
come to this House and rant and rave and make all kinds of 
noise. I think this province would be well served if they once in 
a while saw you get that enthusiastic with the Prime Minister on 
a few issues and a number of issues. 
 
He was in town here last week — or this week, earlier on — 
Mr. Premier. Nobody heard you ranting and raving with the 
Prime Minister about what’s happening with agriculture. And 
you didn’t get anything. And we’re not surprised. No one heard 
you rant and rave with the Prime Minister about highways. And 
you didn’t get anything. And no one’s surprised. And we didn’t 
hear you rant and rave about health with the Prime Minister. 
And we didn’t get anything. And we’re not surprised. And we 
didn’t hear you rant and rave about justice and the Young 
Offenders Act. And you didn’t get anything. And we’re not 
surprised. 
 
You’re not getting anything, Mr. Premier, because the only time 
that you make a whole lot of noise is when you’re in this 
House. That’s the place you ought to be making some noise. 
You have no problem telling the Liberals here to write their 
letters, and maybe they should. 
 
But what are you doing? You’re the top elected person in this 
province. What is it that Mr. Chrétien has that he’s offering you 
that keeps you so quiet? The people of this province, Mr. 
Premier, want you to step up to the batter’s box and go ahead 
and hit a home run for this province for a change and get 
something on any one of those areas. 
 
Justice should have been the easiest one. But your minister 
wouldn’t even go as far as Ottawa with the rest of the parties to 
go ahead and try and accomplish something. 
 
When are you going to go ahead and speak up for this province 
with the Prime Minister, as you had the opportunity when he 

was here in Saskatchewan, on your turf and demand something? 
When are you going to do that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well I tell you, I’m not going to do it 
the way you tell me to do it. No, no way. I’ll leave the ranting 
and raving to you folks. I don’t deal business with prime 
ministers or premiers by ranting and raving. I leave that to the 
Saskatchewan Party. You people are the experts at ranting and 
raving. And in the end result, zero from Saskatchewan from 
your approach. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Premier, that’s interesting because 
you have managed to get absolutely nothing. You’ve got zero 
from the feds. You keep coming here and telling us they don’t 
give us anything. We’re quite aware of that. And you’re not 
getting anything. I thought you should be doing some of that. 
 
Like, what exactly is the Prime Minister offering you? Mr. 
Captain Canada or something? Another constitutional thing 
across the country, when you decide to retire from this job after 
three or four decades? Surely we deserve to be able to get 
something. And you’re the person that we need to send. You’re 
the person that we look up to to go ahead and do that. 
 
All party politics aside, it’s the Premier that’s looked to, from 
everyone in the province, to go to the federal government and 
get some of that. And when you go there and negotiate, 
everyone in this province is cheering for you, hoping that you 
will be able to get something. But as we just went through that 
litany of things that we need over here, none of it has come 
back. I guess what we’re looking at is, what are you actually 
doing? 
 
We agree that we must work harder to prevent crime, to keep 
young offenders out of trouble before they get there. But we 
think there’s some other solutions that may be out there. 
 
For example, for example . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Boot camps. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Now listen, Mr. Premier, here is an example, 
here is an example. You want boot camps, you build them. 
 
But here is a different example for you to do some work with. 
In conversations with workers at the Prince Albert Emergency 
Shelter for Women, I’m told that although they used to receive 
money for child counselling from Social Services. That funding 
is no longer there. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, let’s talk about prevention. It’s the ultimate 
solution to crime. We can talk about rehabilitation for the 
people who have committed a crime not to do it again. We can 
talk about security with more police, more lock-ups, more 
fences, and all those sorts of things. We can talk about 
punishment, the consequences, and those probably all play a 
part. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, what better way to show youngsters that 
violence is wrong, to stop the cycle of abuse, than to talk to 
them in their periods of crisis, when they flee with their mothers 
for shelter because there has been abuse in their homes? So 
when we talk about preventing youth crime, there’s probably a 



1940 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

good place to start. 
 
However, as I said earlier on in the beginning of my question, 
they used to receive money for child counselling from Social 
Services. That funding is no longer there. Mr. Premier, why 
don’t you make a commitment to return that funding so that 
these children in their early experience with violence can get 
that counselling, and we may have the example for the best 
prevention that we can think of, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I’ll take this up with the Minister of 
Social Services and report back at some time in the House — 
Monday or Tuesday of next week. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — There was a question asked, Mr. Premier, 
earlier on by one of the independents on child prostitution. It’s a 
serious problem. I don’t think there’s a person . . . well very few 
people in this province that wouldn’t like to see that dealt with 
totally. And in that discussion that you had, the discussion got 
fairly heated, Mr. Premier, and I would like to probably give 
you, at this time in a calmer moment, an opportunity to say 
what you’re planning on doing for making the streets safer for 
Saskatchewan children, particularly with that component in 
mind. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have given this 
answer, if the hon. member had been in his chair, at length. 
Now if estimates require me to repeat the answer again because 
he wasn’t in his chair . . . maybe he was watching a movie as he 
was last night somewhere. I don’t know what it is. I’m not 
going to do it. It’s in this transcript of the House, and you know 
exactly what the answer was. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well I don’t know what movie you’ve been 
watching. We’ve sent you over a few in the past while that you 
probably haven’t watched. I can verify for you, I wasn’t 
watching any movie, but you’ve sure been seeing some things. 
I’m not sure what you’ve been into to see all those things, but 
probably wasn’t a movie. 
 
Question, Mr. Premier. In Manitoba they have an anti-john 
legislation, and that’s a part that hasn’t been discussed here 
today, with the way they use the concept of confiscating the 
cars for anyone that’s found soliciting a prostitute. So that’s 
something that has not been discussed here today. 
 
And I’m asking you if you have that plan in place or, Mr. 
Premier, something else that’s fairly . . . And I think in this 
time, Mr. Premier, this province would be ready for you to take 
some very strong steps on this issue. I don’t think anyone would 
fault you, Mr. Premier, for doing something that has a lot of 
clout and is very tough in this particular area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, here we go 
again. This has been asked of the Minister of Justice many 
times, and I’ll repeat the position. We’re monitoring the 
Manitoba proposal with interest, as I said earlier. If it works 
we’ll take a look at seeing implementing it here. We want to see 
particularly whether the proposed legislation will withstand a 
constitutional challenge. If Manitoba is successful, we’ll 
definitely take a look at the question of seizing cars of 
perpetrators. 
 

Right now let’s examine that case carefully before making a 
final decision, and that’s our point of view. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Premier, I thought this 
was a time where we would get your particular perspective on it 
which as leader of the party should have probably more clout 
than the other things we’ve been hearing. And comments such 
as we’re monitoring and we’re looking into it, at some point it 
would have been nice to say we have looked into it. We have 
monitored it, and here’s where we’re going. 
 
But so far we’re into monitoring, and we’re into looking at 
things, but I’m not sure what the movies over there that people 
are watching, but they can’t be whodunit movies because not 
much is being done. 
 
It’s a well-known fact now, Mr. Premier, that Saskatchewan 
pays the highest taxes of nearly everyone as far as 
Saskatchewan is concerned. We pay the highest percentage, Mr. 
Premier, of our incomes to the taxman of anyone in the country. 
 
In fact we know you’ve tried to cover this up in different sorts 
of ways. In your budget documents you state that our taxes are 
in the middle of the pack. Well that’s really rather interesting 
how you managed to all of a sudden decide that you’re in the 
middle of the pack. 
 
(2145) 
 
I guess you included the cost of rent and mortgage in that as 
well. Of course, our rents and mortgages are lower here. That’s 
because you’ve chased everyone in the last 40 years of 
NDP-CCF rule out of the province. So obviously when there 
aren’t enough people to fill all the houses the rent’s going to go 
down. Anyone can figure that one out and so can you. 
 
Last year we saw a 2 per cent reduction in the PST which, by 
the way, Mr. Premier, as you’re aware, I voted for because we 
believe in free votes. You maybe don’t at this particular point. 
You saw a 2 per cent reduction in the PST which took the rate 
back to where it was in 1991 when you assumed power. This 
year we see a 2 percentage point decrease in the income tax, a 
saving that amounts to — and you’ve gone through this — 
about half a cup of coffee. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you commit tonight to put before the people 
of this province a detailed plan that’s broad-based tax reduction 
that will help grow our economy and keep our people at home? 
 
If you look around and you talk to the people on your side of 
the House, and I’m sure it’s no different than on this side, you’ll 
find that most people here that have children who have left 
home, most of those are out of the province. 
 
I’m positive that over 50 per cent of all the kids of the MLAs 
are out of province. Two-thirds of mine are. They’d probably 
like to come back. They didn’t want to leave but they had to 
when they found good jobs elsewhere. I would like them at 
home. I think everyone else would like them at home. 
 
What do you have in mind to set up that broad-based tax and 
make sure that our economy grows? It hasn’t been growing 
because then our population should be at a million and a 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1941 

quarter, a million and a half, a million and three-quarters. But 
it’s not there. What are your plans, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I honestly don’t know 
whether the member knows what city we’re in or what province 
we’re in when he makes a question and a comment like that. 
 
We . . . having dug out from under a mountain of debt by you 
Conservatives — a mountain of debt which put this province on 
the verge of bankruptcy . . . How shameful it was when your 
party — right there, the ones that you represent — were 
spending a billion dollars a year more than you were bringing in 
in revenues. Let the good times roll, your people said. We’re 
not here for a long time, we’re here for a good time, is what 
your people said. 
 
And now we pay $800 million to interest payments that go all 
the way to New York and to Hong Kong and to Zurich still, 
even though we’ve eliminated the deficit and reduced the debt. 
Thanks to all of this, you put the people of Saskatchewan 
behind the biggest eight ball that we’ve ever had since the Dirty 
Thirties and the last time the Conservatives were in office. 
 
And finally we’re out of this. And now we reduced the PST by 
2 points and we have the narrowest base of items which are 
taxed by the PST in Canada with the exception of Alberta 
which has no PST. We have an income tax rate which has been 
reduced by 2 per cent on the income tax — Alberta only did it 
1.5 per cent this year, Manitoba did it 2 per cent. We’ve given 
all kinds of tax breaks to small businesses and businesses to 
keep the climate of growth going, whether it’s the 
manufacturing and processing tax, the whole number of other 
taxes. 
 
Where in the world have you been, man? These have all come 
from this legislature. They’ve all been voted on. These are all 
tax reductions which we make, and they’re sustainable, and 
we’re committed to continuing on in that area. And you have 
the audacity of getting up and saying, what’s your game plan? 
 
I’ll tell you what the game plan is: with every surplus dollar, 
one-third continues to pay down the debt, one-third continues to 
have tax reduction, and one-third of that surplus dollar, roughly 
speaking, goes to programs for people, whether it’s your young 
offenders’ issues, or whether it’s health care, or whether it’s 
education. That is our game plan. 
 
And you know why we’re going to get re-elected? Because 
what we’ve told the people of Saskatchewan we would do, 
we’ve done — we’ve done. Unlike you we didn’t bankrupt. We 
pulled, with their help, the province of Saskatchewan right up 
into a place where there is hope and opportunity; where there is 
growth; where there is no more out-migration. We’re going to 
do more. Do we need to do more? Yes, we do need to do more. 
 
But where we took this province from 1991 to 1996, according 
to Maclean's magazine, is a blue ribbon example — not my 
words, Maclean's magazine — a blue-ribbon example for every 
province. You won’t accept that; in a million years you won’t 
accept it because what you want to do is you want to take over 
the treasury benches, and like the Bourbons, you remember 
nothing and you learn nothing, and if you ever should gain the 
treasury benches, let the good times roll again. Let the GigaText 

go, let the High R Doors go, let’s go with the Supercart 
spectacles, let’s go with every cockamamie scheme of every 
fly-by-night promoter that ever came around the province and 
saw a living Tory — that’s what you’ll do. 
 
Well I’ll tell you where we’re going. We’re going where the 
people of Saskatchewan want us to go. Continue on debt 
reduction; continue on tax reduction; continue on program 
enhancement in the right areas. That’s why we were re-elected 
in 1995. That’s our policy, building for the 21st century. And 
believe me you will not be in politics long enough ever again to 
have the chance to open up the coffers to every fly-by-night 
artist that comes by and skins you people as they did between 
1982 and 1991, I guarantee it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Talk about fly-by-night artist. Somebody 
comes up from Guyana and takes a shirt right off your back. 
Just a bunch of bare backs over there. They come out and they 
clean you out. You didn’t know what you were doing. Along 
comes some outfit from Alberta and rips you people off. 
 
NST comes along, and you say, well we had to move out of the 
States because it rained while we were trenching. Well heaven 
forbid that it rains when we trench. And you talk about knowing 
what you’re doing, talking about calling us Bourbons. I suggest 
they ought to call you Schultz over there. You see very little, 
and you know very little. You remember the old series. That’s 
what ought to happen over there. 
 
Talk about debt. You know where it started. You know the 
numbers you put up. Remember 7-7-7. Thank goodness you 
weren’t around. Thank goodness you weren’t in power. You did 
have four decades in this province. You took over as CCF 
people when Alberta went in a different direction, and our 
population hasn’t grown since then, and you know it. Four 
decades of your government and it hasn’t gone anywheres. 
 
Everywhere else in Canada has new growth unless you talk 
about the Maritimes, and that’s a different situation altogether. 
But there’s Alberta, moved in a different direction. We had 
potash. We have uranium. We have the best grain. We have the 
best universities, turned out the best students. And where has 
four decades of your government got us? You know where it’s 
got us. 
 
You talked about out-migration in your answer, Mr. Premier. 
Out-migration still at 1,700 people. When is it going to start to 
grow? What are you doing about it? What are your plans for? 
Next time we ask the question you’ll be down another 1,700 
people and another one. It must be your new program; 7-7-7 
didn’t work, so you go on down . . . was it going to be 1-7-0-0, 
drop that many people from this province on a regular basis. 
 
Mr. Premier, you don’t have a plan for this province, and if you 
do I sure hope you don’t tell it because it might be a whole lot 
worse than what you’re doing right now. 
 
Last year as I said we saw that out-migration of 1,700 people 
and talking about out-migration was your idea. This was at a 
time when the economy was relatively strong. You boasted last 
year how good this economy was, and people were still leaving. 



1942 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

This year oil prices have dropped. Agriculture is scary. You 
have a few agricultural people in your area on your side of the 
House. Talk to the member from Redberry. He’ll tell you what 
it looks like. He’ll tell you how tough it is. He puts his thumbs 
up now. But I’m sure when he gets back home and the people 
ask him how’s farming, I’m sure he doesn’t put his thumb up 
there and say it’s going good. He knows it’s not going good. 
It’s going tough. 
 
If we lose people when the province is doing that well, Mr. 
Premier, what’s going to happen if the group that was up there 
can’t get us the rain or the oil prices don’t go back up? We’re 
already losing people. The economy isn’t going to be better 
than last year. What are you going to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I will tell you what 
I’m not going to do. I’m not going to follow the fiscal policies 
of the PC (Progressive Conservative) Party, that’s for sure. I’m 
going to read to you what the Investment Dealers of Canada 
said just a few days ago. 
 

Saskatchewan has the distinction of being one of the first 
provinces to get its fiscal house in order this decade. A 
budget surplus last year extended the government’s string 
of black ink to four consecutive years, a record matched 
only by Alberta. 

 
Continuing: 
 

An important benefit of the government’s strengthened 
financial position is the continuing decline in annual debt 
(your debt, debt service payments). These fall for the 
fourth straight year to 725 million (still, thanks to you folks 
over there). Debt service costs represent nearly 14 per cent 
of revenues. 

 
Thanks to you PC people over there. And what do the 
investment dealers say? 
 

The Saskatchewan government is to be commended in its 
efforts to reduce outstanding debt. Tax-supported debt 
reached 11.5 billion but was trimmed by 2.3 billion. 

 
We trimmed it, not you people. And what do they say about the 
economy? 
 

The marked strengthening in Saskatchewan’s fiscal 
finances did not go unnoticed. In 1997 Standard and Poor’s 
raised Saskatchewan’s rating for senior, unsecured debt 
from A minus to A. DBRS upgraded the province to A low 
from BBB. These upgrades were in recognition of the 
sharp reduction in government debt, the commitment to 
reducing the overall debt, the basically sound economic 
outlook for the province’s economy. 

 
That’s what the investment dealers say. Not you, sir, but the 
Investment Dealers of Canada say — Canada-wide if not 
worldwide. 
 
What are we going to do? We’re going to do what we have been 
doing because the Buddhists have a proverb: when you’re on 
the right track and the right road, you just keep on going. And 
that’s what the people of Saskatchewan know, that we’re on the 

right track, we’re on the right road and going to keep on going, 
building Saskatchewan for the 21st century, providing hope and 
opportunity and optimism. And we’re never going to go back to 
the days where you brought this province to its knees — never. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Premier, you’re getting your 
back-benchers fired up but you’re not doing much for the rest of 
Saskatchewan. You speak of the 21st century. You will not be 
in government in the 21st century. You know what the polls 
show. You’re at 42. We’re six points behind you and you know 
it. And you know it. And the people of Saskatchewan know it. 
Trot out your figures; trot out your figures. You come to rural 
Saskatchewan. You come to my constituency and you try and 
find a red. You try and find an NDP in my constituency. 
They’re running. They’re running for the hills and you know it. 
They don’t want to be seen; they don’t want to be seen. Last 
time we had two red signs in the whole constituency. Now 
they’re not around. So don’t plan on the 21st century because 
you won’t be there. You won’t be there. There’s one other thing 
that . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Osika: — To introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And 
thank you to the members of the legislature. I’d just like to 
introduce a couple of acquaintances from Moose Jaw that are 
here in the gallery this evening — this late evening. Mr. John 
Morris and Heather Wild, both from Moose Jaw, to watch us in 
operation here today. I’d like you to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Chair, I was 
wondering, after six hours, if the loyal Liberal opposition might 
have a chance . . . 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. What is your point 
of order? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Chair, I raise on a point of order the 
fact that this group have been up for six or seven hours with 
their blathering on and it seems like we have not the ability . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order! The point of order 
is not well taken. 
 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1943 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess if the 
Liberals weren’t in third place, which is last place, they might 
have an opportunity to say something. If they were here once in 
a while, they’d have their chances as well. But I guess they 
show up once in a while and want to say something . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order! Now 
the hon. member knows that you are not to refer to the presence 
or the absence of anyone from the House and I would bring that 
to the member. Order! Order! 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I would like, Mr. Chairman, to read a little 
part from Hansard for you and then we’ll have a question for 
the Premier coming out of that. It’s a question that was asked by 
Mr. D’Autremont and it goes as follows, dealing with the 
Public Service Commission. It says: 
 

Thank you, Mr. Minister. (Mr. D’Autremont says.) Can 
you guarantee there is no partisan activity taking place 
within the Public Service Commission? 
 

And then the hon. Mr. Calvert answers and this is his answer 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Now the member knows that he 
cannot use the proper names of the members sitting in the 
Legislative Assembly. He must refer to them by their 
constituents or their ministry. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. The answer then by the Minister 
of Social Services is as follows. He says: 
 

Yes I can. I want to repeat though that I’m sure that within 
the Government of Saskatchewan, you will find employed 
people who support the political party of the current 
government. You will find people who support the party to 
which the member belongs, and you will find people who 
support the Liberal Party, and there may be someone in the 
province who supports the Green Party. 
 

So basically, Mr. Calvert is making all kinds of comments . . . 
sorry, Minister of Social Services is making comments about 
different kinds of political parties and as that answer says, the 
Public Service Commission is supposed to be non-partisan. 
 
However, at a meeting in late May with PSC and that was for 
50 to 60 people, Brian Topp made a presentation stating that the 
opposition was getting legal advice in return for future services 
and consideration. And I guess, Mr. Premier, I would like for 
you to comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I have no comment to make. I have 
answers to give to questions which are directed to me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — That same gentleman, Mr. Premier, went on 
to say that all we did was run around the province and create 
trouble. This is supposed to be non-partisan, Mr. Premier, 
non-partisan. That’s not non-partisan. Would you answer that 
please. 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I don’t have the faintest clue what the 
hon. member is talking about, and frankly you don’t either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It was from management orientation for 
Public Service Commission. You should know about that 
because I think he works fairly close to you. Do you consider 
that acceptable behaviour, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, it must be . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I don’t know. Does this man know 
what he’s talking about? What is your concern? State it simply, 
just get up in a simple English sentence, spit it out, and tell us. 
Ask me a question; I’ll try to give you an answer as best I can. 
Okay. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I start off with the response that was given by 
the Minister of Social Services, so if you want it clear, this 
comes from your side of the House. And he says: 
 

Yes I can. I want to repeat though that I’m sure within the 
Government of Saskatchewan you’ll find employed people 
who support the political party of the current government. 
You will find people who support the party to which the 
member belongs. You will find people who support the 
Liberal Party, maybe someone in the province who 
supports the Green Party. 

 
The question is, the question is. . . and that is an answer to this 
question. That’s an answer to this question: 
 

Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you guarantee there is no 
partisan activity taking place within the Public Service 
Commission? 
 

And the answer was, yes he can; he says he guarantees it. 
 
And here we have, on this meeting in May, at the meeting I just 
explained to you, the 40 to 50 people — it’s an orientation 
meeting for the PSC, Public Service Commission. He says that 
all the Saskatchewan Party is doing is running around creating 
trouble. I thought he was supposed to be non-partisan. Is that 
non-partisan, Mr. Premier? Now you know the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Who says? You say he says. I’m 
sorry, that’s not good enough. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Premier, I guess we should have 
filled the galleries with the 40 to 60 people that were there. 
Would that have been good enough? Do we have to bring in a 
mob to have to force you to do something? Do we have to bring 
in a mob to get you to listen? 
 
An Hon. Member: — The blond-haired guy was there . . . 
(inaudible) . . . was there. Your official was there. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Ask him. Just lean over and ask him. Right 
there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You don’t worry about me. I’ll ask who 
I want to ask. 
 



1944 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

Mr. Heppner: — Everybody in the province worries about 
you. Everyone in the province worries about you, and I’ll ask 
you what I feel like asking you, and if you want to know how to 
get the answer, you will go ahead, and you can ask him. He 
knows, sitting right behind you, Mr. Premier. Turn around; he 
was at the meeting. You want to know the answer, you turn 
around and ask the gentleman behind you. If you want to know 
the answer, go ahead and do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, wow! Mr. Chairman, 
am I glad those people aren’t arrogant! But I must say, he’s not 
arrogant, but he is a little bit scary, quite a bit scary. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I would suggest to you, Mr. Premier, because 
you seem to know nothing, and I guess that idea of Schultz is 
kicking in very well. You turn around and ask Mr. Nicol, and he 
will tell you, and then you can answer this question 
intelligently. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I don’t know, what did you say? Say 
it again. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — If you turn around and ask Mr. Nicol behind 
you, he was at the meeting, he will explain this to you, because 
you wanted to hear it from someone else than me that that 
occurred. So you check with him. He can tell you; he was there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — No, no, no, no sir. Doesn’t work that 
way. You have a statement to make or an accusation to make, 
you give me your source. If it’s you, I don’t believe anything 
you say nor are you going to intimidate me. It doesn’t work that 
way. And don’t tell me who I have to ask for my information. 
 
You get up and make your accusation. I’ll make a response to 
it. You being a Tory the way you are, you are simply making 
this by way of intimidation, the way you always do. Just like 
your leader calls the public service full of deadwood and 
skunks; do you know where they are and where they’re going to 
be weeded out? That’s your line. That’s how it works. You get 
up and make the accusations. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, sir, here’s the accusation. You want it. 
Brian Topp, involved with that meeting that I’ve told you about 
three times if you would have cared to listen, was involved in 
partisan activities after the Minister of Social Services said that 
he could ensure that didn’t happen. Now you wouldn’t take it 
from me the first time, now you asked it from me. You’ve got 
it. So now what are you going to do about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I repeat again, you say, he says. I’m 
sorry, it’s not good enough for me. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — That’s what I tried to solve for you, Mr. 
Premier. If you want to talk to someone else who was there, if 
you want to talk to someone else who was there you can turn 
around and talk to Mr. Nicol sitting right behind you. So either 
you take my word or, other than that, we have to assume that 
you want to remain ignorant on the issue. Which is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You know what I hear, Mr. 
Chairman? I hear that you, the member from Rosthern, when 
you got together with the Liberals, met with those who are in 
charge of the $1.2 billion PC metro fund, or $2.1 billion metro 

fund. Now that’s what I hear is the case. And there has been 
payment from that metro fund to the PC Party as it’s now 
defunct, and also payment to the Saskatchewan Party as it’s 
there. Is that right or wrong? That’s what I hear. Is that right or 
wrong? 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order! Order. Order! I would remind the 
participants in the debate that they should start addressing their 
comments through the Chair. The back/forth is not permissible, 
so your comments from both sides should go through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Chair, the 
Premier obviously doesn’t want to know what went on there. 
He doesn’t even want to ask his own people that are sitting 
behind him what went on there. And so I guess the situation that 
exists will have to be explored by other people, and other 
people will have to draw the conclusion that the Premier 
doesn’t want to answer to it. As he said earlier on this evening, 
that a refusal is probably an admission. Those were your words 
about half an hour ago. 
 
Continuing with the questions that we had on taxation and 
what’s happening in this province, we were dealing, Mr. 
Premier, with the out-migration and we’re going to continue on 
that for a little longer. For the last year, we’ve seen your 
government trotting out job figures as clear vindication of your 
economic development, and your Minister of Economic 
Development has done a great job of giving us no end of job 
figures on that. 
 
In that case however, how can you explain why more than 
1,700 people left the province than came in if we’ve had those 
fantastic job opportunities that your minister has told us about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You see, Mr. Chairman, the answer to 
that question I can put very, very simply because here’s what 
happened under the Devine administration, the administration 
you supported and still support and you still defend. 
 
The out-migration in last four years — the out-migration in the 
last four years of the PC Devine administration was over 60,000 
Saskatchewan people . . . 60,000. You know where we’re 
coming back? We’re getting those 60,000 back, and we’re not 
quite right there where it’s equal off, 60,000 out and 60,000 
back. You know what? We’re short by your 2,000. Son of a 
gun, that’s a real missing of the target. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, we get back 60,000 from people that you 
drove out of the province. That’s a success story. You should be 
congratulating us, not condemning us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is truly amazing. 
There stands a Premier, and he gets up, and he wants a 
compliment because we’re losing people. Seventeen hundred 
people more moved out than came in, and he wants a 
compliment, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Isn’t this truly amazing. I would hate to see what would happen 
if this Premier thought he was a failure, but then maybe the rest 
of the people of Saskatchewan would take care of that for us in 
the next election. Because, as I said earlier on, the next century 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1945 

will not see this person as Premier, Mr. Chairman. That may be 
by his own choice, we suspect that very definitely. He’s seen 
those figures I quoted earlier on about how well his party is 
doing. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I suggest very strongly he’s going to make 
his exodus very quickly and hope for Mr. Chrétien, who was 
here and received such a warm welcome after delivering 
absolutely nothing, to get a nice position to play some other 
game out there in the rest of Canada. Maybe he can save us 
from who knows what. Maybe he can save us from Alexa. 
There must be things he can save us from. There are no more 
fire-breathing dragons around, but I’m sure he’ll create one. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, my point here is that in good times we lost 
people. That was last year. What are you going to do to ensure 
when the economy changes. And it always does; you said 
earlier on yourself, Mr. Premier, that things kind of move up 
and down, and they do that. 
 
What are you going to do to ensure when things get a little on 
the down side we don’t lose droves of people? You’re losing 
them in good times. You say they’re good times — and we’re 
losing people. 
 
When times get tough . . . And they look like they’re getting 
that way. Check with your farm community. I gave you a few 
people on your side of the House that understand farming. What 
are you going to do then? Or are you going to make sure that 
what’s happened here since the CCF-NDP took on to keep us 
under a million is going to be there? Is that part of your policy? 
Are those some of the good points that you talked about earlier 
on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Did you say under a hundred million? 
I’m either mishearing things or the hon. member is misspeaking 
himself. 
 
But I can tell you this. The policy of this government remains as 
I described. We have growth. I’ve given you all the quotations, 
all the citations from external people. You won’t buy it. You’re 
on your policy of rant and rave that you advocate I should 
adopt. Continue to it; enjoy yourself for as long as you want. 
 
Our policy is clear; the budget is there. I’ve given this answer 
10 times tonight if I’ve given it once. I don’t intend to give it to 
you one more time. So it’s up to you if you want to ask it again. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well it’s the Premier’s estimates, and I guess 
we have to make an estimate on, Mr. Chairman, on his answers. 
And we will do that and the people out there who have been 
watching will probably do the same sort of thing. 
 
Regarding your view of economic development, we’ve 
discussed a little bit about job creation and those sorts of things. 
We’ve discussed the people that have moved out of the 
province. And I guess the question is, in your view of economic 
development, which one do you pick, Mr. Premier? Or you can 
go part way in between if you wish. The door is yours. Direct 
government involvement or instead creating an environment 
where business wants to locate? 
 
Those are two different things. Do you want direct government 

involvement or are you in favour of creating an environment 
where business comes in? Now you’re into Crown investments 
and those sorts of things, which were great in the early days of 
the CCF, Mr. Premier. Have you changed? Are you still in 
favour of all Crowns getting involved and doing all sorts of 
things or are you more in favour of just creating an atmosphere 
where business can flourish without your involvement? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, does the hon. member 
mean when he asks me do I favour about the government doing 
all things, like Mr. Devine did through Fair Share and started to 
say to the government, you shall get this, you should get that? 
Does he mean by his example that I should be doing like Mr. 
Devine advocated we should be doing? 
 
I remember his argument was there’s going to be a factory in 
every town and village in the province of Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And your candidate, the member 
from Saltcoats, he was there. A factory in every town . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the answer is no, I don’t 
support that whatsoever, don’t support that whatsoever. You 
support that. You people live way back in the old dinosaur age. 
That will be your economic policy. 
 
Our economic policy will be the one that has given us upgrades, 
the one that provides jobs, which has given people coming a 
hope, a chance to come back to Saskatchewan. We have got an 
economy and a climate for economic growth which, in the 
words of Maclean’s, is a blue ribbon model for all of the people 
of Saskatchewan. Not your dinosaur days — those days are 
gone by. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well as you say, Mr. Premier, your ideas 
aren’t working. People are moving out of the province and you 
can know that that happens. So we can wave our arms just as 
well as you can. And I guess that comes from being the Premier 
of Saskatchewan who waves good-bye to people of 
Saskatchewan as they move out of the province. 
 
Dealing on with that same line of questioning, Mr. Premier. So 
is it your preference for the government to get directly involved 
in the economy like you did with SPUDCO? Do you want a 
specific example, Mr. Premier? Like you did with SPUDCO, a 
Crown corporation dedicated to potatoes. That’s an example — 
you can deal with that one. 
 
Could you not have done more to encourage the private sector 
to increase this industry instead of competing with them as 
you’re doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, I didn’t hear 
what the hon. member said. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — No problem, Mr. Chairman, I’ve had to 
repeat many questions today. I know the time’s getting on and 
the Premier’s probably getting weary — both of this question 
period, as he is of being Premier as well. 
 
So specifically, this has a specific component to it, Mr. Premier: 
is it your preference for the government to get directly involved 
in the economy — which comes out of the last question, and 



1946 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

here’s the example — like you did with SPUDCO, a Crown 
corporation dedicated to potatoes? And that’s an example, or is 
that just one example? 
 
Could you not have done more to encourage the private sector 
to increase this industry instead of now becoming a competitor 
with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well now, again, I have to be clear. Is 
the hon. member asking whether or not I follow the Tory policy 
of direct intervention in the economy during the Devine 
administration? You know, $320 million of your taxpayers in 
Bi-provincial in Lloydminster. Are you advocating that kind of 
direct government intervention? 
 
Are you advocating $250 million plus direct intervention into 
the economy into the upgrader here in Regina? Is that the kind 
of Tory thing you’re advocating that Mr. Devine did? 
 
Are you advocating that we should pump in another $300 
million plus on top of all of it to the Saferco project at Belle 
Plaine? That kind of direct investment in the economy? 
 
Do you think I should follow the Devine PC approach of 
pumping in $450 million in insurance companies and operating 
insurance companies? Obviously you believe that government 
should be in insurance companies. You believe in that. 
 
Do you believe that we should do the same thing with Millar 
Western, your investments? Is that what you’re asking me — do 
I support your approach to economic development which is the 
way you practised it during the 1980s? Fingers into everything 
and everybody around who came around with any kind of an 
idea on the back of an envelope, you signed up the deal. 
 
You did that. You signed up the deal and you left the province 
of Saskatchewan $14 billion in the hole. And you’re advocating 
that today in 1998? Bring on that election. Bring on that 
election. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The election will be brought on its own if 
you’ve got the courage to be around. Next century you won’t be 
around, Mr. Premier, for one reason or another, and you know 
it. Because you know how easy it is to get you out of your seat; 
it’s been done before. And the same sort of people are waiting 
there for you again. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I’d remind the member again that 
he is directing his comments straight across without going 
through the Chair. And the comments will be passed through 
the Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We will both try to 
get our comments through you, I hope. 
 
So as we said, those 21st century will not see you anywhere. 
And I would suggest, Mr. Premier, that in your answers you 
deal with your government, you seem to have this . . . just like a 
bicyclist who’s got that one little mirror off the side, you keep 
looking in there. You can’t deal with your own government. 
 
Why don’t you answer what you’re doing? Why don’t you 
answer what you’re doing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Of 

which you people left most of it there the last time you were out 
and you know it, you know it. 
 
Unfunded liability, who started that? That was a CCF-NDP and 
you know it. Why not take some credit for that. Okay. 
 
Dealing with Channel Lakes, with Channel Lakes. The member 
over there from Biggar is wondering what the question is about; 
he should listen. If Channel Lakes has taught us anything it’s 
probably that government is best not involved in business 
because it didn’t turn out that great. 
 
Why not rather encourage private industry in Saskatchewan for 
a change, and why does the government have its fingers in 
everything it seems to. I mean, we just mention the SPUDCO 
and we mentioned a few other things. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — So now you’ve learned, you say. 
GigaText, $3.5 million lost; Supercart International, $8 million 
lost; Joytec, 5.2 lost; High R Doors, a million dollars lost; 
Austrak Machinery Corporation, 700,000 lost; Nardei 
Fabricators, 600,000 lost. 
 
By the way, did we mention the — what was that big jet 
airplane they were thinking about? The Squalus — the Squalus 
from Promavia, 5 million, gone just like that. 
 
This is from you people. You tell us about accounting; you 
don’t even know the first thing about accounting. Please, please 
tell it to somebody who believes you and in Saskatchewan 
that’s nobody. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Premier, you seem to have this 
fixation about history. You don’t want to answer about what 
you’re doing; you don’t want to answer about your 
government’s doing, you don’t want to answer what the plans 
are. 
 
But here is something that came out of what you’ve said earlier 
on today, I believe. You said that you had asked some of your 
ministers to resign. Well you should be able to handle this one, 
Mr. Premier. Who did you ask to resign and under what 
circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, what I discuss with my 
ministers is between me and my ministers, fair and simple. I’ve 
told the House what I said early in the afternoon, I repeat. 
 
I have been in circumstances . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
it’s good government. I don’t get up there like the hon. member 
from Rosetown in these kinds of tones to advocate his case. 
That’s, wherever it is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, 
Kindersley’s all right. I’m talking about the gentleman that was 
speaking . . . Rosthern, not Rosetown — the member from 
Rosthern. 
 
Everybody knows the history of this House and what’s 
happened with respect to resignations. That’s as far as I’m 
going to go. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Premier, that’s interesting. We 
can’t seem to be able to question you. You make your own 
decisions, and that’s closed. We knew you were the Premier. 



June 10, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1947 

We knew you were the top person elected in the province. We 
didn’t know that you were that high up that you didn’t have to 
answer those sorts of things. 
 
You’re the ones that . . . you’re the one that said you made 
those statements. You’re the one that said you made . . . you 
asked people to resign. You’re the one that said you had those 
decisions; they were your decisions to make. You said you had 
made them. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, was the person that you asked to resign, was 
that the member from Carrot River? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve given my answer 
already. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess we’re at the 
situation where I understand the Premier has got his little area 
of information that’s closed, and the people of the province 
aren’t going to know what it is. We will never find out it seems, 
Mr. Chairman, which one of his people back there aren’t 
functioning properly, which one he’s had to move aside. Maybe 
you should move them all aside. 
 
Then we’ve seen what’s happened in Guyana, what we seen 
was happened in Channel Lake, with NST — there should have 
been a whole long list, and there may have been. But it seems 
he doesn’t want to admit it. He doesn’t want to tell it. Maybe he 
didn’t actually ask any people to resign. Maybe he isn’t in 
control of his government. We don’t know; he doesn’t want to 
tell us. 
 
Dealing with the economic downturn that we were just talking 
about and the 1,700 people moving out of the province, we’ve 
already seen the effects of the economic downturn. Job growth 
is slowed. If you check out in the farming, the only activity is 
some re-seeding that’s happening. Crops are terrible. Bugs are 
out. Drought is there. Frost has killed a lot of crops. Community 
pastures is sending their cattle home, the ones that took any 
cattle in the first place. Feed is hardly available. 
 
And when we asked the Minister of Agriculture what he is 
doing about it, he says, well I have . . . I wrote a two-page 
document. So a two-page document is supposed to be saving 
agriculture from the difficulties that are going on. We’ve seen, 
as I’ve said, the effects of this economic downturn. Job growth 
is slowed, and it will continue to slow, Mr. Premier. 
 
We’ve had other industries show up in Saskatchewan but with 
agriculture coming to a halt, there’s a lot of other things that are 
going to slow down. 
 
The machinery business, Mr. Premier, is going to be slowing 
down. It’s going to come to a virtual halt. What about the farm 
manufacturing things? Some of the things that are the lifeblood 
of many of our rural communities, communities that have 
developed their own little industries, adding on to certain kinds 
of equipment, everything from combine pick-ups to spreaders to 
cultivation equipment . . . those are laying off people. They’re 
shutting down. 
 
It doesn’t look that good out there, Mr. Premier. And at some 
point, as always happens in Saskatchewan, when agriculture 

starts to suffer, the rest of the province starts to suffer. It’s just 
the way it works. Agriculture is still a critical enough part of 
this province, Mr. Premier, that when it goes down, everything 
else starts to suffer as well. 
 
It’s very easy for government during economic upswings. It’s 
harder on downturns, as you’re finding out. And I guess we’d 
like to know what your plans are during those downturns. 
 
We need in Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier, something that’s going 
to keep things going. How are we going to keep these farm 
equipment manufacturers going? What ideas do we have for 
that? A lot of those, such as Flexi coil, have become players on 
the world market. They’ve become players on the world market, 
Mr. Premier. What is happening to their exports? What are you 
doing to go ahead and enhance that? The other smaller 
manufacturers, they’re suffering as well. 
 
We also need to check into, Mr. Premier, things that we can do 
about input costs. Now I know we’ve talked about it; you’ve 
talked about some of the things as far as inputs and doing some 
checking to see what keeps the cost high. And fuel is one of 
them. But we don’t seem to be getting the answer. There’s 
surveys or things going on, but there’s no completion to this. As 
you’ve said earlier on, you’re doing some research. You’re 
looking into it, but never do we have an answer. 
 
Mr. Premier, agriculture is in a dire state. When you found out 
the other day that all that happened to agriculture is that the 
Minister of Agriculture had gone to the farmers that had the 
lease agreements and said we’ve increased it by 25 per cent — 
25 per cent . . . and then he said what good guys we are. It could 
have been 30 or 33 or 35. So you only sent him an increase of 
25 per cent. 
 
And the member from Swift Current looks all upset by that. I’m 
sure he’s got a lot of people that’s got lease agreements out 
there. And for him to shake his head and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that he’s not concerned that there’s been a 25 per 
cent increase in the lease agreements, I’d suggest that he may 
not be here for the 21st century either. 
 
So Mr. Premier, we need to look at those sorts of things. And 
from your government, we haven’t heard much. . . . (inaudible) 
. . . that two page little document. 
 
What are we doing about hauling feed into this country? We 
looked at the map that was given to us recently about the 
rainfall in Saskatchewan and the drought areas. And we saw 
that on that particular map there is virtually no rainfall in 
Saskatchewan, 6 per cent of what it usually is. Now how can we 
deal with that sort of thing? When you walk across the field 
there is no grass. It crunches. 
 
What are your plans? You seem to have no plans. I was home in 
my constituency last weekend, and a number of farmers came 
up and asked me very specifically, what’s happening? What’s 
the Minister of Agriculture doing? 
 
The Chair: — Order. The clock has been called so this 
committee will rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 



1948 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1998 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:33 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1867 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1867 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1867 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1867 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1867 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1867 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1867 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1867 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1867 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1868 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1868 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1868 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1868 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1868 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1868 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1868 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1869 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1869 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1869 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1869 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1869 
  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1869 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1869 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1869 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1869 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1931 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1942 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Trailer Parts Expansion 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1870 
 Saskatchewan Party Membership 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1870 
 Canada’s Representative for the International Hunter Education Association 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1870 
 Top 10 List 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1871 
 Walk A Mile in our Moccasins 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1871 
 Remembering a Great Saskatchewan Citizen 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1871 
 School Readers' Program 
  Murrell.....................................................................................................................................................................................1871 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Channel Lake Inquiry 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1872 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1872 
 Upgrading Highways and Transportation Systems 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1872 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1872 
 Disaster Assistance for Ranchers and Farmers 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1873 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1874 
 Health Care in Saskatchewan 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1874 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1874 
 Paging Systems for Emergency Responders 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1876 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1876 
 



  

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1876 
MOTIONS 
 Substitution of Member on the Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1877 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1877 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1877 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1877 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1881 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1887 
  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................1896, 1911 
  Heppner .........................................................................................................................................................................1902, 1933 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1903 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1917 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1919 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1924 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1942 
 
 


