





























































Hansard: April 27, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 787 
 April 27, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Ceylon. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions to 
present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Carnduff, Carievale, Regina, 
Alida areas, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I’m presenting is signed by 
individuals from the Glen Ewen, Carievale, Carnduff, and 
Gainsborough area of the province. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

And these are signed, Mr. Speaker, from people all over 
Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise as well on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the impending closure of the Plains 
hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Carievale, 
Carlyle, and Carnduff. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present today 
from the people at Ceylon. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I also present a petition on behalf 
of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan relative to the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition come from the good people 
of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I present a large number of 
petitions from the people of Lampman, Estevan, and Arcola 
concerning the closure of the Regina Plains hospital and 
requesting that the government provide adequate funding in 
order that the Plains hospital may remain open. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 
on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of the Plains 
hospital. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

communities of Gravelbourg, Ponteix, Pambrun, Swift Current, 
and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by a lot of people 
from the Weyburn, Griffin, Pangman, Tribune, Kenosee Lake, 
Lake Alma, some more from Weyburn — mostly from 
Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who want justice for 
widows and widowers whose spouses were killed in 
work-related accidents. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest, as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) on October 27, 
1997. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by petitioners from the Regina district. Thank 
you very much. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly in the 
following areas: to save the Plains Health Centre; to call an 
independent public inquiry into Channel Lake; and to put a 
moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I shall 
give notice again, given that I was supposed to give it on two 
separate pages last week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 38 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

Prior to the formation of the Living Sky Health District in 
1994, what was the ratio of management staff to primary 
care-givers in 1993 at the Lanigan hospital, the Watrous 
hospital, and the Wynyard hospital? 
 

And I shall give notice as well that on day no. 38 I shall ask the 
government the following questions: 
 

(1)What is the current ratio of management staff to primary 
care-givers in the Living Sky Health District, which takes 
in the Lanigan hospital, the Watrous hospital, the Wynyard 
hospital, the Central Parkland Lodge, home care for the 
district, and other long-term facilities for the district; (2) 
what is considered to be an optimum ratio for management 
staff to primary care-givers in Saskatchewan hospitals and 
other health facilities housing patients; (3) what is the 
current average ratio of management staff to primary care 
staff at Saskatchewan hospitals and other health facilities 
housing patients? 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

125th Anniversary of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
couple of weeks ago my office received a phone call that I was 
wanted by the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). 
Considering past MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
experiences, this had the potential to create some anxiety. 
 
However upon investigation, I was pleased to discover that the 
Carnduff detachment of the RCMP wanted me as their guest 
speaker for their spring regimental ball. 
 
Over 160 people, both RCMP officers and local citizens, were 
in attendance, with RCMP members in their red serge and their 
spouses and guests in tuxedos and gowns. This was the first of 
hopefully many balls to follow. 
 
The theme of this year’s gala was the 125th anniversary of the 
formation of the North-West Mounted Police. The North-West 
Mounted Police first went through our communities in 1873 as 
they followed the Boundary Commission trail to the Cypress 
Hills. Ever since then the RCMP have been an integral part of 
our community. 
 
Their mission has been to protect us from ourselves — for those 
of us who have a tendency to speed — or to protect us from the 
actions of others. No matter whether the RCMP service was on 
horseback during the last century or an automobile today, the 
members continue to serve with distinction and pride. 
 
Thank you to the members of the RCMP for their dedication, 
their service, and their sacrifice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Protein/Oil/Starch Pilot Plant Expands 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Last week the protein/oil/starch pilot plant 
announced completion of a $1.5 million expansion to their 
contract research and development facility in Saskatoon. 
 
This new addition focuses on equipment and quality control 
systems, and another $1 million will be spent this coming year 
to further improve this already world-class facility. 
 
 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

Mr. Speaker, the protein/oil/starch pilot plant is a premier 
facility in all of North America, as proven by the NutraSweet 
corporation’s coming to Saskatoon because POS 
(protein/oil/starch) was the only place in North America that 
could accommodate their needs for contract agricultural 
research and development. 
 
Officials at the pilot plant are optimistic about doubling the 
current business there based on current projections. POS is a 
critical spoke in the ag-biotech wheel in the city of Saskatoon, 
which includes Ag-Biotech, the University of Saskatchewan, 
Plant Biotech, VIDO (Veterinary Infectious Disease 
Organization), and numerous other research institutions. Its 
expansion is good news for Saskatchewan farmers, for the city 
of Saskatoon, and for all Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Minister of Health Address 
to Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier says that 
we Liberals are remarkable people because of our ability to 
have one foot on the ground on both sides of the fence. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to physical dexterity, my hat is off 
to the friends across the way. Picture this: a cabinet minister 
managing to speak out of both sides of his mouth while both 
feet are in that same mouth. 
 
I’m speaking of the Health minister’s address to the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses last week. Just to warm up the 
crowd, the minister began by indicating that nurses make 
six-figure salaries. He obviously got our nurses mixed up with 
Jack Messer. 
 
He then stated that he was worried there might be a nursing 
shortage sometime in the future — as if there isn’t one right 
now. 
 
Finally, he informed them that the problems in our health care 
system are vastly overstated. 
 
Some people in the crowd expected the minister to have the 
public address announcer dim the lights and announce that he 
had left the building. Instead he spent the next few minutes 
fighting off the crowd as he bolted his way to the vehicle, 
outraged nurses in tow trying to get at him. 
 
The only question I have is this, Mr. Minister. When is your 
next appearance . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The hon. member 
will want to recognize of course that in providing members’ 
statements that rule 28 is to be followed and all comments are 
to be made through the Chair and not directly to other members. 
 

Weyburn Red Wings Win Anavet Cup 
 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Four series 
down, one to go. Last night, Mr. Speaker, the Weyburn Red 
Wings won game seven of the Anavet Cup against the Winkler 
Flyers from Manitoba. Game seven was a skate-through — a 

7-0 victory, a game that was over before the end of the first 
period. 
 
Now game six on the other hand was anything but, and I think 
that game tells us what we need to know about the Red Wings. 
They came into Saturday’s contest down three games to two. To 
haul out all the sports clichés: their backs were to the wall; there 
was no tomorrow; it was all or nothing; their season could be 
over. And, Mr. Speaker, I was there and they won that game 
5-4, which lead to last night’s clincher. 
 
There’s something very typically Saskatchewan about this 
come-from-behind victory as Roughrider fans will recognize. 
And now as I predicted here 10 days ago, the Red Wings are off 
to Nanaimo, B.C. (British Columbia) for the Royal Bank Cup, 
tier 2 championship — second year in a row — which begins 
this Saturday. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will predict I will be on my feet in this 
Assembly one more time somewhere around May 11 to 
formalize this final victory. 
 
My congratulations once again to the players, coaches, staff, 
and the Red Wing fans, 1,900 of them who were at the game 
last night. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon YWCA’s Women of Distinction Awards 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, last week two events took 
place in Saskatoon that were impressive, elevating, and 
humbling. On Monday evening April 20, the YWCA in 
Saskatoon held a dinner in honour of their women of 
distinction. Hundreds and hundreds were in attendance to here 
about and recognize the incredible lives and contributions of 
local women. 
 
And I’ve been very fortunate indeed to know many of these 
outstanding individuals and have no idea at all how anyone 
could have made the final decision amongst the many 
outstanding nominees. The entire roster of women honoured 
that evening have given immeasurable time, talents, and gifts to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now in addition to this event, Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon hosted 
the national debating teams last week as well. These teams from 
across Canada demonstrated extraordinary skill, intellect, and 
passion in their debates and used three styles: academic style, 
cross-examination style, and parliamentary style. All members 
here could learn from them. 
 
And I know that these young people were very excited about 
the time that they were going to spend with you, Mr. Speaker, 
this last weekend. I’m sure that you were as impressed with 
them as I was. 
 
Their stay in our province continues until tomorrow and I wish 
them continued enjoyment and safe return to their homes across 
our nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

Extension of Cellular Services 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday I 
was pleased to represent the Minister of Crown Investments 
Corporation at the official announcement of the extension of 
SaskTel Mobility services to Ituna. I joined Mayor Joe 
Garchinski, members of Ituna Town Council, citizens of Ituna, 
and representatives from SaskTel in making this announcement, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ituna, Cabri, Pangman, and Ponteix are all joining 
SaskTel Mobility, the largest cellular network in Saskatchewan. 
Now with the expanded SaskTel cellular network, we have a 
link to services even when we are far away. Now all of our 
cities, many of our larger towns, and most of the major 
connecting highway corridors are included — services available 
to over 90 per cent of our population, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskTel Mobility is making it easier for those who live and 
work around Ituna and elsewhere to save time and money in 
business and to have better peace of mind when travelling. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Changes to the Young Offenders Act 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we learned 
that the federal Justice minister, Anne McLellan, is considering 
changes to the Young Offenders Act — changes that are a far 
cry, Mr. Speaker, from what the people of Saskatchewan are 
demanding. The only real change they seem to be suggesting is 
the naming of some 16- to 17-year-old offenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why I continue to be amazed by the 
actions of this federal Liberal government. After all, they seem 
to have adopted the philosophy of our NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government right here at home — throw them a bone and 
maybe they’ll be happy. 
 
And just like the provincial NDP, the Liberals could no longer 
hide from their polling — polling which showed an 
overwhelming support for the changes to the Act. But they 
simply can’t shake their preference to be soft on crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my message to Anne McLellan is this: if you think 
you can stop the growing wave of support for tougher penalties 
on youth crime by making token changes, you’re wrong. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also have a message for the NDP Justice 
minister and his NDP cabinet colleagues — two letters to a 
minister who has demonstrated she is not committed to 
meaningful change is not enough. We simply can’t let this 
window of opportunity created by over 70,000 petitioners shut 
with no meaningful changes or we’ll be waiting for another 
three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many people have to die before our 
provincial and federal governments admit there is a problem? I 
would challenge the Minister of Justice to join with the 
Saskatchewan Party and the 70,000 people who have signed the 
North Battleford petition to increase the lobby effort to change 

the Young Offenders Act before it is too late. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sunrise Lions Indoor Games 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 22nd annual 
Sunrise Lions indoor games will be held in Yorkton this 
weekend. This year’s games will feature over 800 athletes. 
Approximately half of the competitors are from the Yorkton 
area; the other are coming from across Saskatchewan and parts 
of Manitoba. The year will also offer special Olympic events as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the success of the event is heavily dependent upon 
the support of local service clubs, business people, and 
volunteers. The organizing committee, headed by Daryl Bode 
and member directors, consists of 12 dedicated volunteers. 
Between 300 and 400 additional volunteers will work this 
weekend to ensure the games go off without a hitch. 
 
I would also like to take a moment to acknowledge the sponsors 
for this year, and they are the city of Yorkton, Saskatchewan 
Athletics, St. John Ambulance, the Boy Scouts, the air cadets, 
Yorkton Tire and Auto Centre, Danka, the Royal Canadian 
Legion, Yorkton Concrete Products, Morris Industries, Logan 
Stevens Construction, Pachal’s Transport, Weber Do-it Centre, 
the Kinsmen Club, and Yorkton Sunrise Lions. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I want to wish all the athletes a great 
deal of success and good luck over the games this weekend. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Premier or his designate. 
 
Today we are starting to see the power of calling on elected 
officials to vote on behalf of their constituents. The federal 
government is showing the first signs that it is willing to make 
changes to the unfair hepatitis C compensation package — all 
because the opposition parties put the pressure on by calling for 
a free vote. However, most Canadians still don’t believe the 
changes suggested by Mr. Herb Gray go far enough. The vote 
on this issue will proceed tomorrow in the House of Commons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is calling for a similar 
vote in this legislature tomorrow. We are calling on the Premier 
to allow his members to vote freely on this issue. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you allow a free vote on expanding the 
hepatitis C compensation package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member opposite for the first question of the session and I tell 
the member opposite that on our side of the House every vote is 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

a free vote; that is what we do as a caucus, is we sit down, we 
discuss the issue, we look at various points of view, we refine 
the issue, and we come up with the very best position for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So from our point of view, within our ranks every vote is a free 
vote. We believe that rather than the American system, which is 
individual responsibility, we believe in group . . . or collective 
responsibility comes up with the best decisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we are not the only people 
calling for changes to the compensation package and for a free 
vote. Just look at what your own Saskatchewan NDP MPs 
(Member of Parliament) are saying. 
 
Lorne Nystrom says that compensation for all victims was part 
of the NDP platform — federal platform — in 1997. That’s a 
platform the Premier supported, Mr. Speaker. In fact you forget 
— your deputy premier, your former deputy premier, managed 
that campaign. 
 
Your former MLA, John Solomon, is criticizing the unfair 
package, and your former NDP Party director, Dick Proctor is 
saying the Prime Minister has placed a muzzle on his 
back-bench MPs. That’s exactly what you are doing by refusing 
to allow a free vote. 
 
Mr. Premier, or his designate, whose example are you going to 
follow? Are you going to follow your federal cousins, who are 
saying take off the muzzle and provide fair compensation, or 
are you going to listen to your buddy, Jean Chrétien, and 
continue to muzzle your members? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would to 
say to the member opposite again: this government is a stanch 
supporter of parliamentary democracy and the traditions of 
parliamentary democracy, which is group or collective 
responsibility on this side of the House, and we have our 
debates in caucus. 
 
We’ve been consistent, unlike the members opposite, who I 
notice when the Liberal Party hired a non-elected person to be a 
staff member, the member from Kindersley over there said he’s 
been elected to nothing in any official capacity, other than the 
Liberal Party. How does that entitle him to a salary from the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 
 
And yet when faced with the same situation with respect to their 
own leader not in this House, they’ve changed their position. 
 
We are consistent; we believe in the parliamentary system and 
the traditions of the parliamentary system, which means as a 
group we will take our decisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meadow Lake Pulp Mill Losses 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly evident the 

minister has no intentions of answering the questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible for 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). Mr. 
Minister, buried in the footnotes of the CIC annual report is the 
fact that the province is now on the hook for all the operating 
losses at the Meadow Lake pulp mill over the next 18 months. 
Taxpayers own 50 per cent of the company, but thanks to you, 
the NDP, the taxpayers are now on the hook for 100 per cent of 
the losses. 
 
Mr. Minister, how could you agree to that? Did you read the 
contract before you signed it or are you going to have another 
public inquiry to figure out how you blew this deal? Mr. 
Minister, why would you agree to a deal that put taxpayers on 
the hook for potentially millions of dollars of operating losses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I’m pleased that the member from 
Souris-Cannington asked the question because I have here an 
article from the Star-Phoenix of October 5, ’95 that says, 
“Upgrader fails to fulfil province’s prediction.” And then a 
handsome picture of the individual saying that keeping our 
shares in the upgrader was a bad gamble. 
 
And then a few months later, December 19 of ’97, that same 
handsome fellow was saying, “Opposition praises NDP for 
sticking out the Husky deal.” 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order, order, order. Now 
. . . Well, hon. members, I . . . Order. I know hon. members are 
quite capable of restraining themselves and I encourage them to 
do that. 
 
I didn’t have difficulty hearing the question being put and I will 
ask for the cooperation of the House to enable the Chair and 
everyone else to hear the answer being provided. I’ll allow the 
minister a few more seconds to complete his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that on the Husky upgrader he was urging us to get out 
of that at 7 cents on the dollar and then a few months later he 
was congratulating us for keeping our position. 
 
But I want to make the story clear and a bit of history. You’ve 
made the deal in the pulp mill at Meadow Lake. You did. No 
consultation with the Assembly. No consultation. No discussion 
at Crown Corporations Committee. You just put the hundreds 
of millions in, you and Grant Devine, your old buddy, Grant 
Devine. You invested the money. And it’s losing money, 
there’s no doubt about it. But I would have a look in the mirror 
and I’d give Grant Devine a call and ask him why he made . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister’s 
memory is failing again. I was only elected in 1991. 
 
Mr. Minister, any time the NDP corporate geniuses did that the 
Channel Lake . . . 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now the Chair is 
having difficulty . . . Order. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Any time the 
NDP corporate geniuses that did the Channel Lake contract start 
signing deals, taxpayers get very nervous. Mr. Minister, the 
NDP . . . the Meadow Lake pulp mill cost us $43.5 million in 
the last two years. The Canadian Pulp and Paper Association 
doesn’t expect much of a price turnaround, so taxpayers stand 
to lose that much money again over the next two years. 
 
Or what did you get in the return? What did you get in return 
for that 1 per cent of the company? Every time you guys make a 
deal you get taken to the cleaners. Mr. Minister, how much 
money will this terrible deal cost the Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
How much money are we going to lose over the next two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member is incredulous. Here 
he is sitting beside the member from Moosomin, who was in the 
caucus of Grant Devine when the decision was made. He was 
there, went to the leadership convention, supported Devine, and 
I say to you, I’ve got the record here of how your pulp mill has 
been making out. Your investment — not ours — yours. Here’s 
how it’s been making out: 1993 — it lost 31 million; 1994 — it 
lost 14 million; it made money one year in 1995 — 29 million; 
lost again in ’96 — 22; lost in ’97 — 20. 
 
You made the deal — you and the member from Moosomin — 
you went to the convention to support Grant Devine, and it’s 
losing money. What would you suggest — that we shut the pulp 
mill down? If you’re honest about it, there’s two choices: 
continue to support the bad Grant Devine deal or shut it down. 
Which of those two would you put forward? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Elphinstone was a member of the Assembly at that time 
and he’s partially responsible for this. Mr. Minister, it’s kind of, 
it’s kind of ironic. We are calling for your government to keep 
the Plains hospital open — at least until voters can decide its 
future in the next provincial election — but you have no money 
for that. But you have millions of dollars to suck up all the 
losses at the Meadow Lake pulp mill until the middle of the 
next year — right about the time for the next election. 
 
Mr. Minister, where are your priorities? How can you find 
millions of dollars to pump into the pulp mill, but you have no 
money to put into a major hospital that is in desperate need by 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I know the public is shocked about 
your investment in the pulp mill at Meadow Lake — the bad 
deal it was. But you know what they’re even more shocked 
about over the weekend is to find out that Mr. Hermanson is 
taking $2,000 a month of taxpayers’ money. Now that’s 
shocking and there’s something you can do about that right 
away. 
 
I would ask the member, and the Leader of the Conservative 
Party, if they will stand up today and say they’ve cancelled the 

contract with Mr. Hermanson for 2,000 a month, and donate 
that money to the hospital in Regina. Will you do that today — 
cancel the contract of 2,000 a month and give it to the health 
care of Regina hospitals? Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Emergency Services 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, we 
see again a recurring pattern in the Regina hospitals. First 
there’s a crisis in Regina emergency rooms because there’s not 
enough beds. Then someone from the health district denies 
anything was wrong. Then the Health minister ignores the 
whole problem. 
 
It happened again on Friday when the Regina emergency rooms 
reached a state of gridlock, according to the medical director of 
emergency services, Dr. Phil Luke. 
 
Mr. Minister, how many more times does this kind of crisis 
have to occur? When are you going to address this problem? Or 
does there have to be a disaster involving loss of life before you 
get it through your head that there is a problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to read from the same 
article that the member opposite is reading from. Because when 
I reviewed the article, Mr. Speaker, the Regina Health District 
makes it fairly clear that there are a couple of reasons for why it 
is that issues that they had to deal with on Friday were dealt in 
the fashion that they were. 
 
And I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from what Ms. Evans says 
here. She said and recognizes that there were some critical care 
beds available, which the member eludes to mention here — 
says that there are critical care beds that are available here. Also 
says that from time to time that the system is tight, and also 
goes on to say: 
 

As for the Pasqua, Evans said, the emergency ward was 
really busy but the hospital had beds available and was 
admitting patients. “And these things were OK at the 
Plains,” he said. 
 

Now Ms. Evans is the person, Mr. Speaker, who is responsible 
to ensure that adequate direction is provided for people who 
need emergency care services — not the members opposite and 
not the Liberal Party, but the people who are responsible for the 
actual day-to-day delivery of the services. 
 
And Ms. Evans in her article assures the people of 
Saskatchewan and the Leader-Post and me that in fact there 
were beds available on that date. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal 
opposition put forward a motion in this Assembly on December 
15 to compensate all hepatitis C victims and their families. In a 
rare show of support, members of this House unanimously 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

passed this motion. 
 
The resolution contained the following: That: 
 

. . . the governments of Saskatchewan and Canada 
consider, as soon as possible, setting up a compensation 
plan for victims who were given contaminated blood or 
blood products, including the victims of hepatitis C; 
including interim compensation . . . 
 
And . . . that the governments of Saskatchewan and Canada 
consider including secondary victims in the compensation 
program; 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’m wondering if the Premier will explain today 
why his government has failed to live up to this motion which 
was supported by all members of this House, including the New 
Democratics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite — and again, to emphasize the importance of 
this decision that we unanimously made as Canadian health 
ministers across Canada, including the federal minister — when 
we began these discussions about six months ago, Mr. Speaker, 
we parked our politics at the door. And we made some 
decisions about how it is that we might in fact take 
responsibility for what we as the federal government, the 
provincial government, and the Red Cross feel that we are 
responsible for. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, we have a compensation package that 
reflects what we as all Canadian governments across the land 
— health ministers, Canadian provincial governments across 
the land, along with the federal minister — believe is a package 
that reflects what we were asked to look at. And that’s what’s 
before the courts today, Mr. Speaker. That’s what’s being 
negotiated. And we believe that at the end of the day we’ll have 
a compensation package that will in fact makes its way to those 
people who in our opinion should be compensated, because 
they were victims of the blood system that we had 
responsibility for over a period of time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that the only 
thing that the government and the members opposite parked at 
the door was their credibility in this whole scheme of things. 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal motion indicated that all victims 
should be compensated. In it did it no way suggest that only 
victims between 1986 and 1990 should be included. All 
members of this House, including those on the government side 
of the House, supported the motion. So obviously every 
member of this House believed on December 15 that all victims 
should be compensated. 
 
Mr. Premier, if every member of this House believes there is an 
obligation to compensate all victims, why are you preventing 
them from speaking their mind through a free vote in this 
Assembly? Is it because you know they don’t support the 
current agreement? Will you lift the gag order? The NDP House 
Leader has just stated in this House that every vote on that side 

is a free vote. If that’s the case, Mr. Premier, is it true that the 
NDP caucus will be voting against the health minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
answered this question before and it’s kind of ironic that it 
would be the Liberals in the legislature asking that question 
when their federal counterparts are taking the exact opposite 
position. 
 
From our point of view, the goal of this government is to arrive 
at the very best policy for the people of Saskatchewan. We do 
that by discussing it amongst ourselves, taking positions, 
reworking the positions and coming up with the very best 
position for the people of the province. That’s part of the 
parliamentary system. That’s part of the sense of collective 
responsibility. To go to a much more American approach where 
everybody can be all over the map yet somehow or another 
come up with the best government position, isn’t appropriate 
and it’s not part of our system. And it’s not part of a system that 
we think comes up with the very best solution to what I might 
say is a very, very difficult issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses Convention 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Health addressed the Saskatchewan nurses’ union 
convention in Prince Albert last week. Nurses went to their 
annual meeting frustrated by the overwork and stress they face 
on a daily basis. They were hoping for answers from the 
minister. Unfortunately all he did was inflame the situation to 
the point where he was virtually chased out of town. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister told SUN (Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses) representatives that they have no reason to complain 
because some of them make six-figure salaries. Well I don’t 
know where he’s coming from but I have yet to meet a nurse 
that makes a six-figure salary. 
 
I ask the minister, are you going to apologize in this House 
today for your remarks, as the president of the SUN, 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, is calling on you to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a couple of 
comments in clarification of what the member opposite first 
makes. First of all I arrived in Prince Albert and was picked up 
at the airport by Ms. Junor’s car and her staff who transported 
me to the event. And then Ms. Junor and her staff transported 
me back to the airport; so I was not chased out of town, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact Ms. Junor provided that transportation to and 
from for me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to say that the members opposite 
have been at all the public meetings that I’ve been at. They’re 
their meetings, the Liberal meetings. And they’ve heard me 
stand up at the microphone and continuously say a number of 
things: that nurses in Saskatchewan today are overworked; that 
the system from which they work we need to provide some 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

improvements in; that we need to provide enhancements for 
nurses across the province. 
 
You’ve heard me say that now at four of your meetings. You’ve 
read it in the newspapers across the province from where I’ve 
visited and the press that I’ve given. You’ve heard it all over. 
So there’s no dispute about whether or not nurses are working 
very hard in this province. We all understand and appreciate 
that they are. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to work with nurses in this 
province and I made the commitment in Prince Albert — made 
the commitment that we’re prepared to make enhancements to 
ensure that nurses are going to be . . . and services are going to 
better enriched in this province. That’s the commitment that I 
make. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — We can go on and on, Mr. Speaker, to study and 
work with people but still not come up with any solutions. 
When confronted about the problems facing front-line 
care-givers, the minister indicated that each health district is 
now preparing a report on that particular issue. He told SUN 
delegates that these reports will be completed next month and a 
plan will be developed by early summer. 
 
Mr. Minister, we spoke with Susan Kotzer, the head of SUN 
local in the Living Sky district yesterday. She was unaware of 
any study and had not been contacted by anyone from your 
department for input. 
 
Please explain why the nurses aren’t being consulted about a 
plan that directly affects them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I don’t know what the member talks about 
when he talks about study and where he got the word “study” 
from. What I said is this: I said to the nurses in Prince Albert 
that I was waiting for the district boards to resubmit their 
budgets to me, to submit their budgets because their 1998-99 
allocations have gone out. And they said they wanted some 
assurances that there would be some enrichments in nursing 
staff earlier. And I said that I would want those submissions 
from the district boards back by the middle of May before, in 
fact, there would be a decision for enrichments. 
 
But when we got them back, that there would be meetings with 
the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations; that the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses would be at that table; and the 
Department of Health would be at that table; and we would look 
at how we would make the allocations across the province that 
in fact would be complementary to what they suggest we should 
be involved in. 
 
That’s the discussion that we had, Mr. Member. That’s the 
discussion that I had with the provincial health nurses, and 
that’s the understanding that Ms. Junor has, is that after May 15 
we’ll have that audience to ensure that when we’re making 
additional injections to ensure that we can improve the quality 
of nursing care in the province, that they will be at the table 
with us helping to decide where in fact that will be. That’s the 
discussion decision that I delivered in Prince Albert the other 
day. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I just need to get something 
straight here: that the minister has asked health districts to 
prepare reports on the issue of staffing yet the nurses are not 
being consulted or being provided any avenue for input at this 
point in time. Is that some kind of a whitewash? Those are the 
people that should be in on the initial discussions. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you acknowledge that nurses are run off their 
feet, that they are battling very stressful working conditions on 
a daily basis, they must be consulted. They should be in on the 
bottom floor — not the health districts but the front-line 
care-givers themselves. 
 
Will you make a commitment to nurses like Ms. Kotzer that 
their concerns will be reflected in this study and that their 
concerns are legitimately addressed in this entire review? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite from Melville, I want . . . all he needs to do is pick up 
my speech — the one that I delivered to the nurses in Prince 
Albert — and he will see that in my speech, and a number of 
occasions during the question and answer period, highlight, 
highlight that in fact we would be having a table discussion 
which would include the nurses and would include SAHO and 
would include the provincial government’s Department of 
Health, to ensure that when allocations are made, that those 
allocations of resources are made in the appropriate location. 
 
That was in my speech, Mr. Member. You need to pull the 
speech, take a look at it, and you’ll have some appreciation of 
how in fact we’re working with the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses and SAHO and the Department of Health to ensure that 
we provide the best health care services in the province — the 
best health care services in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Federal-Provincial Environmental Ministers’ Conference 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the Premier or his designate. 
 
I’m curious about who the Minister of the Environment is — 
the hon. member from Prince Albert Northcote or the hon. 
member from Indian Head-Milestone? And nothing sends a 
clearer signal of this government’s disregard for the 
environment, Mr. Speaker, than benching the Minister of the 
Environment and sending in his place, the Minister of Energy 
and Mines to a federal-provincial environmental minister’s 
conference on how to achieve the greenhouse gas reduction 
targets set at Kyoto. If that is not sending the fox to guard the 
hen-house, then I don’t know what is. 
 
Will the Premier explain why it is a higher priority for the 
Minister of the Environment to attend a Ducks Unlimited dinner 
than attending the conference of environmental ministers on the 
implementation of the Kyoto Agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a red-letter day. 
This is two ministers to receive the first question of the session. 
 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

In response to the hon. member — as she probably realizes — 
when the government takes a position, all cabinet ministers 
follow that. And the Minister of Energy and Mines very capably 
presented the Saskatchewan position at the meeting in Toronto. 
And basically what came of this first meeting was, further 
meetings were decided. We will have a secretariat set up where 
all provinces will participate, and as you know a federal . . . or a 
national advisory committee will be struck, and Saskatchewan 
is certainly partaking in this, and we will continue to work with 
the federal government and other provinces on the climate 
change and the Kyoto conference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, everyone except Roger 
Phillips, CEO (chief executive officer) of IPSCO, believes that 
greenhouse emissions are contributing to global warming and 
that if nothing is done the consequences will be catastrophic. In 
Saskatchewan alone the result of global warming will be 
reduced precipitation, more frequent droughts, and more 
frequent severe weather damage. 
 
When governments don’t want to act, Mr. Speaker, they refer a 
problem, an issue, an action, or a decision to a committee, a 
commission, or a panel for study — thus postponing the need to 
do anything. 
 
And I ask the minister today — since there are hundreds if not 
thousands of studies and reports available on how greenhouse 
gas emissions can be reduced — why is it that they are 
choosing the route that they are choosing. There is no need for 
delay, Mr. Speaker, two years of actions that can already be 
taken. Will this government show leadership in protecting the 
environment and commit our province to cutting down on 
greenhouse gas emissions in a serious way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, again I thank the hon. 
member for the question. The Saskatchewan government, this 
government, is certainly committed to recognizing that global 
warming is not somebody’s figment of imagination. It is real; it 
is happening. We just need to look at the series of years in the 
1980s, the warmest years on record in history. 
 
We are committed to work with the people of this province to 
do what we can to reduce greenhouse gases, but we must 
remember that because of our wide open spaces and sparse 
population, people have to travel to get places. Our agricultural 
economy is energy based. Our oil and gas industry is very 
important to us, creating lots of jobs. 
 
So what we will do, we are going to work with industry as well 
as the environmental people. We are establishing 
Saskatchewan’s version of a task force with people from all 
walks of life and stakeholder groups. And we are going to come 
up with a Saskatchewan made solution but we are not going to 
simply put our blinders on and say, the heck with the economy 
and jobs. We are going to make it a balanced approach and we 
will certainly succeed in doing this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery 
are two friends of a number of people in the Assembly, Rodney 
and Colleen Parenteau. Rodney and Colleen are in town today 
to make a presentation to a youth . . .,employment for aboriginal 
youth. And I want all members to join with me in welcoming 
them here today to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, pursuant to section 
14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, I table the Report of the 
Provincial Auditor to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan on the 1997 financial statements of CIC 
subsidiary Crown corporations. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the Minister of Finance to introduce 
his officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Beside me is Mr. 
Bill Jones, who is the deputy minister of Finance; and beside 
him is Larry Spannier, who is the assistant deputy minister of 
the treasury board branch; and sitting right behind me is Kirk 
McGregor, who is the assistant deputy minister of taxation and 
intergovernmental affairs; and beside him is Jim Marshall, who 
is the executive director of economic and fiscal policy; and 
beside him, behind Mr. Spannier, is Terry Paton, who is the 
Provincial Comptroller. 
 
I should say, Mr. Chair, I’d like to move resolution no. 1: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $714,243,000 be granted to Her 
Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 
1999. 
 

And I have copies of the department summaries that I’m going 
to provide to the two opposition parties as well as there’s one 
for each of the three independent members. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And, 
Minister, welcome to the officials. We only have one copy of 
this so we’re going to try to get some copies made; so it makes 
it a little difficult to look at the details of it but I understand the 
math. 
 
The first question is an obvious one, Mr. Minister. We went 
through this exercise not a month ago and at that time you were 
asking for one twelfth, now you’re asking for two twelfths. 
Why the change? 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is traditional that we do two twelfths as 
this particular time. That’s the way it’s been done the past 30 
years. I might remind the members opposite that last time we 
were here the question was why one-twelfth, why not 
two-twelfths? So today maybe the question is why two-twelfths, 
why not one-twelfth or three-twelfths, whatever. But for the last 
30 years this is the way that the government has operated. 
 
This amount of funding allows all government programs to 
operate at their normal levels and avoid hardships to individuals 
and third parties as we move through the process of approving 
the budget for the year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, we thought that you made 
such an incredible argument for one-twelfth last time, we were 
kind of confused this time that you had moved to the 
two-twelfths because we thought you had actually convinced 
yourself of the rightness of your position a month ago. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the concerns that we have and we raised 
last time was the whole question of cash flow for departments. 
Has your department — in the interval since we last had this 
discussion — has your department done an analysis of the cash 
flow requirements in reaction to the discussion we had a month 
ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Just as you were mightily moved by 
the arguments I was making, I was mightily moved by your 
arguments. And one of the things I asked the officials in the 
Department of Finance to do was to talk to the departments to 
see if they were able to manage well on the basis that this is 
done — the one-twelfth first interim supply Bill followed by the 
two-twelfths, or whether that was at variance with what they 
really needed. 
 
And therefore the treasury board officials in the department 
spoke to the various departments and basically found out that, 
with very minor variances, the interim supply as it’s 
traditionally been done is what they need to operate. And 
whether they would need more money or less money, the 
variances I’m told were very small. This is verbally what was 
said by the departments to the Department of Finance. 
 
And the departments basically said, look, we operate on an 
annual basis. We plan our activities. For each month we need 
roughly one-twelfth. If you give us this amount that’s roughly 
what we need to operate and how we can pay the third party. 
 
So I’m advised that in fact this . . . the way that this has worked 
for the past 30 years is probably largely because it does meet 
the needs of the departments, agencies, and third parties. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I take it in your discussion then 
that those departments that maybe have capital requirements 
that aren’t necessary till later on in the year or things of that 
nature are going to have a fairly significant excess of capital 
available to them in the interval, while there may be other 
departments specifically that indeed are operating out of a cash 
flow deficit position. 
 
In your review of talking about how the departments are 
functioning, has there been an analysis of how third parties one 
arm’s length removed from the department are able to function 

in this allocation environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I’m advised that this allocation is 
quite suitable to meet the needs of third parties. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And as I 
understand it, that this allocation is on the expenditure side only 
and is irrespective of any of the cash flows coming into 
government. Does this create a difficulty for government in 
terms of your sources of cash in order to operate this way, or 
does it put you in a better or worse situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, it doesn’t create any difficulty for us 
and we’re well able to manage with this type of appropriation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, is there any implication in this 
system, of doing the allocation in terms of your estimates, on 
interest paid on the debt? Does that get allocated out on a pro 
rata monthly basis or is that done in some different way when 
bonds mature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well this would relate to the appropriation 
to the Department of Finance, and some of that would be 
statutory. 
 
As you can see — and I appreciate that you’ve just received 
this, but it is the same as the last one — under the department 
summary, the Department of Finance would receive $725 
million to service the public debt in 1998-99, which I might add 
is down from $860 million a few years ago. So we’re making 
some good progress in that regard — reducing debt, saving the 
taxpayers a great deal of interest, certainly going in a pretty 
good direction. 
 
In any event, that $725 million is a statutory amount; that is, by 
law, that has to be paid and it does not really depend upon 
interim supply. What the Department of Finance is getting 
under interim supply is two-twelfths of $174 million, which 
will meet the other expense needs of the Department of 
Finance. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I notice there are 
some other statutory amounts. For example, as I read this there 
is $123.7 million to the Department of Education. Can you tell 
me what those funds are for, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, essentially, teachers’ pensions. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And in addition to the two-twelfths you’re 
looking for in the Department of Finance, there’s also a $96 
million amount in the Department of Finance. Would that relate 
to pensions as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In general, yes it would. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Going down the column in general — 
Legislation and Municipal Government. Would you care to 
explain what those two statutory amounts might be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes the . . . in the case of Municipal 
Government, that figure of $5.6 million is the funding to 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) and 
to the urban parks — the Wakamow, Wascana Centre 
Authority maintenance, and Swift Current Chinook Parkway, 
as well as the Meewasin Valley Authority. And in the case of 
Legislation, that figure relates to payments to the individual 
members of the legislature and also to the various caucus 
offices. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I am 
concerned about the ability of departments to meet anticipated 
needs in this straight formula system but I’m also concerned 
about departments being able to meet extraordinary needs. For 
example, over the weekend was a very dry weekend with a 
great possibility of increased fire hazard. What does the 
department do if it runs into unforeseen expenditures or 
unforeseen difficulties? What is the methodology or 
mechanism for them to meet unanticipated spending 
requirements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The departments have told us that they can 
manage quite well with this appropriation. But in a case such as 
the member’s referring to, Mr. Chair, if the department needed 
more money for forest fires right away, they could take that 
from another area of spending in their department. In other 
words, take it from monies which they would have spent on 
something else, put it into the forest fires, and make that money 
up when they get their whole budget. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So each department then, Minister, is 
expected to sort of self-finance whatever may come up as a 
contingency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well they’re expected to manage and 
administer as appropriate and if something arises that needs to 
be dealt with they’re expected to deal with it. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I would like to draw 
your attention as well to loans and advances and I see that 
there’s $900,000, I guess that would be, in Agriculture and 
Food for loans and advances. Can you explain that entry, 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that would be . . . the $5.4 million 
relates to advances for the agri-food equity fund pursuant to 
The Department of Agriculture Act. And the $900,000 is 
two-twelfths of the $5.4 million — or I should say that also 
includes investment in Crown agricultural land held for resale, 
which is $400,000. 
 
So to recap, Agriculture and Food will receive $5.4 million, of 
which $5 million will be for the agri-food equity fund; 400,000 
will be for investment in Crown agricultural land held for 
resale, for a total of $5.4 million; and $900,000 will be 
appropriated in this Appropriation Bill, should it be approved 
by this House. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And the investments that are required under 
this department flow in a symmetrical enough way in order for 
this to be adequate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the department has advised us, as 
have the other departments, that they can manage with this 
amount. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — In Economic and Co-operative 
Development, I see $1.267 million. Can you indicate where that 
is being spent, under loans and advances as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, these are loans and advances pursuant 
to The Department of Economic Development Act. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, in some of the areas you look at 
the allocations and I’m concerned about how this may work. 
For example, under Municipal Government, they’re going to 
receive $26 million under this allocation. And I hear you when 
you say that the department has said that this is enough funding. 
Have you talked to the municipal and urban . . . or the rural and 
urban municipalities to see if this enough for them to undertake 
the capital projects that they are planning to do this spring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, I personally have not talked to them in 
the sense that the individual departments talk to their own 
groups and stakeholders, so that the Minister of Municipal 
Government would have some familiarity, and her officials, 
talking to the individual municipalities. But personally, no, I 
have not. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to welcome the minister and his officials here today. 
 
The last time you were up we held a discussion centred around 
the price of oil and the income being generated for the province. 
I wonder if you could please give us an indication of what the 
average price of oil was for the month of April up until this 
date, since we’re still in April, and did it fall within the criteria 
that you had placed for yourselves in doing the budget? — 
because in the budget you were estimating $17.25 as the annual 
average rate of oil. How has that rate been in comparison to 
what your expectations were for this past month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Of course the month of April is not over 
yet, as the member knows, although it’s almost over. I’m 
advised that the average price of oil has been about $15 to 
$15.50 for the month so far. 
 
That would be consistent with our expectation for this period of 
time. The projection for the average price for the year I believe 
is 17.25 — for the year. The 15 to 15.50 range for April is 
consistent with what we expected. We expect higher prices later 
in the year and we expect the average price to be about $17.25 
for the year. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. From our 
previous discussions on this particular issue, your expectations 
for some month is going to have to average $19 to cover off the 
15.50 that you receive this month. From all the projections I 
have seen on either a monthly or quarterly basis, no one is 
predicting it to go that high. Some are predicting it may reach 
the 17.50 area and that in a particular month, but I don’t believe 
anybody is making a projection that it’s going to reach $19 
within the budgetary cycle. 
 
What information, or what sources do you have to indicate that 
that will indeed be the case at some point in time during this 
budget cycle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Your mathematics is not quite correct. The 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

price would not necessarily have to go up to $19. If the price 
was . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well you’re a dollar and seventy-five 
short at this point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I repeat, Mr. Chair, the member’s 
math is not correct. The price could be $18 for a prolonged 
period, and depending upon how long the price was $18, that 
could average the price for the year to seventeen and a quarter. 
The price would not have to go to $19 for any part of the year, 
let alone the entire year, in order to average that out. That’s a 
simple matter of arithmetic. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Indeed if 
it was at $18 for the next 11 months, it wouldn’t have to reach 
the $19, but on a month-by-month basis you’re going to have to 
average $19 to cover off the 15.50 that you got this month. 
 
So on a one-month basis, you’re going to have to have $19 
average to cover off the losses of $1.75 that you suffered this 
period. If you have an $18 spread for the next 11 months, yes, 
you’ll meet your requirements of $17.25. 
 
What other sources other than your own estimates are you using 
to determine that the price is going to average out at $17.25? 
Therefore at some point in time, it’s going to have to be greater 
than that because the first month of your estimates averaged 
out, by your own words, at 15.50. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Other sources we rely upon to make this 
projection include the Government of Alberta, the BT Bank . . . 
The Government of Alberta, by the way, projected in their 
budget $17.50. The BT Bank estimates $17.23, CS First Boston 
estimates $20; Goldman Sachs estimates 18.50; Lehman 
Brothers estimate $19; J.P. Morgan estimates $17.77; RBC 
Dominion Securities, 17.50; Petroleum Industry Research 
Associates, 18.50; for an average of $18.18. 
 
Now some things have happened since some of these 
projections have been made. But I want the member to know 
that in my travels as I’m talking to people occasionally from the 
oil industry or some of these organizations that predict these 
things, I ask them if they’ve changed their projections, whether 
they think that a $17.25 average for the year is still a reasonable 
estimate, and so far invariably I’m told that this is reasonable 
and that most others expect this kind of price as well. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The estimates 
that I have seen have been somewhat lower than your estimates 
— from the Royal and TD (Toronto Dominion). 
 
Mr. Minister, when you’re talking these prices from all these 
companies, we’re talking about West Texas Intermediate f.o.b. 
(freight on board) I believe Chicago, but I could be wrong on 
that. When you’re talking $17.25, when you’re talking $17.25, 
are you using that figure for that oil at wherever its designated 
point of delivery is or are you talking that’s the price we’re 
going to receive on average for crude oil in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I’m advised that is the estimate we’re 

using except it would be f.o.b. Cushing, Oklahoma as distinct 
from Chicago. But other than that, that’s the figure that we are 
using. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What is the average price then, Mr. 
Minister, that we actually received in Saskatchewan for a barrel 
of oil? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well that would depend upon the quality of 
the oil and so on, but on average the projection we’ve been 
talking about. And then one would convert that from U.S. funds 
into Canadian funds and then could estimate what we would 
receive in Canadian funds. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, surely somebody in 
your department has a rough estimate as to what the average 
price for a barrel of oil in Saskatchewan would be. You can 
break it down and give it to me in light, medium, or heavy; it 
doesn’t matter. But somebody must have an average price that 
you’re basing your estimates on, on the number of barrels that 
are produced and on the value of that oil. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The average price for Saskatchewan oil, 
averaging all of the types of oil together, is $15.33 Canadian per 
barrel. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, what would be the 
production during the last year for oil so that we can gain an 
estimate as to what the figures would actually work out to in 
dollars for us in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We forecast production of 149.4 million 
barrels for 1998-99 fiscal year and that is slightly higher than 
last year where we had . . . well we forecast it for last year at 
148.9 million barrels. This year we forecast 149.4 million 
barrels so it’s going up by a million barrels — no, I’m sorry, 
half a million barrels — roughly the same as last year. 
 
Also the mid-year report was roughly the same — it was 149.9. 
So we seem to be in about 149 million barrel range last year and 
that’s what we’re projecting for this year as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m surprised 
that you gave the results in barrels though since we are in 
Canada. I realize the oil patch prefers to work in barrels, 
especially internationally, but when I was working in the oil 
patch we had to figure everything out in metres, which nobody 
had a real vision of how large a cubic metre was. 
 
Do you measure the volumes actually in barrels, or do you 
measure them in metres and then convert them for your 
monetary considerations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I’m told we measure in barrels. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It sounds like 
another CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) operation where the 
farmer is forced to sell his grain by the tonne, the CPR converts 
it back to bushels and then turns around and dumps it back into 
the terminals at the West Coast in tonnes again. It seems some 
people manage to get away without the metric conversion. 
 
Mr. Minister, land sales I believe have diminished somewhat. 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

Can you give us an indication of what your revenues were on 
the last land sale and how that compared to a year ago at the 
same time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Mr. Chair, I am told that last year or 
before the last year we’re forecasting $108.3 million from land 
sales. And that the forecast for this current fiscal year that 
we’ve just started is $85 million; so that we project a drop of 
some $23 million from the 108.3 to the 85. And I’m advised 
that the most recent land sale in April brought in approximately 
$6 million — I don’t have the figure in front of me — which is 
down from probably equivalent sales last year. 
 
What I will do is undertake to provide the member with the 
exact figure of what was achieved in the most recent land sale, 
and to provide any kind of meaningful comparison we can with 
respect to the same period last year if there was a similar sale at 
the same time and so on. 
 
So we’re acknowledging that the land sales will probably be 
down. And I’ll get you the specific information about the most 
recent land sale and send that over to you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My concern 
here is that the land sales are going to be down considerably. I 
think the exact number, if I’m not mistaken, was 5.6 million for 
the land sale in April. I don’t know what the one was a year 
ago, but somewheres in the neighbourhood I believe, of 10 to 
12 million. So roughly 50 per cent less from last year. That 
means that’s a considerable drop. I don’t know if there is a 
trend in the land sales that perhaps a summer land sale or a fall 
land sale normally generates more return than any other 
particular month. 
 
So perhaps you could give some indication of what the trends 
are in that area. Is there a particular time of the year when land 
sales are greater than others, or on a curve, or is it just more or 
less based on what the price of oil is at a particular time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I should say one of the difficulties 
here is that it’s difficult to assume that the budget is going to be 
the same as the first 27 days; we’ve only had 27 days of the 
current fiscal year. So in terms of trends, it’s difficult to say 
well this has happened in the first 27 days so this is indicative 
of what will happen across the year. We have to do an estimate 
for the entire year and that’s what we do. That’s why I say that 
there was no surprise that the price of oil was 15 to 15.50 
during the first 27 days; what we’re trying to do is budget for a 
whole year and the price will be different. 
 
But to answer the question specifically, I am advised that last 
year the . . . there was $23 million achieved in April in land 
sales so it was much, much higher, but the price was also at a 
very high level at that time. It is expected that as the price 
continues to rise throughout this year, which is what we project 
as we were discussing a few moments ago, that the land sales 
also will go up and certainly that has been the pattern in the 
past. 
 
I might add that in ’95-96 the land sales were similar to what 
we had this April, in April of ’95. So it’s not unheard of that 
they should be in that range but we are expecting that as the 
price goes up that the amount achieved on the land sales will go 

up as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. While the 
oil industry is known as a boom and bust industry and it cycles, 
you just have to make sure that your estimates are on the right 
side of the curves whenever you’re making those estimates, and 
not place yourself at a disadvantage. 
 
When the $23 million was achieved in the April of ’97 land 
sale, do you know what the oil price was at that particular time, 
to sort of gauge some sort of a relationship between the price of 
oil and the price of the land sales? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I don’t have that figure in front of me, but 
I’m advised that it may have been around $22 — so certainly 
better than the price of oil since the beginning of this April. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe 
that a good number of the different oil companies have a price 
of around 16 to $17 as more or less a break-even point. Not 
necessarily that they’re not making money at below that, but 
that’s the kind of dollar figures they need to carry out extensive 
explorations. So when the prices drop below that, explorations 
drop considerably, and that’s why you see a return of $5.6 
million in the last land sale. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you projecting for incomes for the land 
sales in the future? I’m not sure if they’re held every quarter or 
every two months. I wonder if you can give some indication on 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. The estimate for the year, as I 
indicated a few minutes ago, was $85 million, and that was 
projected. There are six land sales throughout the year, the 
fiscal year, as the member will know. And we had projected for 
the April land sale a $10 million estimate, so obviously we fell 
short of that by some four-point-something million dollars. 
 
And for June we’re also projecting, estimating 10 million. And 
then it rises to 15 million for August, October, and December, 
and goes up to 20 million for February of next year. 
 
So, so far we’re off by some $4 million. And we hope that by 
the time we get through more of the year, obviously, that our 
estimate will be met, but that remains to be seen. But we remain 
optimistic based upon what we have been told by the private 
sector and everyone we’ve consulted with respect to oil prices. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I guess 
you achieved 5.6 million. You, you rate it at 56 per cent on your 
estimates for your return on that. Not exactly a great return, 
although in school that would be a passing mark — not a great 
one by any means. Hopefully your future projections will be a 
lot closer to the mark or you’re going to have a major shortfall 
within your budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to talk about the other issue that we 
discussed last time and that was within the Environment 
department — the Tetra-Paks and the money for that and for 
recycling. You’ve had a period of time now to gain some 
experience in that. Do you have any indications on returns from 
the monies coming in from the environmental charge on 
Tetra-Paks as compared to the outgo that you will be 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

experiencing? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, we don’t have any indications yet 
because it’s only been 27 days since SARCAN was able to give 
deposits back to people — the 5 cents per Tetra-Pak. And we 
don’t yet have reports from SARCAN with respect to the 
volume but I’d be pleased to, once we do have that information, 
provide it to the member. And certainly we’re anxious to see 
how successful it is too. 
 
There may be people that haven’t even really finished collecting 
their Tetra-Paks for, you know, some period of time in taking 
them in. I mean if they’re like our household you sort of pile all 
this stuff up in the basement — whether it’s your tin cans or 
your pop bottles or your drinking cans, and even sometimes on 
a hot summer day a few beer bottles. And then at our house this 
is kind of an annual thing to clean all this stuff up. Or maybe 
the Boy Scouts come along every six months or something and 
you give it to them. 
 
So I would imagine a lot of people, knowing that there is a 
Tetra-Pak refund, that they can get 5 cents per Tetra-Pak or the 
gabled containers that contain other than milk . . . some of the 
orange juice may be in gable top containers and so on. There 
will be people that are stocking up on these things and saving 
them. 
 
So in the first 27 days you’re not going to know that much, but 
after six months when people start collecting them and taking 
them in, we’ll know. And I think the uptake later in the year 
will be better than it is now, because unfortunately the problem 
we had before April 1 is people were throwing their Tetra-Paks 
out rather than taking them in under the voluntary system; so 
that there wouldn’t be a backlog of Tetra-Paks and gabled top 
containers. 
 
But now that people can get 5 cents per Tetra-Pak or gabled top 
containers as a result of the recent change in the budget, I would 
expect people will be accumulating those and taking them in. 
And that I think is a real improvement, but I think it will be 
some time before people get around to cleaning their basements 
out or giving them to the Boy Scouts or whoever may come 
along and getting them into SARCAN. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Your home is 
somewhat like mine although I don’t have the beer bottles. In 
my house it’s my mother-in-law or my mother who comes 
along and hauls them out and they just disappear. I’m not sure 
who she gives them to but they go. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the things that’s happening in the province 
now is we’re getting into the fire season and that is a major 
expense for the department for the Environment. They regularly 
spend, I believe it’s about 26 million or $28 million a year on 
fire. Most of that occurs in the months of May, June and July, 
although it does stretch onwards into September. They need 
most of their money at that particular time to cover off their 
operating expenses. 
 
Giving them one-twelfth last month and two-twelfths this 
month, will that be sufficient to cover off the operating 

expenses for the fire-fighting or does somebody have to carry 
that cost for a period of time — such as some of the private 
operators that are providing fire-fighting services — or does the 
Department of the Environment carry that cost through some 
means for a period of time? How are those costs covered on the 
short-term, say by the end of May, because we’re giving 
one-twelfth for May and one-twelfth for June now in this 
particular interim supply. How does that department cover off 
that large cost that they have over that very short period of 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The Department of the Environment and 
Resource Management has indicated through the Department of 
Finance that they can certainly manage with the amount of 
money being appropriated to them. The answer to the question 
specifically is that if the forest fires were very badly out of 
control and they needed to allocate more money than 
one-twelfth or two-twelfths to forest fire-fighting, then they 
would be allowed to take money from other areas of their 
department in the interim and use that money to fight the forest 
fires so that they would have sufficient resources to battle the 
forest fires. So that’s what they would do. 
 
But they’ve indicated to us that they don’t foresee any problem 
at all getting this appropriation. This appropriation is what they 
would normally get and normally expect and they are quite able 
to manage the forest fire-fighting part of their budget out of this 
kind of appropriation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Good 
afternoon, Mr. Minister, and to your officials. I have a couple of 
questions this afternoon. 
 
I noticed last week we had an announcement about the 
Women’s Secretariat giving out their money for on-line, for 
their program. It was something that was talked about in last 
year’s budget and I understand that they’ve only been given out 
a percentage of it now. Has all of that money now been 
disbursed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — They would receive the money they’re 
entitled to under the budget in terms of their appropriation and 
subject to approval of this House. And then in terms of the 
disbursement of their money to other groups or individuals, that 
is a question that would certainly be better put to the minister in 
charge of the Women’s Secretariat when she is in estimates. 
She is responsible for the allocation of the specific funds. 
 
What this interim supply Bill does is says that the Women’s 
Secretariat will receive two-twelfths of their budget, namely 
$257,000 according to this interim supply Bill. With respect to 
the details of how quickly they’re allocating that money to third 
parties, I’m afraid I can’t really answer that question, but I 
know that the minister in charge of the Women’s Secretariat 
would be pleased to do so in estimates. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, for last year’s budget then, all 
the money that was allocated for the budget would have been 
given to the secretariat at that time, so they could in effect have 
money in their account as such, if they haven’t disbursed all the 
money. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I’m advised that last year we 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

budgeted $1.4 million for the Women’s Secretariat, and they 
were in fact paid that money. And then if they have not spent all 
of that money then the appropriation lapses. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So is it possible, Mr. Minister, that even if the 
money hasn’t been disbursed, the cheques have been written, 
and the minister could be just waiting for an appropriate time to 
give the money out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We forecast that they will actually have 
spent by March 31, 1997 their full appropriation of $1.4 million 
and this year we have budgeted for them $1.5 million. So if 
they had any money left at the end of the year, I presume that 
they would also have some bills that came due to them — you 
know, bills that came due in March — that they might be 
paying out in April out of their appropriation last year. But I am 
advised that we forecast they will certainly have spent all of the 
money they were appropriated for last fiscal year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the news release 
that was sent out last week, I believe it was or maybe the week 
before, I think there was about a hundred and forty thousand 
dollars that had been . . . that was given out to specific groups. 
So then that must have meant it was last year’s money that they 
were just holding because they wouldn’t have had enough from 
this year’s appropriation to spend that amount of money. So I 
guess my question to you is did they just write the cheque and 
sit on it until the appropriate time comes to hand it out in a 
news conference of some sort? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Those funds could have been funds from 
last year, or they could be funds from this year. I’m not familiar 
with the announcement that the member is talking about 
although I am sure the announcement is as the member has 
described. And the situation would be that they could have 
incurred expenses in March of the last fiscal year and paid those 
monies out in April, or they could be announcing monies that 
they’re paying out of this year’s funds. 
 
For that level of detail, the member would be well advised to 
ask the minister in charge of the Women’s Secretariat when she 
is here to do her detailed estimates, because she will then have 
officials from the Women’s Secretariat that will certainly be 
happy to answer those very important questions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another issue I 
would like to bring up is the exemption for fire trucks, which I 
thank you very much for, and I’m sure a lot of people around 
the province too. 
 
The second thing that people are asking me is why is it only 
exempt . . . the additional equipment that is required is only 
exempt at the time you purchase a fire truck. So if a town . . . 
Naicam just bought a new fire truck, they brought it into town 
yesterday and they were very thankful for that. And yet the next 
town down the line needs some equipment as well and they 
can’t purchase that equipment exempt from PST (provincial 
sales tax) because they didn’t purchase it at the time they 
purchased the fire truck. Now is there some . . . have I been 
given misleading information, or can you explain this to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The intent is to assist the fire departments 
and the volunteer fire-fighters, and professional fire-fighters in 

some cases, with major purchases of equipment, which would 
be the fire trucks and the attachments to the fire trucks. 
 
The intent is not to give a tax break with respect to maintenance 
and repair. Not that maintenance and repair isn’t important, but 
the request put forward . . . And the member is familiar with it 
because she’s raised it in the House. I’ve met with the Naicam 
fire-fighters and so on. The request put forward to the 
government was with respect to purchases of fire trucks. That 
was the request. That request has been granted. 
 
There’s never really been a request for regular repairs and 
maintenance and replacement of certain parts of fire trucks, nor 
am I indicating that if there was such a request it would be 
granted. I think what we wanted to do is deal with the big ticket 
item that people really have a problem with. That we have dealt 
with. 
 
And so the request was made. The member herself raised the 
request. The request has been complied with, and I’m very 
happy to say, because I think it’s a good thing to do. There are 
many, many things you could do with respect to sales tax. 
 
The member was up in the House on Friday asking about large 
inland terminals and maybe having a tax break on those. On 
reflection, after I answered the question — just saying I didn’t 
anticipate that we would — the thought struck me that there 
was no particular reason why the taxpayers should assist in the 
shutting down of some of the smaller elevators and building the 
inland terminals and so on. We know that they put stress on our 
roadways, and so it wouldn’t be appropriate, I think, to take the 
tax off the large inland terminals and their construction and so 
on. 
 
But my point is this, that I mean you could take any item and 
say, wouldn’t it be nice if the sales tax was taken off. And we 
can all agree that it would. But there has to be a certain revenue 
base to pay for education and health care. 
 
With respect to the fire trucks, we’ve taken the tax off the 
purchase of fire trucks and attached parts. And I might add that 
in some cases that will apply to a major rebuild. Because I 
know there’s one municipality that is using a chassis that they 
had before, but basically they’re kind of rebuilding the fire 
truck from the ground up and essentially getting a new truck. 
And we will administer the policy with some flexibility — to 
say that, you know, basically they’ve got a new truck by the 
time they purchase so many parts that the parts and labour add 
up to a big bill. 
 
But with respect to just any purchase of parts, no such 
commitment has been made. And I think we’ve gone a long 
way to meeting the major problem in dealing with it and I don’t 
anticipate doing anything else. I would rather concentrate on 
more general tax reductions in the future. 
 
If the fiscal management that we’ve had so far from this 
government continues, and the economy does well — if it rains 
this year, as we all hope it does, and we get a good crop off — 
then let’s hope that in the future, maybe two or three years from 
now or something, we can have continued tax relief as we’ve 
tried to have in every budget since 1993. 
 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

(1515) 
 
And so that would be my hope rather than little changes to the 
sales tax base. Although I might add that our sales tax base is 
the narrowest now of any province with a sales tax. For 
example, Manitoba is 7 per cent sales tax also, but they apply it 
to so many items that it is the equivalent that if we were at 9 per 
cent. They collect the 7 per cent on many, many more items. 
We’ve taken it off some items. 
 
But I think our long-term goal should be to generally reduce tax 
rates — and I know certainly the members opposite would 
agree with that — rather than taking it off specific items. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And to start with, 
you are right now getting a request for PST exemption on other 
equipment as well when it comes to fire-fighting equipment. 
When I talked to the fire-fighters last night they were . . . they 
told me that at their convention this weekend there was a 
number of fire-fighting groups, volunteer boards, who were 
quite surprised that some of the equipment that they had 
thought maybe would be exempt now isn’t. 
 
I guess we are talking . . . you talked about upgrading, perhaps 
is what you were talking about when it comes to building a new 
fire truck on an old chassis. And I guess I’m wondering who is 
. . . who makes this decision on what is new and what is old. 
 
And then some of the worries that we have is the fact that a lot 
of the new equipment that’s required under the occupational 
health standards, their fire-fighting suits and that type of thing, 
is very expensive, and to get a break on those, on that kind of 
equipment, isn’t going to make a big difference to the 
provincial coffers. It’s not going to make a . . . it won’t mean 
that you won’t be able to buy another executive aircraft or 
anything. But it might . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. I’ve listened carefully to 
the questions the hon. member is posing and I wish to remind 
all members that the purpose of interim supply is to discuss 
whether to grant, reduce, or refuse interim supply with respect 
to the motion before the Assembly, and that detailed questions 
respecting policy of and actions of various departments are 
better put when those departments are before this . . . before the 
committee to deal with those. 
 
So I invite the member, in that spirit of dealing with interim 
supply, the need to increase, reduce or grant interim supply, if 
she would wish to continue her questioning. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I will stick 
to exactly the same subject that the minister spoke about. The 
minister talked about the fact that we’re having targeted taxes. 
I’d like to remind the minister that last year when there was a 
reduction in the PST for hog barns it was only on very large hog 
barns. It didn’t help the small farmer. So in that case we were 
looking at helping only the big people — somebody who was 
spending over $7,500 before they’d see one ounce of relief on 
the PST. And now you’re using another scenario which is 
exactly opposite. So I just wanted to bring that to your attention. 
 
I guess the other question that I’ve got, Mr. Minister, is the 
notice I saw today that there’s an increase for illegal hunting. 

The fines is going to go from $25,000 to $100,000. What kind 
of an impact will that have on your budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’ll have to get back to the member, and I 
certainly undertake to do so, with respect to the amount of 
revenue that is anticipated. Hopefully the higher fines would 
have a deterrent effect so that people would be precluded from 
engaging in illegal hunting activities, I would hope. 
 
On the tax side, I appreciate the member’s point that in the 
budget we have made the tax break for farmers on the 
horticultural and livestock side quite a bit more accessible. It 
used to be that you would have to have $500 tax payable before 
you got a break. So you’d have to spend $7,200 on a 
horticultural or livestock facility. Now it’s $100 — so that if 
you spend $1,400 or more on a livestock facility or a 
horticultural facility with respect to the sales tax, after that you 
would be entitled to a tax credit. So it is an improvement. 
 
Certainly it benefited many ordinary producers the other way, 
not just large ones. But I acknowledge what the member says, 
that the tax break in the recent budget which contained a 
number of tax reductions to the fire trucks, the livestock, and 
horticultural, the reduction in personal sales tax, the research 
and development tax credits which will encourage more 
employment I think, certainly do help out in the way the 
member has described. 
 
And I’m very glad to see that acknowledged. And certainly we 
want to be very cognizant of that in the future and try to work 
with the members opposite and all people in the province to 
reduce taxes in a way that is going to encourage activity, 
whether it’s on the farm or employment in the city. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Welcome, 
Mr. Minister, and to your officials as well. 
 
A few questions just for clarification first, Mr. Minister. You’ve 
indicated that your request today is for two-twelfths. Do you 
expect a further interim supply request during this sitting of the 
House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That would depend entirely upon the 
opposition. I mean it’s well-known that the length of the 
legislative session is determined by the opposition, both parties, 
and the time at which the budget will be ultimately approved 
and the estimates will be approved is really up to the 
opposition. 
 
So if we go longer than after the two-twelfths runs out, which 
would be the end of June, then I’ll be presenting another interim 
supply Bill at that time. And if we go that long, I’ll be very 
happy to do so. And as far as I’m concerned, it’s entirely up to 
the opposition whether we need one or not. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. We’re 
indeed looking forward to further Bills which are in the hands 
of the government and will develop as we move along, I 
understand. 
 
Clarification on also a comment you made to one of my 
colleagues, indicated that you had consulted with all the various 
departments that I assume pass on funding to other levels of 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

government, and my specific question of course is with the 
Department of Education. In your consultations with them, are 
you satisfied that they will be meeting all of their obligations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, last time when we had the 
interim supply up for the one-twelfth, I raised a concern with 
you regarding school boards. And you indicated I think a 
positive reaction to the fact that there seemed to be a bit of a 
predicament that boards were being placed in. You’re aware 
I’m sure, Mr. Minister, that now that even though we’re only 27 
days into the fiscal year of government, we are well into four 
months of the fiscal year of school boards. And in fact if we 
look to the end of June — and you’re saying the interim supply 
that you’ve asked for today is going to carry us to the end of 
June — school boards will have had six out of ten school 
months already past. And with a number of employees on 
10-month pay plans, I would think that we’re probably well 
over 50 per cent of their costs will have been incurred by the 
time we get to the end of June. 
 
Will you be in a . . . so again a similar question to the one that I 
asked you last time. Will you be instructing officials to ensure 
that the boards of education will receive at least five-twelfths of 
their grant monies by the end of May? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I did look into this matter further as a result 
of our conversation last time we were in interim supply, and I 
can advise as follows. The payment schedule to school boards is 
as follows, and I’m advised this has been the case for some 
years: in April, we pay January’s payment. That is out of the 
interim supply that has already been approved. In May, we pay 
for February and March. That is out of the interim supply that 
I’m hoping the House will approve today. 
 
In June, we pay for May and June, because presuming . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, yes. Presuming that the budget 
has passed, and thereafter, in August we pay for August, 
September for September, and so on up until December. The 
school boards receive no payments from the government in 
January to March but any interest costs school boards incur are 
factored into the government’s decision on grant funding. So in 
other words that expense to the school board for the interest 
they incur for the January to March period, I’m advised, is 
taken into account when the level of grant funding that a school 
board would receive is calculated. That’s the advice that I have. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s a new 
interpretation and I guess we’ll have to ask the Minister of 
Education at the time we get to estimates as to whether or not 
there’s a new calculation in the foundation grant formula that 
uses previous interest costs. That I’m not aware of. 
 
You did indicate though that very clearly boards of education, 
by the time the end of May comes around, will have paid out 
almost 50 per cent of their expenditures, salaries, and that they 
will have received from the government not nearly enough to 
meet those obligations. 
 
I’m wondering, even though you have indicated that this is 
previous practice, there have been many resolutions that have 
been put forward by the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association to deal with this issue; to indicate that as soon as 
the interim supply passes, that government provide school 
boards with the necessary funding so that they do not incur 
expenditures on the interest side. 
 
And while you’ve indicated that there’s consideration given, I 
mean that will have to be checked with some of the school 
boards. I do know in checking with some school boards last 
week that they are in an arrears position. Many school boards 
do not have large reserves and they rely on basically an 
operating loan. 
 
Right now those, especially rural boards of education and many 
of the large urban ones as well, do not have tax revenue coming 
in. Their tax revenue is not going to be achieved until maybe 
July or August. So as a result they’ve already delved quite 
heavily into the operating fund that’s been set up with a 
financial institution and incurring huge amounts of interest 
costs. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question then is, are you planning to change 
the program to ensure that boards of education aren’t on the 
hook for the fact that the government isn’t providing sufficient 
funding to the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as far as I’m concerned, as I indicated 
last time, or tried to indicate, the member raises some good 
points that need to be examined fully and fairly. And as far as 
I’m concerned, my deputy minister, Mr. Jones, can meet with 
the deputy minister of Education and the Minister of Education, 
her other officials, and explore whether there would be a better 
process to meet the objections that the member is talking about. 
 
This process I think has presented problems to people, not just 
recently but over the course of time and probably under 
governments of various political stripes . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And the Minister of Education says she used to 
ask this same question when the Conservatives were in power. 
 
But in any event, what I’m saying to the member is this. I 
acknowledge that there is some validity to what the member is 
saying. The member raises some good points. Let’s try to deal 
with the problem and find a solution that is workable for the 
school boards. 
 
And my deputy minister and I have just had a short 
conversation while the member was speaking, and certainly he 
indicates to me that he’s more than willing to have that kind of 
conversation with the Department of Education. So let’s get that 
going and perhaps when the Minister of Education is up in her 
estimates, I don’t know if . . . I’m not committing that by then 
we will have made any progress, but certainly the conversation 
can continue. 
 
And perhaps you can even raise with the Minister of Education, 
some of the questions that she asked when she was sitting over 
on that side of the House. But let’s look into it and see if we can 
do a better job in that regard. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I’m 
encouraged by your comments to indeed recognize that there is 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

a problem. And I know that the Minister of Education has 
indicated that this has been a problem for awhile, that it was 
raised under previous governments, but we haven’t found a 
solution. 
 
And I’m encouraged to see you indicate that it’s time that you 
sat down with deputy ministers and all agencies, and the 
partners involved of course. I think, very clearly, you want to 
involve the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association to find 
out indeed what the expenditure is to boards. Because what we 
have is . . . We’re dealing with taxpayers’ money. Whether it’s 
the local money from the taxpayer or the provincial government 
taxpayers’ money, it’s the same dollar and we need to find a 
better way of spending it rather than providing financial 
institutions with a larger interest cost and a charge to the 
taxpayer. 
 
I think we can look at that cooperatively and I’m encouraged by 
that, and I look forward to the discussion that we’ll have with 
the Department of Education, the officials there and the 
minister, and your ministers as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the minister, 
just a few questions in regards to Health. I notice, Mr. Minister, 
in your interim supply here you have $286.704 million being 
allocated to the Department of Health for months . . . I believe 
we are covering now May and June. And, Mr. Minister, you’re 
quite well aware of the fact that there are a number of concerns 
in the area of health as well. 
 
You’re probably aware of one of the issues that we’ve raised 
and continue to raise. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if your 
department has given any consideration . . . When you talk 
about finances and extending funding to the Department of 
Health and the fact that your government talks about how it’s 
created 38 district boards around the province, offering them 
more opportunity to be . . . carry responsibility. And yet at 
many times they’re handicapped because of the way funding is 
allocated and some of the situations we’ve noted over the past 
few days, past number of weeks. 
 
And one of the issues, Mr. Minister, when we talk of this 
funding allocation, don’t you believe, Mr. Minister, it would be 
much more appropriate if we are going to allow the boards to 
meet the needs, such as the emergency situation that arose in 
Regina again on the weekend, where Dr. Phil Luke talked about 
emergency rooms clogged big time across the board — not just 
talking one hospital, but all three hospitals — Mr. Minister, 
wouldn’t it be appropriate for us, if we’re thinking of boards 
having the ability to determine and address the concerns in their 
districts, to do block funding? 
 
Isn’t that something that you could discuss with the Minister of 
Health and look at in giving the boards this authority to meet 
the demands by . . . and each district’s demands are going to be 
a little different. They’re not all going to be acute care beds or 
whatever. And I know you can move acute to . . . in one 
direction. But really to address the acute care beds or the 
emergency situations, you really don’t have the opportunity to 
pull funds back in that direction. Is that an avenue that your 
department has talked about or you’ve . . . been pursued or has 
been brought to your attention and addressing that concern? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that’s a very good question. And 
certainly the matter of the freedom of the various health boards 
to spend their money as they see fit, without it being directed to 
specific areas like long-term care, home care, acute care, and so 
on, certainly has been brought to our attention — both the 
present Minister of Health and myself, when I was minister of 
Health, and probably the previous minister of Health. 
 
But I want to say to the member that when this was brought to 
my attention when I was minister of Health — and the member 
was one of the people bringing it to my attention, that the 
districts needed to have this freedom — one of the things that 
ministers of Health do is to meet with the health districts 
themselves on a regular basis, both the individual boards and 
the boards together when they meet in convention, and you 
have meetings with all the Chairs of all the boards, and the 
annual meeting of SAHO, and also there’s a Health Districts 
Advisory Committee. 
 
And so I said to the health districts themselves — when I was 
minister of Health — I said, look, people are saying that the 
hands of the health districts are tied. Do you want some change 
in the way that you’re free to spend the money or not free, or 
not free to spend the money? Should that be changed? And as 
far as I was concerned, quite frankly, I had an open mind about 
it, that the matter could be looked at and maybe there was a 
better way. So I raised this with them. 
 
One of the things that happened subsequent to that was at the, I 
believe it was the 1997 SAHO convention — which as the 
member knows is the convention of all the health districts and 
their affiliates — one of the districts presented a resolution. The 
resolution said that we should do what the member is saying we 
should do — just give them block funding. And as I said, I was 
quite open-minded about the matter and remain so. 
 
In any event, I’m told this resolution, to do what the member 
says we should do, was defeated by the health districts by I 
think about 80 per cent, but I could be wrong. In other words 
they said to us, no, we don’t want a change, we like the present 
system. 
 
So the difficulty is, you know, basically what they’re saying is, 
it’s not broke so don’t fix it. We like the way you’re giving us 
the money now. That’s the message we get from the health 
districts and so we’re prepared to live with that as well. And as 
I said before, I’m open-minded. 
 
In terms of the health system generally, yes, we hear of various 
problems in the health care system. But I want to say to the 
member and to the House, that the reality is that every single 
day in the province of Saskatchewan there are some thousands 
of people that are treated in our hospitals — I think something 
like 4,000 people — there are 9,000 people that are cared for in 
special care homes, commonly referred to as nursing homes; 
there are 15,000 people, I believe, that see other health care 
professionals, doctors, and others; and there are thousands and 
thousands more who receive home care. 
 
And my point is this: we have in this province an excellent 
public health care system that on a day-to-day basis serves 
thousands of people every day. And yes, you get a few 
complaints. But I say this to the member: I know of no place on 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

the face of the earth that has a better, more compassionate and 
caring health care system than the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Are there problems in it? Yes, there are. Should we try to 
resolve them? Yes, we should. But it’s a pretty good system of 
which we should be proud and we should not bash that system 
on a day-to-day basis. Because that system is still an example to 
people all over the world and, I would argue, across Canada. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Chair, 
I’m listening with some interest to the minister’s comments. 
And having . . . recognizing the fact that the Minister of Finance 
did just move from the portfolio of minister of Health, he’s a 
little more familiar with the health situation so he’s quite 
capable of responding to concerns in the area of health. 
 
But when we look at interim supply here . . . And, Mr. Minister, 
while you talk of the province of Saskatchewan having one of 
the most caring and compassionate health systems, I think, I 
believe you’ll find, Mr. Minister, that there are a number of 
people across this province who are becoming very frustrated 
with the whole health system. 
 
And one of the concerns specifically is certainly the area of hep 
C. And, Mr. Minister, I’m sure you’re quite well aware of it. 
Mr. Minister, in the interim supply motion before us, if there 
were a court ruling that said governments were responsible to 
assist hep C victims, what would the Department of Finance 
do? 
 
Are there any provisions that have been put aside to address 
concerns that may arise, should we face a situation where if we 
come to that point, if elected officials aren’t ready to accept the 
responsibility and the courts end up ruling and say governments 
are responsible, how is your department prepared to address the 
issue of compensation for hep C victims? And then specifically 
the interim supply motion before us, of this motion, and the 
$286 million, are you aware of any amount based on the current 
agreement that would be going to meet that need? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In response to the first part of the 
member’s question, I would say with respect to the health 
system, and yes, there is some frustration about the health 
system, but the question that I always put to people, and I’ve 
certainly put to the opposition, is if you know of a place on the 
face of the earth that has a better health care system than the 
province of Saskatchewan, please let me know where it is. And 
I don’t usually get an answer to that question. In fact I never 
have, except one day when a member from that side of the 
House suggested that the United States system was more 
compassionate than ours, a statement I disagree with because 
many people have no medicare coverage there. 
 
In answer to the second part of the question, we will meet the 
commitments that we are required to meet, and if there is a 
judgement of a court that says that the province of 
Saskatchewan has some responsibility to compensate victims of 
hepatitis C over and above the proposed compensation package 
that has been discussed before, then that commitment will be 
met. 
 
How would it be met? It would not be met out of the current 
Department of Health budget, I don’t believe. It would have to 

be met out of the reserves of the province, of which we have 
some to meet unforeseen circumstances. And that’s what we 
would do. 
 
We would certainly meet any obligations that we were required 
to meet as a result of the court saying that we had some liability 
and responsibility to hepatitis C victims beyond those with 
respect to whom, in effect, liability has been acknowledged and 
some compensation is being forwarded. 
 
And when I say liability has been acknowledged, I’m not 
talking about that in a legal sense. I’m talking about that in the 
sense that for that period there was some involvement by the 
province in the blood agency, which had some interaction with 
the Red Cross and some testing that was available. And so it has 
been thought appropriate that governments, whether or not they 
are legally liable — because that’s another question — should 
contribute to a compensation package. 
 
But if the courts go beyond that and say that there’s some other 
responsibility legally that the province has then any such 
commitment as ultimately determined will certainly be met. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, a 
moment ago you made some comments about a question, I 
believe, that had come to SAHO, and I found it interesting, 
having attended part of SAHO this year . . . and was quite 
interested in the presentation that was being made regarding 
home care versus acute care. Unfortunately I couldn’t come to 
some understanding with the SAHO officials as far as 
attendance for just that portion, as a result of not being able to 
be there for the full day even though I’d offered to cover 
whatever costs were incurred. And I think one of the officials 
suggested that everyone else had come at their own expense, 
and I look around the room and I see a lot of the people there 
were representing district boards and I doubt very much that 
they were there at their expense. I’m sure that they were there at 
the taxpayers’ expense as a result of the boards covering their 
remuneration. 
 
But when you talked about the vote being taken, and I think 
back to the district boards and the way the district boards are 
formed, they were all appointed boards at one time. And yes, 
we do have a number of elected positions now but I note, as I 
was noting around the table and around the room, I note a lot of 
people who were there had been there for quite awhile. And 
certainly from our area I didn’t see anyone who would even 
consider very strongly giving me any support. My guess is that 
a lot of people would be voting as a result of their appointed 
position and the fact that they were quite supportive — their 
government had basically put them in that position. So I would 
assume that you could expect a vote in favour of leaving the 
funding as it was. 
 
But I do want to leave you at this point with the fact that there 
are a lot of people who really feel on boards, and in some cases 
feel that when they raise their concerns that other board 
members certainly look down on them. And I think it’s 
unfortunate because they may be speaking out on issues that 
affect them directly. I think of Lanigan, the board member from 
Lanigan — I just can’t remember the board member’s name 
right now — but certainly a board member who I believe was 
appointed and re-elected. Certainly a strong supporter of . . . 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

Hatcher, I believe . . . Kachur, Kachur, but a gentleman who did 
speak out in favour of his community. 
 
So when we talk about funding for health care and Department 
of Finance’s contribution or commitment to health care . . . and 
I’m sure you would stand up, like the Minister of Health will 
when we get into estimates, and say well we’re spending . . . in 
my budget my officials have allocated 1.72 or almost a third of 
our budget is going into . . . just into the health care portfolio. 
And I just haven’t looked closely. That’s probably reflected in 
the numbers that we have here this afternoon as well. 
 
I think no one’s disputing the fact that health care is a major 
concern, a major issue, and it does take a lot of taxpayers’ 
dollars to keep . . . for the system to function and the system to 
operate. I guess what I would have to say, Mr. Minister, while 
I’m not expecting a lot of answers, or to find ways of 
addressing some of the concerns out there, I still think we have 
to go a bit to address some of the issues and concerns in the 
area of health and health spending, where the monies are going, 
to address areas where it seems that we’re still missing out, 
where there are some people, due to no fault of their own, are 
missing out. And those are some of the concerns in areas that 
I’m looking forward to getting in with your colleague, the 
Minister of Health, and asking. 
 
(1545) 
 
Because I realize specifically at the end of the day, while the 
Department of Health makes determinations as to how they 
spend their money, they come . . . he’s going to come looking, 
knocking on your door and saying, Mr. Minister, can you go to 
your officials and look and see if you can find me a few more 
dollars to put into health care to address some of these 
concerns. So I recognize that and I’m hoping that we can find a 
way to make sure that we certainly meet the needs of 
individuals out there and show some of the compassion that you 
were talking about. And I thank you for your time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, and I certainly agree that 
the health care system needs to meet the needs of the people. 
And that’s what it does on each and every day. If there are 
problems in the system we need to try to deal with those as 
well. But as the member says, we’re actually spending 38 per 
cent now of our operating funds on health care. So it’s well over 
a third of operating funds, providing a lot of things we’ve never 
provided before in the way of services. And certainly spending 
a lot more money than we have before. 
 
And we’ll just have to continue to try to deal with the problems 
as they arise, as indeed every government has to do at any given 
time. Because I don’t think we’ll ever be at the point where we 
won’t have some problems in any system as large as the health 
care system. But I do thank the member for those questions and 
those comments. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and good 
afternoon to the minister and to his officials. With respect to 
what department of your government might be involved with 
making presentations to federal tasks force, I know it’s very 
public right now that your Department of Highways and 
Transportation, your Department of Agriculture are making a 
number of presentations at Justice Estey’s meetings across this 

province. 
 
Now taking you back to about a year ago now when the federal 
government asked for a task force on the future of the financial 
services industry in this country, at the time there was a request 
going out to let the task force know of the views of, certainly of 
financial service consumers across this country and in, certainly 
of our province. What department of your government would be 
involved in making such representations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The Department of Justice of 
Saskatchewan has the responsibility for regulating financial 
institutions with respect to provincial jurisdiction. So anything 
within provincial jurisdiction would be the responsibility of 
Department of Justice, and they would deal with questions 
concerning financial institutions like the credit unions and so 
on. 
 
With respect to the question of federal changes to . . . 
concerning financial institutions, the Department of 
Intergovernmental Affairs would be the lead department to 
make representations to Ottawa, or an agency of Ottawa, with 
respect to the views of Saskatchewan concerning any proposed 
federal changes. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Then I 
would ask the minister, in the figures before us here this 
afternoon for two-twelfths of the interim supply for 
Intergovernmental Affairs, what amounts might be allocated to 
that very task — making the views of Saskatchewan consumers 
of financial services known to the federal task force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m afraid I don’t have the answer to that 
question. That question though is an important question, and 
I’m sure that the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, in his 
estimates, would be pleased to provide the member with the 
exact amount that might be spent on that kind of activity. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would 
maintain to the Minister of Finance this afternoon that . . . Well 
certainly I would agree with you that’s it’s a question of 
importance. I would, I would suggest to the point that perhaps 
some other level of your government might want to be involved 
more actively in such discussions. That of . . . Well of your 
department certainly, perhaps of Executive Council, given that 
the ante has been upped so significantly in recent months with 
respect to mergers — mega-merger talks, I guess if you want to 
use that sort of terminology. 
 
But certainly a lot of concerns are being expressed by my 
constituents at this time with respect to these sorts of talks. You 
must be hearing those same concerns expressed from, certainly 
from your constituents if not from people province-wide. 
Would it not be prudent at this point to be allocating more 
resources towards making your voters’ views known to this 
federal task force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I’m not sure that that process would 
necessarily involve the expenditure of more public monies. 
What it would involve would be people who are already in 
place doing the job of formulating a position on the part of the 
province. And certainly, what the member says is quite correct 
— that this doesn’t simply concern the Department of 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

Intergovernmental Affairs. It is of concern to the departments of 
Justice, Economic Development, Finance, to name three. 
 
What I said to the member was that the Department of 
Intergovernmental Affairs would be the lead department in 
making representations to the federal government or one of its 
agencies. But that doesn’t preclude consultation and work on 
the part of various departments. And certainly we will want to 
watch very closely both what the financial institutions are 
proposing and what the federal government is proposing. 
 
These are certainly not done deals. As the member says, there is 
a federal task force on the future of the Canadian financial 
services sector which hasn’t produced its final report. That’s 
one of the things we’re waiting for, as is the federal 
government. 
 
We don’t want to prejudge all aspects of the issue. But we want 
to see that report. We want the mergers to be reviewed by the 
federal government and the federal regulators. 
 
At the end of the day, we want to ensure that questions of 
service to people in Saskatchewan, and especially rural 
Saskatchewan, and questions of employment and job numbers 
are adequately addressed with respect to this issue. And we will 
certainly be communicating those concerns to the federal 
Liberal government and trying to make sure that the Liberals do 
what is in the interest of Canadians. 
 
But in the meantime, the federal government is waiting for this 
report, and we’ll be very interested to see what’s in the report as 
well. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Certainly 
the Liberal opposition here in the province will be interested in 
seeing this report when finalized. My understanding is it’s in 
September of this year. 
 
But I would maintain that this government certainly should be 
playing a much more active role in the interim, as an example. 
My understanding is the competition bureau is awaiting the 
results of this very same task force report. Would it not seem 
opportune that this government at this time would be more 
active in making representations to the task force so that the 
views of people in this province, consumers of financial 
services — in substantial amounts, I might add — that their 
views would be well-known to this task force? 
 
It’s not just a case of being able to pass the buck entirely to the 
federal government. We need to make all our voices heard in 
the whole process. You’re our government at this time, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, our government across from us; we’re looking to 
you to take an active role in making the views known. You read 
as well as I did this morning’s poll results. We can say what we 
want about the Leader-Post, but the call-in poll over the 
weekend, 93 per cent of those calling in suggest that they think 
services will suffer as a result of mergers of banks. 
 
Given the significance, I would maintain, of this sort of 
sentiment, I think it would be appropriate that more energies, 
more time involved, by members of your government in this 
process would be time well spent. And I’ll just leave my 
comments at that. But I would like to hear from the minister 

here this afternoon, Mr. Deputy Chair, if he would commit that 
his government would take a more active role in this process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well we will certainly do what is required 
to appropriately make representations to the federal government 
with respect to matters of banking, just as we do with respect to 
the federal government and its role in rail-line abandonment, 
and just as we do with respect to the federal government in its 
role in cutting health care funding to Canadians. 
 
On all of those issues we will be diligent in representing the 
desires and interests of the people of the province, whether it’s 
the Liberal health care cuts, the Liberal rail-line abandonment, 
or what the Liberals may or may not do concerning financial 
institutions. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to thank my officials 
today and also both of the opposition parties for their questions. 
 
And if I may, I’d like to move a second resolution. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. I appreciate the notice of intent 
to move a second resolution, Minister. The committee has one 
resolution before it which needs to be dealt with before we can 
introduce the second motion. 
 
The question before the Committee of Finance is resolution no. 
1: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $714,243,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the twelve months 
ending March 31, 1999. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I hereby 
move resolution no. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1999, the sum 
of $714,243,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(1600) 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move: 
 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

That Bill No. 34, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 1999, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 75(2) I move that the Bill be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. On my left is the new deputy minister of Economic 
and Co-operative Development and I hope the members of the 
opposition will take this opportunity to welcome Fraser 
Nicholson to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We did an open, cross-Canada 
search for the best deputy minister that we could get. We had 
about 70 applications. And Mr. Nicholson was the choice we 
made. 
 
He’s originally from P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island), has worked 
for the governments of Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, 
New Brunswick, and has a career as a professional civil servant 
and also an extensive background in economic development. So 
as I say, it’s an opportunity for us to welcome him to the 
province. 
 
On my right is Dale Sigurdson, who’s the assistant deputy 
minister of policy and co-ordination. Behind Dale is Bryon 
Burnett, executive project leader for community economic 
development. Behind me is Donna Johnson, who is director of 
administration. 
 
Also attending at the back we have representatives from some 
of the other agencies. We have Gerry Adamson, who is the 
vice-president for STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership Inc.), and we have Neil Brotheridge, who is the 
director of administration for the Saskatchewan Tourism 
Authority. We have Zach Douglas, who is president, and 
Glenda Bruce, who is director of finance and administration, for 
SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation). 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
 

Subvote (EC01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Minister. Welcome to 
the minister and to your officials. And welcome to 
Saskatchewan — I’m sure you’ll enjoy it — Mr. Nicholson. It’s 
a great place to be here, and welcome to Regina. You’ll have to 
travel around the province to see the rest of it. I’m sure you’ll 
. . . If you like Regina, you’ll love the rest of the province. 
 
Madam Minister, I don’t believe that we sent over a list of the 
global questions that we normally do. So I think I’ll just ask you 
if you can give us a brief overview of what your department 
accomplished last year and your goals for this upcoming year. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well thank you very much for that 
question. We feel that the fact that the province is enjoying 
pretty well unprecedented economic growth, certainly 
unprecedented in terms of jobs, is something that we should all 
be proud of in the province not just the Department of 
Economic and Co-operative Development. 
 
We’re very pleased that more people are working now than ever 
before in the province’s history. Almost all of the new jobs 
created are full-time jobs. And as the parent of two teenage 
sons, I’m very pleased that a lot of those jobs have gone to 
young people. And as I say that’s something that I think all 
people in the province have to be proud of. 
 
Now in terms of direction, we believe that our role as the 
government is to define the sectors of the economy that we see 
having the greatest potential for growth, and some of them are 
traditional sectors like mining and agriculture and forestry. 
Some of them are new sectors like information technology, 
biotechnology. 
 
So to define the strengths that the province has in cooperation 
with groups like the Provincial Action Committee on the 
Economy, and other groups as, the member says, as you travel 
around the province and then to work to ensure that we have all 
the ingredients in place for success, that we have the right tax 
regime so that, for example in our key sectors, the PACE 
(Provincial Action Committee on the Economy) report said 
Saskatchewan is the most competitive place to do business if 
you are, for example, a farm implement manufacturer. 
 
That we have the right infrastructure in place. The fact that the 
University of Saskatchewan won the Canada-wide competition 
for the synchrotron, which is the most important scientific 
investment the federal government will make this decade. We 
won that because we have the right research infrastructure in 
place. We’d actually invested money in the proper research to 
lay the groundwork for that. 
 
So you need the right tax regime, you need the right 
infrastructure, you need the right regulatory regime. So the 
member opposite will know that in the area of hogs, for 
example, we had to change the regulatory regime to ensure 
growth and to ensure that we have the right training in place. 
 
So it’s that sort of role — defining what our strengths are, 
building on them, ensuring that all the ingredients are in place 
for success. 
 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

And I think, finally, to ensure the attitude is right here that we 
all, without becoming boastful, take pride in the 
accomplishments that we as a province should take pride in, and 
that we talk to other parts of Canada and the world about what 
Saskatchewan has to offer. 
 
And I know when Mr. Nicholson and some of the other 
candidates were here, they were applying for the job of Deputy 
Minister of Economic and Co-operative Development because 
they believe strongly in the potential of this province. So we 
need to be proud of what we’ve done as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. This afternoon, 
and I’m sure in the next few sessions that we have, we’ll have 
an opportunity to talk about the PACE report and the 
Partnership for Growth, and probably the next step in that, 
being that this . . . that document was the second one, I’m 
expecting a third one fairly soon. 
 
We were just talking to the Minister of Finance and he talked 
about the fact that your government didn’t believe in targeted 
tax reduction, and yet now we’re talking about targeting certain 
groups of industry growth. So it’ll be an interesting afternoon 
I’m sure. 
 
Many of the companies that I’ve talked to lately are talking 
about the regulations that were promised, that they were 
promised to see reduced in the next . . . over the next 10 years. I 
think part of the Partnership for Growth talked about reducing 
regulation of 25 per cent over the next 10 years. So we’ll be 
discussing that as well. 
 
But first of all we talked about the jobs, or you’ve talked about 
the jobs, and I understand that there’s about 12,000 jobs — is 
that the number that you’re talking about? — that the province 
created last year. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Member opposite, you always get 
into different numbers. Depends how you’re doing it. This 
number is March over March so you go — because that’s where 
the most recent numbers — this March 14,300 more people 
working than last March. You can do it month by month or you 
can do it on an average, year average. And sometimes you get 
. . . I have examples here of organizations comparing apples and 
oranges. 
 
So the number I’m giving you is this March relative to last 
March, 14,300 more people working. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So the 12,000 I think would probably be 
January 1,’97 to December 31, ’97. That probably is where the 
12,000 would come from. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think the member opposite is right. 
It’s 1997 over 1996. It’s the second number that I’m talking 
about; rather than doing it month by month you do a 
weighted-year average. So you’re right. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you tell us 
how many of those jobs are part-time and how many were 
full-time? 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What we have here is 12,200 
full-time and only 800 part- time, which is about the way it’s 
breaking down month over month. The vast majority of the jobs 
are full-time; very, very small component of part-time jobs that 
are new. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, out of those jobs, can you 
give us an idea of what figures . . . what wage brackets these 
jobs fall into? Were the majority of these jobs in the higher 
wage brackets? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, you can’t 
do a breakdown like that. They don’t sort out the information in 
that well-defined a way. But what you can look at is incomes, 
and incomes, per capita incomes are rising in the province. 
 
So that assumes two things — the new jobs tend to be at least at 
the average or probably above the average, but also the people 
in the system are getting paid better. So our average incomes 
are rising, which would suggest that the jobs that are here and 
the jobs that are being created are at least average and probably 
above average. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, from listening to government 
releases, we understand that the job situation is just wonderful 
here in the province. And I know in my own area there’s a lot 
more . . . a lot of people that are working. But I am wondering 
why, if there was . . . if everything is wonderful, why there’s 
still an out-migration here in Saskatchewan between July and 
September of last year. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well again I’ve got a couple of 
answers to that. Statistics Canada is only one measure of what’s 
happening in terms of people in the province. And sometimes I 
think we think it’s too scientific. In the past, I know when I was 
in Finance, Statistics Canada had on different scores proven 
itself to be wrong over a period of time. But it’s one indicator 
and I don’t dismiss it entirely. 
 
What you have to look at too, though, are health care cards, the 
number of people who actually have health cards in one year 
relative to another year. Now the health care card numbers say 
that the population is increasing, that more people . . . I think 
last year 17,000 people moved in to the province, 12,000 moved 
out. So you’ve got a net in-migration of 5,000 according to the 
health care cards. 
 
Another indication is the size of the labour force. Not just the 
number of jobs, but how many people are in the labour force. 
The labour force is growing. 
 
So again it’s hard to be scientific. I think the main thing is the 
trend is increasing. The trend since 1991 has been upward, and 
all across the piece upward even including out-migration. It 
doesn’t mean that we don’t have to keep working at that. I think 
every parent in Saskatchewan is concerned that their children 
have the opportunity to work here if that’s what they choose. So 
we have to keep working on it. But I think we’re making very 
significant progress. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, the health care cards may 
have indicated that there was more people, but Statistics Canada 
indicated that there was 1,200 more people left this province 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

last year than came to the province. And this in the midst of 
some very good economic times, or at least last year was. 
 
What is the government considering? What do you think is 
going to happen this year when there quite possibly is going to 
be an economic slow-down? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well again, I’m not as pessimistic 
about what is occurring in the province. When you consider that 
we had unprecedented levels of growth when key economic 
indicators like commodity prices were not spectacular, oil 
prices were not spectacular, there was a time in this province’s 
history in which that would have just dampened the whole 
economy. 
 
What’s happening now is the base of this economy has never 
been broader. Never have we had more cylinders of the 
economy working and at more refined stages with value added 
processing and manufacturing service industries. And so 
although there are some trouble spots on a few of the indicators, 
we do not believe that this is going to significantly slow down 
the economy either. 
 
We also believe that just as . . . you may remember what 
happened in the province was the economic numbers were 
going through the roof, and as the economy was growing all of 
those numbers were doing very well. But we weren’t doing well 
in the people. We didn’t have the jobs. And we kept saying it’s 
going to catch up, and eventually about eight months ago it 
clicked in, it caught up. The jobs clicked in. I believe the same 
thing is going to happen with respect to the population. 
 
So I’d be careful if I were the opposition about pounding that 
number too hard because the day when that number does turn 
around it will be like the jobs. And all of a sudden they’ll say 
yes, we now do know for sure that the population of the 
province is growing dramatically too. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I believe that when you were 
in opposition your government relied heavily in Statistics 
Canada’s population as the indicators, and now we’re saying 
they’re misleading. I think we had better . . . we should all be 
on the same page. 
 
Madam Minister, my economic growth is predicted to be down 
to 2.6 per cent in 1998 compared to 3.3 per cent last year, so 
we’re wondering what you’re predicting for job growth this 
year. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We’ll look up the exact number that 
we have in the budget. We always put a number in the budget. 
But a couple of comments. If you look back over the last few 
years, economic forecasts have traditionally and consistently 
underestimated Saskatchewan. And I think there’s a couple of 
reasons for it. One is all the forecasts have seen an average 
crop, which we don’t always have. And I think the other thing 
is that they underestimate the extent to which this economy . . . 
it has a momentum which is feeding upon itself. 
 
So we expect there to be significant job growth this year. 
Perhaps not as dynamic as this last seven or eight months, 
because it has been unprecedented, but significant job growth. 
And we can find out the exact number for you in just a second 

here. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, in my area, I’m very 
fortunate to be in the area where there’s a lot of manufacturing 
and a lot of industry. But in the last little while, because of 
agriculture and the significant price decrease for the 
commodity, there is a lot of — I hate to use the word depression 
— but there is a lot of people that are not quite as optimistic as 
they were the last few years. 
 
Two years ago when the figures were extremely good, that was 
the year that WGTA (Western Grain Transportation Act) 
pay-out came from the federal government and we saw income 
taxes soar. This year, with the prices down, we see a 
tremendous decrease in the activity in employment, not only in 
the firms around our area with the Bourgault, Doepker, the 
firms that are involved in manufacturing equipment, but also in 
the oilfields. Many of the young people that traditionally went 
to work in the oilfields over winter found that they didn’t have a 
job this winter. 
 
Now I know that the job numbers are still saying that they, that 
they’re up higher than last year, but you’ll still find a number of 
people are feeling not very confident about going into this 
coming year. So I guess I am waiting to see what kind of 
numbers you’ll be looking at and giving to the people, so we’ll 
know what we’re banking on. 
 
Madam Minister, another area that I’d like to talk about is 
personal and business bankruptcies. They were up 7.5 per cent 
during the first half of 1997, and I was wondering how we can 
account for this in a booming economy. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Let me give you something on the 
jobs here first. Conference Board of Canada, “Economic 
Forecast, winter 1998,” they’re forecasting 2.3 per cent growth 
in jobs and employment. So our estimate usually is close to 
those but they tend to be estimates. If you look at the estimate 
last year it was quite different than the reality. We did a lot 
better. 
 
Now in terms of economic indicators, almost every economic 
indicator is a positive one. When you look at bankruptcies I’m 
not sure what the member’s talking about. If she’s talking about 
personal bankruptcies, that often has very little to do with the 
economy. It has to do with spending habits of individual people, 
and it means that they’re just extending their credit beyond the 
legitimate means that they have. And it’s got nothing to do with 
the economy of an individual province. 
 
But if you took that number and you looked across Canada, you 
would find very similar situations across the piece. In fact I 
know, because I’ve read articles talking about the fact that 
people as they opened up their wallets, consumers became more 
confident in the future, some of them went too far and became 
too confident. But I don’t see that particular statistic as a 
Saskatchewan phenomena. I think it’s a Canadian, and probably 
even broader than Canadian, phenomena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, can you give me an idea 
what the retail sales figures for the first quarter of 1998 are or if 
you have an estimate of what they are? 
 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, you’d 
have to ask the Department of Finance. Now I don’t think they 
probably have much of an estimate yet anyway because usually 
there’s a three- or four-month lag. But they’re the ones who 
would be collecting this data on an ongoing basis. They’ll 
release reports; well certainly there’ll be a mid-year report 
which will cover that. 
 
But I doubt that they’ll have much solid indication as to where 
the trend line is because there is a lag in collecting data and tax 
receipts. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, the estimates for business 
development programs are up nearly 25 per cent over the 
previous year’s budget. Can you briefly run through these 
programs that are in place? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The biggest single increase there is 
what we call WEPAs (Western Economic Partnership 
Agreement). Western . . . I forget what the acronym is. It’s 
economic partnership with the federal government. They used 
to have them in the past. The federal government let them lapse 
for a while. They’re now prepared to sign a WEPA agreement 
again. 
 
What it really is, is we put on the table $3.7 million is our 
allocation. The federal government will cost-match that money 
for projects in Saskatchewan. So really, the biggest item of 
increase is the fact that the federal government has gone back 
into cost-sharing economic development programs. And this of 
course is good news for us because it means that the federal 
government is willing to come in and actually participate in 
helping to develop the economy here. 
 
The kinds of projects that would be involved, some of the 
interim funding for the synchrotron, the major project that I 
mentioned, comes through things like WEPA agreements. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, this is very interesting. Can 
you . . . the federal government is actually cost sharing an 
economic development here in the province. Is this something 
that the provincial government does all the administration and 
the advertising and giving the businesses an opportunity to 
know that this is happening? Or how do the businesses in the 
province, how do they get to know about this program? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — They don’t tend to be programs that 
businesses participate in directly. What you do is you sign an 
agreement with the federal government to invest certain 
numbers of dollars, often in economic development 
infrastructure, that you both agree, you know, here’s the terms 
of reference, here’s the sorts of projects that you look at. 
 
But they wouldn’t be . . . they would be very unlikely that they 
would be programs that the average business person would 
participate in. It would be things like . . . now this isn’t one that 
is in fact the case, but the R&D (research and development) 
park building at the University of Regina would be the sort of 
thing that you might cost share; the synchrotron, parts of the 
early stage development of the synchrotron. 
 

So they would be things that advance economic development by 
building say the innovation and technology infrastructure for 
the province — those sorts of projects. Or perhaps potentially 
investments in things like tourism to build the infrastructure for. 
And again this is not decided; I’m just pulling this example out 
of my hat. 
 
If people believe, as I do, there’s huge potential in this province 
for ecotourism. We don’t have the infrastructure for ecotourism 
in the North, which means basic facilities, so we may agree to 
invest in joint government projects for that sort of 
infrastructure. 
 
But it’s those sorts of programs. The agreement hasn’t been 
signed yet so we haven’t mapped out exactly what the terms of 
reference would be. But it will be of that . . . projects of that 
kind. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, the project you’re talking 
about is the one that went from $475,000 to $3.75 million? Is 
that the project that we’re discussing at this time? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It’s just the way they categorize. 
You have to . . . if you’re spending money you have to put it 
under some subheading. So I guess it was put under business 
investment programs because it seemed like the most 
appropriate kind of title to put it under. It should have probably 
been under a title of its own because it isn’t really a business 
investment program as much as it’s a federal-provincial 
investment program. So it was put there because it had to be put 
under some title; that seemed like the most appropriate one. 
 
Ms. Draude: — The only example that you have given me that 
you didn’t say isn’t a real example was synchrotron. I 
understand, and correct me if I’m wrong, it hasn’t been 
formally okayed for here. We’re spending money to make sure 
we do get the project, I believe is the right way to put it. 
 
Can you tell me if there’s any other agreements that you’re 
working on right now. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The main project we would be 
working on with the federal government right now is the 
synchrotron. The synchrotron will mean about $170 million 
investment in Saskatchewan. 
 
As I mentioned before, Canada is the only G-7 country that 
doesn’t have the synchrotron. The federal government decided 
that we should have one. There should be a competition to 
decide which facility had the capacity to develop the 
synchrotron. The University of Saskatchewan won. I believe we 
should all be proud in Saskatchewan of the fact that we won. 
 
So our major focus in dealing with the federal government on 
economic development has been on ensuring that we put in 
place the funding that’s required for the synchrotron. The main 
source of funding for the synchrotron will be the Canadian 
Foundation for Innovation. That would . . . they could 
potentially provide 40 per cent of the funding. 
 
Then our task has been to work with the federal government to 
identify the rest of the capital funding and to also identify the 
operating funding. And although we haven’t completed the 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

discussions, I’m very optimistic that we will actually land this 
project. 
 
But that’s been the focus. If there’s been any focus we’ve had 
with the federal government, that’s been our top negotiating 
point, and that’s what I believe is most important to the future 
of this province. If we have Canada’s only synchrotron, that 
will put this province on the map in a way that people across 
Canada and across the world will just sit up and take notice of 
us. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I agree that the synchrotron 
is a very important project. It’s something that would be great 
for Canada. I understand that we haven’t got the project . . . 
actually is not positively ours yet, and you’re working on it. 
 
But to say that it’s really important, it’s what’s going to put 
Saskatchewan on the map, I think leaves out a whole lot of 
people in this province that are working on something a whole 
lot different than the synchrotron — people that have invested 
their own hard-earned money across the province in various 
industries. And to say that we can target out one thing that’s 
going to put Saskatchewan on the map I think is not being very 
kind to the rest of this province. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell me who in government decides. 
Is it yourself? Who decides how this money is going to be 
spent, the money that is put in by the federal government? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I want to clarify 
what the member opposite is saying here. What I’m saying is 
what we as a government can do that will have the greatest 
impact, is that particular project. If there is one project that we 
have to single out, that is the one that is the most important of 
the projects that we have at our disposal right now. 
 
But it’s really not appropriate for the member opposite to twist 
that and to say that what we're saying is that we do not give 
credit to all of the people in Saskatchewan. Because as I 
mentioned earlier, we are doing well in this province because of 
the work of so many people in the province. It’s a partnership. 
It’s the cooperatives; it’s the businesses; it’s the farmers; it’s the 
workers. It’s everybody pitching in and everybody does their 
part and everybody’s part has to be recognized. So I don’t 
appreciate the comment being twisted. 
 
Now in terms of decisions, as I say, what we have to do is we 
have to be forward looking. If we did win the competition for a 
major project, our job as the government is to press the federal 
government to live up to its commitment with the finances, 
which is what we’ve been doing. To ensure that just because 
this project was awarded to Saskatchewan, rather than to 
Ontario or to Quebec or some bigger province with a lot more 
clout in the federal system, that we get our fair share and that 
we’re treated fairly. 
 
And so that’s what this is about and I think we should all 
instead of knit picking around the edges, we should all be proud 
of our successes and celebrate every success of every person 
across the piece. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I think as Minister of 
Economic Development, what you can do as the government 

would be to give all of Saskatchewan business people an even 
playing-field, and we’re talking about taxes and utilities and 
regulations and workers’ compensation and everything else that 
we have as a deterrent to business in this province. 
 
Madam Minister, I didn’t get an answer as to who actually is 
going to be doing the deciding on how this money is going to be 
spent from the federal government. I heard you talk about it 
being used on infrastructure. For me, infrastructure is things 
like roads and is the basis of our society, which is education and 
health care and highways. Is that the type of thing that you can 
spend this money on? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well probably not on roads because 
we’ll be looking for a different agreement with the federal 
government on roads. That is another part of infrastructure and 
it’s a very important part. 
 
But this particular agreement probably will not focus on roads. 
It will focus on other economic development tools. It won’t 
focus on roads because what we want to sign with the federal 
government is a national transportation scheme that ensures that 
we get some federal money in here for roads. 
 
So I can’t tell you what the projects are going to be because we 
haven’t signed the agreement. But I can tell you that we will 
ensure that we use those dollars to the best effect to ensure that 
we have the most economic development for the whole 
province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — How are people of this province going to know 
when you’ve decided what the best thing is going to be? Are 
you going to make an announcement after it’s decided or are 
you going to let people know that this is an area that the 
government is looking at that has a possibility for growth? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well to the member opposite, I 
think one of the ways that we find out what is important to 
people in Saskatchewan is by travelling around the province. 
And so when the legislature isn’t sitting, I spend huge amounts 
of time going around the province, holding meetings with 
groups across the province, in ensuring that we do have a sense 
of what their priorities are and what matters to them. And I 
think that’ll be reflected in the decision making here. 
 
And as I say, part of governing is leading and listening. And so 
we will lead in the sense of helping to identify the different 
choices. But we’ll also listen, and those views that I hear when I 
travel around the province will be reflected in the agreement we 
sign with the federal government. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I appreciate that when we’re 
not in session, even during session, you’re probably doing a lot 
of travelling around, as we on this side of the House are. And at 
the same time, I imagine you get the kinds of letters and faxes 
that we get every day. I’d like to give you an example of one 
that I received in my office today. It says: 
 

Taxes are killing businesses in this province. Money that 
should be used for upgrading equipment and improvements 
in my business is being sent to Regina. 

 
That’s the kind of questions and responses that we get every 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

day. And I am wondering what you say when people tell you 
this, give you this kind of information. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I don’t . . . I think what we 
need to look at is, not what the opposition says or what the 
government says, what independent agencies say about our tax 
regime. The Provincial Action Committee on the Economy 
looked at the Saskatchewan tax regime and assessed its 
competitiveness relative to other jurisdictions and they found 
some interesting things. 
 
As a place to do business, it’s 12 per cent cheaper to do 
business in Saskatchewan than it is in any comparable 
American jurisdiction, mainly because many of those American 
companies end up paying significant health care costs. 
 
If you want to start in business in Saskatchewan, it’s 18 per cent 
cheaper to start a business here than in Winnipeg; a full 29 per 
cent cheaper to start a business here than in Calgary. 
 
So when you look at business, you have to look at the whole 
package of the cost of doing business. This is a very 
competitive place to do business. And we’re particularly 
competitive in the areas that we’ve targeted — manufacturing 
and processing. The tax regime in this province for 
manufacturing and processing is simply the best in Canada. 
 
So we feel that this place is already competitive. We’re 
committed in each and every budget to lower taxes, to actually 
do targeted tax reductions and across-the-board tax reductions, 
as we can afford to, to ensure that we’re even more competitive. 
 
So I think on that score, we’ve got a lot of positive news to talk 
about and a lot of positive news to feed back to people who 
write those letters. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Yes, Madam Minister. This is one of the real 
people in the province that have started a business and have 
concerns. Provincial Action Committee on the Economy of 
course did a very good job and we’ll be talking about some of 
their statements in the next little while. 
 
But when we talk about the costs of starting a business in 
Saskatchewan compared to an American jurisdiction, where we 
know it’s the health care, starting a business here in 
Saskatchewan, we say it’s lower than Winnipeg and Calgary, it 
says right in your book here, it is because of the start-up costs 
and a lot of that is the cost of land. And that the land itself is 
considerably cheaper here than in Calgary. So I guess when 
we’re worried about this I think the people of this province 
know very well what they’re investing their money in. 
 
Madam Minister, the targeted areas that this government has 
decided is something that will keep the province going, that is, 
the film industry, the hog industry, and the potato industry, and 
synchrotron are great projects. But there are thousands and 
thousands of other ones that people are trying to make happen 
that they’re finding very difficult. In fact some of the people 
that were in the gallery a few minutes ago, the elk breeders, are 
probably ones that would say that they could use some help. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to touch on another area and that is 
the REDAs (regional economic development authority). I see in 

the budget the REDAs’ funding nearly doubled this year. Can 
you tell us where that money is expected to be going? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
I know talks a lot about rural Saskatchewan. And if you look 
across rural Saskatchewan, regional economic development 
authorities are probably one of the most important vehicles to 
promote economic development in rural Saskatchewan. Parts of 
the province where they have really effective REDAs, the jobs 
created are really quite phenomenal for the dollars invested. 
 
So we’ve had complaints from REDAs that they could do even 
more if they had better funding, so we’ve allocated new 
funding. We’re sitting down talking to them about exactly how 
it’s going to be spent. 
 
But there’s two issues. We want to give more developmental 
support to some of the REDAs that are not doing quite as well 
as the very best REDAs; so that all of the REDAs are top-notch 
and are in the no. 1 category in terms of achievement. 
 
And we also want to deal with some of the concerns about 
REDAs. In your area, for example, the riding next to yours is 
doing very well and they’ve hit a cap. They’re doing so well in 
Humboldt that they’ve hit a ceiling. We want to see if we can 
open up a ceiling so that they can actually continue to create 
jobs. 
 
We also want to talk to them about ways of involving more 
young people in REDAs so that we can give young people their 
first opportunity for a job in a rural community; so they can stay 
in that rural community. And if you look at other co-op or 
internship programs like that, often getting that first job gives 
you the contacts you need to get another, permanent job in that 
particular area. So we see it as a way to help retain young 
people in rural Saskatchewan. And we’ll also work with the 
REDAs to ensure that the dollars are in place to have the 
training that we need across the piece. So again, there’s a level 
playing-field, all REDAs have staff that are of the highest 
quality in terms of access to training. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I’m not exactly positive of 
the number of REDAs there are in the province. I imagine you 
can give me that number. But will you also give me an idea of 
how many of these REDAs are doing what you consider to be 
well — that they’re actually operating within the guidelines to 
the optimum that you had expected they could? Tell me what 
percentage of the REDAs are in that category. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I would put it this way. There 
are 25 REDAs in the province. There are five or six that are 
moving so quickly that we are struggling to keep up with them. 
So they’re doing better than well. And I think we see them as 
the models. Therefore we want to ensure that every other 
REDA is doing just as well as the rest. But they all have to be 
delivering a minimal level of service to get funding. They have 
to file reports. They have to say, we’ve got a plan; here’s the 
progress we’re making on our plan. And so they all have to a 
minimal level, otherwise they’re not government funded. 
 
But there are five or six across the province that are exceeding 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1998 

anybody’s expectations. And so what we say is, we said let’s 
see them as a model. And we had this year the first ever REDA 
conference in Saskatoon to bring all the REDAs together, and to 
allow the five or six best ones to share some of their success 
stories with the rest; so that we can actually ensure the other 
REDAs do as well as the five or six that are way up in the stars. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, the REDAs in our local areas 
in rural Saskatchewan have an opportunity to deal with the 
industries that have specific needs. I’m wondering if you’ve 
considered . . . or if there’s work being done to allow them to do 
job training, or to work with the industries and see specifically 
what they need to ensure that the REDAs are growing in a way 
that industry needs; so that we don’t end up with another type 
of bureaucracy that isn’t really meeting what the industries’ 
needs are at this time. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well if you look at the Humboldt 
REDA, they’re heavily involved in training because they see 
that as sort of an extension of their mandate. 
 
I know in Yorkton they . . . We were just in Yorkton on Friday, 
and there were I believe 400 businesses that have gone through 
that particular . . . it’s not just a REDA; it’s also a federal 
agency, federal, provincial, municipal agency all under one 
roof. 
 
So obviously they are using the REDAs, and they’re using the 
REDAs for, in some cases, training as well. But our training 
strategies goal is to also be sensitive to that, to ensure that our 
training strategy is geared to institutional training sometimes, 
but often quick training, to ensure that the people are available 
for industry when they need them. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I believe that most of the REDAs are funded in 
the same way, that is that they receive their funding from the 
local towns and RMs (rural municipality). Are any of them 
receiving funding from any other agency? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The funding varies. I think the main 
principle that we have is it’s got to be a partnership. So if it’s a 
partnership, they have to show visible signs of local support, 
which means funding, and then we’ll put equivalent support on 
the table. 
 
They tend to be municipal governments, but not always. In 
Saskatoon they have a business component; businesses actually 
contribute financing to the REDAs. So it varies. 
 
I think the main concept that’s key to REDAs is, if the 
community support is there, the funding follows. That is, the 
local communities are buying in so they’re actually putting their 
dollars on the table, and therefore we welcome those sorts of 
partnerships. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, a number of the REDAs in 
my area are funded directly by the municipalities or the town 
councils. And the increase, the $60,000 that is . . . I guess can 
be doubled this year, is based on the fact that the local money 
will also increase. 
 
Now the problem with this is our local RMs, whether it’s rural 
municipalities or the towns, have been cut back so drastically 

by this government. Their funding has decreased probably up to 
60 per cent or higher and they’re struggling big time to try and 
find enough funds to build the roads and supply the services 
that the people need. 
 
And now at the same time, in order to get their REDAs going, 
they’re also asked to put in more money so that the REDAs can 
also grow as well. 
 
Now REDAs are a good idea but we’re again asking the people 
who have always balanced the budgets, the people that are 
working with the least opportunity to get additional funding, to 
put more money in to see the economy grow. 
 
Now is there any opportunity for this government to recognize 
the value of the REDAs in a way that isn’t going to cost the 
taxpayer sitting in his house again more money directly through 
their property taxes and trying to get the economy growing 
again on the backs of the property owners in this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I must correct the 
member opposite. The information isn’t accurate. The decision 
was not to double the funding at all for the REDAs. The 
decision was to . . . you have situations . . . Let me give you 
some concrete examples of what we’re dealing with. 
 
Have a situation in your area, exactly your area, where you have 
a REDA doing very well, a Humboldt REDA. It’s just, as I say, 
going through the stratosphere. It’s one of them that’s leading 
all the rest. Other parts of that region want to joint that REDA. 
But because there’s a cap of 60,000, they can’t join and get 
extra money from the province, which is a foolish situation. So 
we need to change the rules and we need to sit down and figure 
out a way to encourage success. 
 
If a REDA is going well — it’s hit its cap— but other 
communities want to join into that REDA, we shouldn’t be the 
people saying, whoops, sorry, you’ve hit a rule here. So we 
want to free up the system to allow the money that’s already 
locally generated — the money is there waiting to be 
cost-matched — so that we can be part of that local success and 
not an obstacle to the local success. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I appreciate the fact that 
maybe you are changing the rules to ensure that the REDAs can 
change to grow and expand in whatever way it would take to 
make sure that the people can benefit from the program. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, the local contribution is still 
coming from the RMs and the taxpayers, who are trying to not 
only build the roads and keep the water and sewer system going 
and to ensure that, and that the infrastructure is there for the 
people that is putting the money in, but we also . . . they are also 
asked to put money into the REDA. Whether it’s double or not, 
I’m sorry if I made a mistake in those numbers. 
 
What I am saying is that I have a letter sitting in front of me 
right now from one REDA who says that they don’t have the 
same opportunity for growth as some of the other areas because 
their local RMs and their local towns don’t have the funding to 
put into the REDA. And that’s where I’m asking if the 
government has looked at these situations to find out if they 
can’t, if they can’t, like you said, look at individual REDAs and 



April 27, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

see what they need and ask if there is some way that they can 
help to get the economy going. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I think what, what I would say 
to the member opposite, two things. I already talked about the 
example where a REDA is doing really well and wants to 
expand and our particular rules as they exist now are an 
obstacle to expansion. So we want to end that situation. We 
want to be promoting success, identifying with success, helping 
success, not, not being an obstacle. 
 
We also want to ensure though, across the province, that 
communities that want REDAs have the capacity to do that. It’s 
like a co-op. You can’t create a co-op in Regina, you can’t 
create a REDA in Regina. If the local . . . We can go in and give 
them advice about how to get the local momentum going, how 
to reach out to their communities, how to do a business plan, 
how to do a mission statement. But if the local will isn’t there, 
then we don’t have the capacity to go in and create it. 
 
So if the will is there, what we want to do is sit down and talk to 
them about how we can help bring it together for them. The 
problems that they have tend to be more organizational, or 
getting together a plan or a mission statement. And our role is to 
facilitate that, to ensure that we are there to help the REDAs as 
they . . . the ones that are doing well and also the ones that are 
struggling. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I would like to go on to 
another area. Should I go on to the . . . into the area of the film 
industry, or would you . . . 
 
I believe the government has put a lot of faith in the increased 
film production industry in Saskatchewan with this new tax 
credit. Can you give us your forecast for the film industry in 
Saskatchewan over the next year in terms of the number of 
productions and the number of permanent, full-time jobs that 
will be created? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We have a number of estimates. The 
estimate from the Saskatchewan Motion Picture Association is, 
by 2001 the number of jobs will go from 500 to 1,760, which is 
about three times as many jobs. Our Department of Finance 
estimates about 1,450. So it’s in that sort of range in terms of 
what we expect. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................787 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................787 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................787 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................787 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................787 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................787 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................787 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................787 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................787 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................788 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................788 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................788 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................788 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 125th Anniversary of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................788 
 Protein/Oil/Starch Pilot Plant Expands 
  Koenker .....................................................................................................................................................................................788 
 Minister of Health Address to Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................789 
 Weyburn Red Wings Win Anavet Cup 
  Bradley.......................................................................................................................................................................................789 
 Saskatoon YWCA’s Women of Distinction Awards 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................789 
 Extension of Cellular Services 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................790 
 Changes to the Young Offenders Act 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................790 
 Sunrise Lions Indoor Games 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................790 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................790 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................790 
 Meadow Lake Pulp Mill Losses 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................791 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................791 
 Regina Emergency Services 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................792 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................792 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................792 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................793 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................793 
 Saskatchewan Union of Nurses Convention 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................793 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................793 
 Federal-Provincial Environmental Ministers’ Conference 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................794 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................794 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................795 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................795 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................795 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................795 



 

  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................797 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................800 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................802 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................804 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................806 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................807 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................807 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Economic and Co-operative Development — Vote 45 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................808 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................808 
 
 
 


