





























































Hansard: May 15, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1171 
 May 15, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present petitions today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 

These signatures, Mr. Speaker, come from Carlyle, Weyburn, 
Coronation, Stoughton, Antler, Lampman, Langbank, Grenfell, 
Regina, Wawota, Gravelbourg, Willow Bunch, Weyburn, 
Yorkton, Edenwold, Moosomin, Estevan, Arcola, Manor, all 
across south-eastern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well to present petitions and 
reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to put 
an immediate halt to all plans of the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I’m presenting is signed by 
individuals from the Lebret, Fort Qu’Appelle, Edenwold areas 
of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Radville and Lake 
Alma. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. Jack Messer 
may be gone but people still want the severance back . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Now the hon. 
member will want to avoid all debate I’m sure and proceed 
immediately to the presentation of his petition in the orderly 
form or else pass his place. 
 
Mr. Heppner: —  
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these are signed by the good people from Mayfair, Speers, 
and Hafford. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people concerned about the impending closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Ceylon, Weyburn, and Radville, Mr. Speaker. I 
so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition to present 
today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Prince Albert 
and Bengough. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition as well to present 
to the Assembly this morning dealing with the issue of the 
Plains hospital and the impending or possible moratorium that 
we’re all hopeful of. These petitioners come from the Alida, 
Gainsborough area of Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to present on 
their behalf. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition is also on 
behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan with respect to 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on the petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
good people of Ituna, Hubbard, and Yorkton. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

colleagues in bringing forward petitions and Saskatchewan 
people’s efforts in stopping the closure of the Plains hospital. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petitions that I 
have today are from Mankota, Fir Mountain, Glentworth, and 
Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the Plains Health 
Centre closure. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Lafleche. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Goodeve, from Ituna, from Hubbard, and from all 
throughout the land, and I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
rise again today on behalf of people of Saskatchewan to present 
a petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has signatures on it from the city of 
Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy 
today to present petitions on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These folks, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of Maple 
Creek and Fox Valley and Piapot, which is a small town to the 
east. And I’m happy to present them on their behalf today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12 they are hereby 
read and received. 
 

Of citizens humbly praying to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements for the funding for the 
twinning of the Trans-Canada Highway; of citizens 
praying to save the Plains Health Centre; of citizens 
praying to put a moratorium on the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre; and finally of citizens praying to have the 
Workers’ Compensation Board Act amended to reinstate 
pensions for disenfranchised widows and widowers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got two notice 
of motions here. The first one is, I give notice that I shall on 
Wednesday next move the first reading of a Bill to amend the 
northern municipalities airports Act. 
 
And the second one is that I give notice that I shall on 
Wednesday next move first reading of a Bill, the northern Act. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 52 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: with respect to the 
Saskatchewan community pastures program, (1) which of 
the pastures in the program offer the additional service of 
backgrounding of calves during the 1997 pasture season; 
and (2) what were the net profits or losses for each of the 
calf backgrounding projects during the 1997 pasture 
season, shown separately? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature, in 
your gallery in the back row, a number of representatives from 
the credit union system in Saskatchewan. 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

And I won’t introduce all of them but I would like to introduce 
Elwood Harvey, who is the president of the board of directors 
of Credit Union Central and also a member of the Saskatoon 
Credit Union; and Colin Markusson, who is the first 
vice-president of the board of Credit Union Central and from 
the Raymore Credit Union. He also is the Chair of The Credit 
Union Act rewrite working committee who has been very 
involved with the drafting of The Credit Union Act for this 
session of the legislature. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome these people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the official opposition, we too would like to extend a 
welcome to representatives from the credit unions. It’s certainly 
has been our privilege to sit down with them and discuss, and 
we’ve discussed it for a number of years as they’re aware of it, 
The Credit Union Act that they’ve been looking forward to. 
 
And we want to thank them for their input and welcome them to 
the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, on behalf of the 
Liberal opposition, would also like to extend a sincere warm 
welcome and an expression of appreciation for the input, the 
dialogue that we’ve had recently, and we appreciate and look 
forward to working with them continuing into the future. Thank 
you. Welcome and thank you for being here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you I’d like to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. 
Miles Vass, who is in the east gallery today. Miles of course is a 
gentlemen from Carnduff, Saskatchewan who has worked very 
hard on behalf of his friends and neighbours in the agriculture 
industry, mostly the farmers around the area, in the areas of 
surface rights and the attempts of course to achieve some 
fairness in surface rights for agricultural producers. 
 
Much like the people from the credit unions, who I’m also glad 
to see here, Miles works on behalf of other people at his own 
cost and expense to a large extent. They have of course, in the 
credit union movement, have worked for many years to get their 
legislation that’s coming up soon and will be passed. Miles of 
course has been waiting since 1997 when Alberta put into effect 
the very legislation that he would like to see in Saskatchewan. 
And we’re hoping that he will have success as well. 
 
I’ll ask all members to please join with me in welcoming Miles 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is again my pleasure to introduce to you this year a group of 
students who come to us from Balfour Collegiate. They’re 
seated in your gallery. They’re enrolled in the special tutorial 
class. I say that I’m pleased, because on previous visits these 

students have shown themselves to be very attentive to what is 
happening in question period. They’ve also prepared very many 
good questions; so it’s a real treat to sit down with them as I 
hope to later again to discuss what’s happening here in the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I would ask all members to join with me to extend them a 
warm welcome today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
my colleague from Cypress Hills in welcoming Miles Vass to 
the Assembly today. Miles is one of our neighbours just to the 
south of my home community and works very hard on behalf of 
the South-East Surface Rights Association. 
 
Again, I’d like to ask members to welcome him to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the rest of us assembled here today, I’d like to introduce, 
sitting in your gallery a group of grade 2 and 3 students from 
Avonlea School in Avonlea, accompanied by Denise 
Dombowsky, their teacher, and a number of chaperons; Mrs. 
Beingessner, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, Mrs. McRorie, and Mrs. 
Knowles. 
 
I’ll look forward to seeing them later this morning — or one of 
my colleagues depending on how things go here this morning. 
So I’d just like everyone to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a very 
special young man in the House today. And though his mother 
is here — she’s a very shy person, she doesn’t want to introduce 
him — I’d like to introduce the gallery to Alan MacKinnon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Importance of Credit Unions to Rural Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have been hearing 
about bank mergers for some time. Many of us suspect this will 
have a negative impact on rural areas in terms of availability of 
financial services. This is why credit unions are so important to 
this province. 
 
There are communities in my constituency like Speers, Borden, 
Langham, Marcelin, Leask, and Asquith where credits unions 
are the only financial institutions. There are also towns like 
Perdue where the banks simply picked up and left the 
community, but credit unions came in to fill the void. I know 
many of you can relate to this in your own constituencies. 
 
The Credit Union Act modernizes business powers to allow 
credit unions to offer a broad range of financial and other 
services to members and non-members. It provides access to 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

non-member investment capital for credit unions, but also 
ensures members retain control over credit union affairs. 
 
The Act allows credit unions to use electronic communications 
to conduct meetings of directors, members, and shareholders 
and to file documents. Market practice codes have also been 
instituted and regulatory roles and practices modernized. 
 
In short, The Credit Union Act is this government’s response to 
the bank mergers as it puts credit unions on a level playing-field 
with banks while retaining their community-based character. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Nursing Week 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
nurses week in Saskatchewan is winding down. And the Liberal 
opposition had hoped to see the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government do more to address the increasing workloads and 
the stress of front-line health care workers. Instead, we watched 
the Minister of Finance launch into a tirade demonstrating how 
much he values the concerns being expressed by nurses 
throughout this province. 
 
We have been warned by the Premier to start addressing the real 
issues. We have a similar warning. Start addressing the fact that 
nurses are overworked and overstressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not only Nursing Week; this is also Mining 
Week. And we believe that there may be some confusion on the 
government side of the House. Why else would the NDP 
government be giving nurses the shaft? 
 

Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The eighth 
annual Cathedral Village Arts Festival has become a right of 
spring in Regina Centre. In fact I think you can go right from 
the Moose Jaw festival over to the Regina one because one ends 
as the other starts. 
 
It starts on Victoria Day with a kick-off pancake breakfast and a 
full day of family activities in Turtle Park. This Saturday, May 
16, we build a little momentum with a full community garage 
sale. But the festival includes a full week of art, film, food, 
crafts, music, dance, poetry, theatre, buskers, drumming, and 
much more. 
 
This festival has a couple of special events, including yart. Now 
this is where you can transform your own yard into a work of 
art or to a land of intrigue, and also you have a chance to use 
those Christmas lights one more time. As well, the public art 
committee and the Cathedral business association have gone 
together to put banners along 13th Avenue, and anybody can 
take a drive and have a look at those specially made banners. 
 
It culminates the following Saturday with a full day and 
evening of food, craft fair, and performance venues. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I know you’ll be disappointed, but they’ve invited me 
— not you — to the dessert tasting contest on Saturday. And as 
well I have an event with a friend of mine from Pakistan and 

tabla player, Nadeem Naz, called the Rhythm of Unity. 
 
So come one, come all, and have your soul reawakened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Benefits for Veterans’ Spouses 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the members of 
this Assembly, war is something of an abstract concept that 
fortunately we have never seen. But our country’s veterans have 
never been that fortunate. It is our war veterans who bought and 
paid for the freedom that we as Canadians enjoy today. We owe 
an insurmountable debt to those who risked their lives, those 
who lost their lives, and those who gave their loved ones for the 
life we enjoy today. 
 
Sadly today many veterans are no longer with us. There are 
currently 10,000 veterans in Saskatchewan and about 150,000 
in Canada. Their average age is 77. And it is incumbent upon 
all of us to ensure their final years are filled with dignity and 
respect. 
 
Currently veterans have access to veterans independence 
programs — a program designed to help them stay in their 
homes as long as possible. But under this program the benefits 
to veterans’ spouses are cut off one year after the veteran’s 
death. Many spouses desperately need this program to remain 
independent in their homes. 
 
As a member of the Spalding Royal Canadian Legion and in my 
capacity as an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), I 
have spoken to many veterans and their spouses about this 
issue. We have drafted a petition calling on the federal 
government to change the veterans independence program to 
provide benefits for veterans’ spouses until their death. This 
weekend at the provincial board meeting a resolution was 
passed to support this petition.  
 
I would ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 
calling on the federal government to reaffirm their commitment 
to our veterans for this wish. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SABEX Award Winners 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday evening 
in Saskatoon the winners of the 1998 SABEX (Saskatoon 
Achievement in Business Excellence) awards were announced 
at a gala banquet. 
 
And the winners are as follows: for the hall of fame award 
recipients, Mr. Gerry Rose and Mr. Harold Latrace; for new 
business venture, Terminal Systems International; for new 
products, prairie Free Press newspaper; customer service, 
Westwind Aviation; for marketing, Cover All Shelter Systems 
Inc.; for community involvement, M.D. Ambulance; for 
exports, Wavecom Electronics; for innovation, Terminal 
Systems International; for growth and expansion, Cover All 
Shelter Systems, Inc.; and for business of the year, Wavecom 
Electronics. 
 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

Although special recognition is given to these particular 
businesses and to the finalists in the SABEX process, it’s really 
all of Saskatoon and district and all of the province that benefits 
from the business community in Saskatoon — for their 
enterprise and their contributions to the economy, the quality of 
life we enjoy, and the opportunities that we have for the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News Headlines 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, here are five recent good 
news headlines from Saskatchewan weekly newspapers. (1) 
“Successful year brings expansion,” Davidson Leader, April 27; 
(2) “Shaunavon GM set to build new dealership,” Shaunavon 
Standard, April 28; (3) “Kamsack firm expanding to Canora,” 
Canora Courier, April 29; (4) “Building supply store expands,” 
Kamsack Times, April 30; (5) “Construction boom,” Shaunavon 
Standard, May 5. 
 
These headlines have two things in common, Mr. Speaker: one, 
each is further proof that the Saskatchewan economy and 
Saskatchewan communities, especially our smaller 
communities, are doing quite well; two, each story comes from 
the constituency of an opposition member, members who ignore 
the good fortunes of their province. 
 
One is tempted to think, Mr. Speaker, that they, the official 
opposition and the third party, spend their time praying for bad 
news, all for the sake of short-term political gain, as opposed to 
applauding the economic success stories all around them. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, they can prove me wrong by 
applauding today’s good news. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

College Mathieu 80th Anniversary Celebrations 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, many households across 
Saskatchewan yesterday witnessed the end of an era. Although 
some nervous members opposite might think I’m talking about 
their days in this Chamber, if it’s any comfort, I’m talking about 
Seinfeld. The Seinfeld era came to an end much like the 
previous Tory administration — with all of them ending up in 
jail. 
 
However, now all eyes in the community of Gravelbourg are 
turning towards celebrations this weekend in their community, 
some rather special celebrations to mark the 80th anniversary of 
College Mathieu. Over the years, College Mathieu overcame 
many turbulent times, most notably the fire which gutted much 
of the facility in 1988. 
 
Dedicated people rebuilt because they strongly believed in the 
value of providing an excellent education in a francophone 
setting. Aside from offering a strong, francophone-based 
secondary education, the college also serves as a focal point for 
the francophone community in Saskatchewan by making many 
educational, recreational, and cultural opportunities available. 
 

Alumni from across the country are attending and some will 
even be entertaining at the celebrations. The highlight of the 
weekend will however, be graduation celebrations for the class 
of ’98. 
 
I’m sure all members join me in congratulating students, staff, 
alumni, and the community, and wish them an enjoyable 
weekend. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News for Weyburn Economy 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise here 
today to inform this Assembly of many good things happening 
in the Weyburn economy. Weyburn Inland Terminal is 
constructing a new pellet mill facility to produce animal feed 
from the screenings left over from grain cleaning. The terminal 
was also honoured with a Canadian Wheat Quality First Award. 
 
The Weyburn Wheat Pool elevator is adding new 
grain-cleaning equipment to its expanding facilities and 
screenings will be utilized in the Wheat Pool’s new subsidiary, 
Cangro Food Processors. 
 
A new 40-bed, private nursing home is under construction. The 
$1.5 million project will create 30 jobs. 
 
Paradise Herbs, a local company that grows and wholesales 
herbs and spices, is purchasing the former Co-op store building. 
They plan to employ as many as 15 full-time employees. 
 
ARC Design Studios, specializing in architectural designs, 
opened recently. 
 
And tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, I will be bringing greetings on 
behalf of the province and my constituents at the grand opening 
of a new retail store in the Weyburn Square, Bata and Athlete’s 
World. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these stories have two things in common. One, 
they illustrate the strength of Saskatchewan’s economy. Two, 
they’re all happening in my constituency and I’m proud of it. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower Computer Project 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskPower. Mr. 
Minister, yesterday you told us that your $100 million computer 
purchase, code name the Delta Project, was a good deal. And of 
course we’ve heard the same thing from you about Channel 
Lake and about Guyana before they all went down the tubes. 
You’ve also told us that you’ve learned some really valuable 
lessons from Channel Lake and so we just really want to find 
out what you’ve learned besides giving your deals code names. 
 
First of all if it was such a good deal, why wasn’t it announced? 
Why would we have to learn about this $100 million deal 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

through a brown envelope from one of your employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when the 
member asked the question he also passed along a document. 
And while he was talking about what a terrible deal this was, in 
the document, his own — as he says — secret document, it says 
and I quote: “Total benefits over the analyzed period will be a 
sum of $174 million.” He talks about the investment being 99 
million and his document says the analyses show that the 
benefit will be $174 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in today’s Leader-Post as well it indicates that the 
company doing the work for SaskPower, I quote: 
 

The SAP software is renowned for its excellence, 
according to industry analysts. About 150 to 200 Fortune 
500 in the U.S. use the Germany-based system and even 
Microsoft and IBM are running their business on the 
German software neither one of them makes. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say to the members opposite that their 
condemnation of the Crown corporations in Saskatchewan is 
well understood. They want to privatize them and they’re trying 
to undermine them and destroy them, and by doing that 
attacking thousands . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I trust that the 
analysis was done by the same genius, Mr. Christensen, who 
didn’t even bother reading the contract he put his signature 
onto. Mr. Minister, you can excuse us for being nervous in light 
of the record over there at SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you’ve learned so many lessons from the whole 
Channel Lake deal, the question is, did you learn to tender this 
project. If you have tendered this $100 million project, will you 
table all the bids you received in regard to this Delta Project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to you that the 
member opposite, who continually harangues the employees of 
SaskPower and employees of all the Crown corporations . . . I 
say the record of SaskPower stands on its own. It’s a very good 
power corporation in the context of Canadian power companies. 
It’s got excellent employees. 
 
Is it perfect? No, it’s not perfect. But I can tell that member, 
who has joined the Conservative Party recently, that compared 
to any of the approaches that your group, the Tories of 
Saskatchewan, used in running up a $15 billion debt, I’ll tell 
you, you can stack up the record of the Power Corporation 
today against any of the deals that your government made. 
 
As to this project, I want to say that the process is followed and 
the board recommendation and approval are all in place. Any 
questions on the details of the project, I’m sure the Crown 
Corporations Committee will get into and all the answers on 
this arrangement will be provided. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
concern is always we get the answers after you’re already 
deeply in trouble and the money is already gone. 
 
What we want to know is, before the fact, before you finalize 
this deal, what information are you going to share with us and 
with the public of Saskatchewan about the due diligence that 
you kept talking about in Channel Lake. What information are 
you going to share with us in terms of the detailed analysis of 
the cost and benefit analysis other than one piece of paper that 
we got leaked to us in a brown envelope? 
 
Are you going to share with the people of Saskatchewan who 
got the management consulting contract? Who are the computer 
consultants involved in the potential awarding of this contract? 
And did you look at any local — ISM (Information Systems 
Management Corporation) for example — contractors who 
potentially could have benefited from this deal, Mr. Minister? 
Will you give us all the facts before you’ve lost the money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that obviously the Crown corporations in 
Saskatchewan have projects and procurement of about $1.2 
billion a year. This a project of five years in duration. The 
member obviously says many times in this House that he wants 
politics removed from the Crown corporations — doesn’t want 
any politics involved in the Crowns. 
 
We have boards of directors and managers that manage $8 
billion in assets. And you say you want no politics involved. 
And yet daily, daily you come here to the House and politicise 
the Crowns. Why? Because you’re intent on privatizing them. 
And what you’re trying to do is destroy the Crowns for political 
reasons. 
 
I tell you that the processes followed will be reviewed in Crown 
Corporations Committee as has been the structure over the 
years. All of the details will be provided and I’m sure the 
members opposite will be there to ask the tough questions. And 
I say to the member opposite, who again maligns one of the 
people from SaskPower here in the House, does not do any of 
that when that individual comes to the committee. No attack on 
the individual but he maligns him here in the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Benefits for Veterans’ Widows 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today is 
for the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, although you and 
I disagree on many issues in this House we certainly agree that 
Canada is the best place in the world to live. I think you and I 
would also agree Canada would be a much different place today 
if it were not for the war veterans who risked their lives to 
protect our freedom. We owe each of these veterans a 
tremendous debt. 
 
One way the federal government repays this debt is through the 
veterans independence program, a program to help our ageing 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1177 

veterans stay in their homes and live out their final years in 
dignity. Sadly, once a veteran dies, the spouse is cut off the VIP 
(veterans independence program) benefits after one year. 
 
Mr. Premier, as a member of the Spalding Legion, I’ve drafted 
and signed a petition to call on the federal government to extend 
VIP benefits to all veterans’ spouses until their own death. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, I’ll be circulating this petition to show our 
support to our veterans and their spouses. I would like you and 
the other members of this Assembly to be among the first to 
sign it. I’ll be sending it over, and will you please sign it today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite, who raises a very important issue, that her 
idea of taking this as a project I think is a very worthwhile 
effort and I think it is one of the examples of what private 
members can do to become more involved in the process. 
 
I would take it one step further and suggest that not only a 
petition but she may want to work with other private members 
to bring forward a motion that could be commonly debated and 
voted on in private members’ day that would deal with this 
most important issue. 
 
So I say to her, without a lot of discussion or debate on behalf 
of my caucus, because that’s where that decision will have to be 
made, but I would be very receptive to taking forward the idea 
that a common resolution passed by the Assembly on the next 
private members’ day may in fact be in order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Protection Legislation 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal opposition raised concerns earlier this week about two 
Melville children who are caught in the middle of a custody 
fight. Leon Walchuk has been charged with the murder of his 
estranged wife and came within hours of getting unsupervised 
custody of their children. 
 
We believe this demonstrates how in some cases there must be 
a mechanism that kicks in to help children when the system 
fails. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Social Services. Following 
question period I will be introducing the child protection Act 
which aims to add some teeth to the system. The minister has a 
copy of this Bill and my question is, will he be supporting this 
legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve only just 
received from the member a copy of the Bill that he intends to 
introduce, so I haven’t had an opportunity to thoroughly . . . or 
even have a cursory look. 
 
I want to say to the member though that we certainly share what 
I believe is the motivation behind this Bill, and that motivation 

being to extend to the children of our province, in whatever 
circumstance they may find themselves, the best possible of 
protection and guidance and strength. 
 
On the specific issues of children which are caught in the courts 
and are sometimes trapped in battles between parents and in 
other circumstances, Mr. Speaker, our Minister of Justice and 
the Department of Justice is currently conducting a 
province-wide discussion with some documentation asking for 
input from many people in Saskatchewan how we might better 
deal and provide for children caught in those circumstances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill that we are proposing will 
add teeth to the system. It will allow the Children’s Advocate 
the authority to step in when the system has failed children. 
 
Mr. Minister, this issue must be addressed before the end of the 
current legislative session. It must not be left to die on the order 
paper. I’m not trying to play politics, Mr. Speaker. I urge you to 
pass this Bill we have proposed or make whatever amendments 
you feel are necessary to make sure it’s workable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m appealing to the Minister of Social Services 
and to the Minister of Justice to ensure that we do pass this 
legislation. It’s desperately and urgently needed in this 
province. I’m asking the minister for his commitment that such 
legislation will in fact be passed on this issue before this current 
session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say again — and 
I’ve said this in reference to other Bills that have been presented 
before the Assembly — that when legislation is introduced into 
this House, it is most appropriately introduced after there has 
been some significant public consultation. 
 
Now if the member had listened a moment ago, I have indicated 
that the Department of Justice, working interdepartmentally 
with the departments of Health and Social Services and others, 
are at this moment talking to citizens of our province, talking to 
groups, talking to families, about what should be done to better 
serve the needs of children caught in these circumstances. 
 
It would be inappropriate, Mr. Speaker, for us simply then to 
legislate before that kind of discussion. This is not to minimize 
in any way, this is not to minimize in any way the issue that the 
member raises. I want to confirm that. But you don’t simply, on 
a day, come up with a piece of legislation and then hoist it onto 
all of those who will be affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our process is to work with the people of 
Saskatchewan first. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition has 
learned that the late Tommy Douglas was inducted into the 
Canadian Medical Hall of Fame this week. He is the first 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

non-medical professional ever to be inducted. 
 
Mr. Premier, I couldn’t help but wonder, if Mr. Douglas was 
with us today, would he be fighting for or against the closure of 
the Plains hospital? What do you think? Would this great man 
who fought so hard to ensure all people in Saskatchewan have 
access to quality health care approve of your decision to close 
the Plains Health Centre? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you one thing. I’ll 
tell you one thing. One Premier of this province who would 
never be so inducted would be late premier, Ross Thatcher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to have the Liberal Party, the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan — the direct heirs of the Ross Thatcher Liberals 
who fought medicare — to have them invoking the name of 
Thomas Clement Douglas, Mr. Speaker, is almost beyond what 
I ever thought I would hear in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas in 1982 or thereabouts said to 
the people of Saskatchewan, we accomplished the first phase of 
medicare, we accomplished the first phase of medicare, and 
that’s the separation of the ability to pay from the ability to 
receive services. We built hospitalization; we built medicare; 
we built doctor coverage. 
 
He said in 1982 there was a piece we didn’t finish. That’s the 
second phase. That’s the wellness phase. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what we’re doing, in the direct descendant of Tommy Douglas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the late Tommy Douglas 
believed that health care should be available for each and every 
Saskatchewan resident, urban or rural. But each and every day 
the Liberal opposition is serving this government with evidence 
to demonstrate that Tommy Douglas’s dream is dying under the 
present NDP. 
 
The Liberal opposition believes that a landmark should be 
established so that future generations can recognize the work of 
Mr. Douglas and as a constant reminder to the present 
government demonstrating how they’ve gone wrong. Following 
question period today, we will be introducing a private 
members’ Bill to rename the Plains hospital the Tommy 
Douglas memorial hospital. 
 
Mr. Minister, what better tribute could there be for the late Mr. 
Douglas. Will you be supporting this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I understand, I understand 
that the Liberals cannot find a leader of their own to quote on 
the subject of health care, and so they will quote Tommy 
Douglas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any student of Saskatchewan or Canadian history 
know that for all the time that Mr. Douglas sat in the premier’s 
chair of this province, he was fought daily by the Liberal Party, 
the same Liberal Party that sits over there and now invokes his 

name. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tell you, I tell you, if they want to build the 
tribute to Tommy Douglas, they will join in what we’re doing 
here — building a renewed health care system for the people of 
Saskatchewan on Saskatchewan soil. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, as Mr. Douglas had to do it, we’re 
doing it without the help . . . in fact being deterred by that 
federal Liberal government which they represent. On a daily 
basis Mr. Douglas had to fight the Liberals; on a daily basis we 
have to fight the Liberals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Election Campaign in Nova Scotia 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During the recent 
provincial election in Nova Scotia, there were widespread 
media reports that Saskatchewan NDPers and perhaps 
Saskatchewan government employees were out there working 
on the Nova Scotia provincial campaign. It was also reported 
that calls were being made from a call centre in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier or Deputy Premier assure this 
House that no government staff went to Nova Scotia and 
worked on the election campaign at taxpayers’ expense, and 
will he tell this House that the phone calls that were made to 
Nova Scotia from Regina were made from government offices 
or the NDP’s big call centre. 
 
And will he also table any records for any staff, particularly 
senior staff, deputy and acting deputy ministers, that happened 
to travel to Nova Scotia or Atlantic Canada during the period of 
February 19 to March 24. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say first of 
all, the references to the election are obviously as a result of the 
fact that the NDP made historic gains in that election, and I 
understand why the Liberals are upset about it. And the worry 
of course there is that they’ll end up a rump of a party sitting in 
opposition very quickly, as you are here in Saskatchewan for a 
very good reason. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that your attempt to 
accuse government employees from Saskatchewan of going 
there at taxpayers’ expense is not accurate. But it may be true 
that some people would take holidays or days off to go and 
work against the kind of divisive party that we are seeing here 
in Saskatchewan in opposition, the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, 
that hypocritically allows the federal Liberals to cut $7 billion 
out of health care. And then roam around our province dividing 
family against family, town against town, for political benefit, 
when it’s your federal government that’s causing havoc with 
health care right across the country in every province and in 
every city. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health or whoever would like to 
respond to the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday Health ministers met in Ottawa to 
discuss the compensation package for hepatitis C victims. And 
unfortunately as we see from by the headlines it says, “Nothing 
decided at latest meeting.” That reminds me of a sitcom I 
believe that was just completed last night, a program about 
nothing. And unfortunately for hepatitis C victims, the latest 
meeting basically was a meeting about nothing. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re the Chair of the Health ministers. Mr. 
Minister, and Mr. Premier, or whoever, why would you not take 
some leadership and show hepatitis C victims that you have the 
courage and the compassion to stand up to meet their needs, and 
to call on the federal government to put in some extra funds to 
address the needs of hepatitis C victims outside of the period 
prior to ’86 and past 1990. Will you do that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to report to the 
House today on behalf of the Minister of Health, that ministers 
from across Canada yesterday met; met also with 
representatives of the Hepatitis C Society and the Hemophilia 
Society. At the close of their meeting, with the exception I 
understand of Ontario, all ministers have agreed to form a 
working group over the next three to six weeks to again wrestle 
with all of the significant issues that must be dealt with in this 
very complicated, complicated package of compensation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Conservative Party here in the legislature may 
be pleased to know that the working group is being led by the 
Conservative Government of Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it’s 
unfortunate that the Minister of Health, the Chair of the Health 
ministers of Canada today, would not take the leadership. This 
was a true opportunity for the province of Saskatchewan to take 
some leadership and to show compassion, to show a sense of 
fairness, and to give some real leadership. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did the Minister of Health not take real 
leadership and call on the federal government, rather than call 
on Mr. Rock, the Minister of Health, to also show some 
leadership and show some compassion to hepatitis C victims. 
Mr. Minister, are you going to give us the assurance today that 
this province will give some leadership in calling on support to 
hepatitis C victims who are not covered in the ’86-90 package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, that is precisely, precisely 
what this minister and this government has been doing. It’s 
providing the leadership to build a Canadian consensus. So that 
no matter if I’m a resident of Newfoundland, or a resident of 
British Columbia, or a resident of Saskatchewan, or a resident 
of Ontario suffering from hepatitis C, there is a fair and 

equitable approach to compensation. And more importantly, in 
my view, Mr. Speaker, a fair and equitable approach to 
providing for medical care for those who are suffering from this 
dread disease. That’s the leadership that this minister has been 
showing. 
 
It’s happening. The ministers have established a working group. 
They have selected, on this occasion, the Government of 
Alberta — the Tory Government of Alberta — to provide 
leadership there, and we can expect, I’m sure, further 
communication from that working group over the next three to 
six weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Damage Policies 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). Mr. Minister, SGI has decided to send a message to 
the Saskatoon man who risked his life trying to stop an armed 
gunman after a bank robbery. Unfortunately SGI isn’t sending 
its hero a congratulations note. They’re sending him a bill — a 
bill for $700. 
 
Randy doesn’t want his last name published because the bank 
robber he was trying to stop is still at large. When the robber 
fled the scene in the stolen car, Randy took up the chase and 
attempted to stop him by sideswiping him with his own car. In 
the chase, the robber tried to kill Randy, firing as many as six 
shots into Randy’s car. The end result is that Randy’s car was a 
complete write-off, and extensive damage was done to the 
stolen vehicle as well. Now SGI wants Randy to pay the $700 
deductible on the stolen car. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that how SGI thanks people who see something 
wrong and tries to do something about it? Will you call off the 
dogs at SGI and cancel the $700 bill that SGI sent Randy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that the issue she refers to was written up in the Star- 
Phoenix on May 14. The article indicates that the issue that she 
raises and the Randy she mentions, that this is in fact a serious 
issue where the individual who was, as it says here, at one 
moment a softball coach and hobby artist, the next minute a 
crime fighter chasing a fleeing bank robber around the streets of 
River Heights and dodging bullets as the masked man fired 
from a stolen car. We understand the situation to be that in an 
attempt to stop the robber, his car, in trying to ram the fleeing 
vehicle, was sideswiped. 
 
And the issue here is twofold. First of all, is Randy responsible 
for the deductible on the fleeing car as well as his own? And 
contrary to the press report here where it says SGI also will 
make him pay the 700 deductible on the stolen car that he 
side-swiped, that is not accurate. 
 
Secondly, we’re reviewing the file to make sure that Randy 
receives adequate and proper scrutiny of the situation and that 
his rights are in fact protected. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in closing, the one word of advice that I 
would give to Randy and others when they see serious crimes 



1180 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

taking place, that the attempt should be immediately to call the 
professional police — the city police or the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) — in order to avoid this kind of an 
incident. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Randy is still a victim of a crime. 
He’s the father of three and he’s facing difficult financial 
challenges. And these days he’s also living in fear because this 
bank robber is still at large. And he’s very upset with the 
treatment he’s received at the hands of the SGI staff. It’s one 
thing to say that you’re going to look at it all but it’s another 
thing to send him a bill. 
 
What he wants to hear from you is that he doesn’t have to pay 
$700 for trying to do what we’re supposed to be doing, and that 
is being good citizens in this province. Will you stand up and 
tell him that he does not have to pay that $700? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again, the issue here is 
twofold. The issue is, is he responsible for the vehicle that he 
side-swiped? I’m telling you no, he is not. 
 
Is he responsible for his own deductible on his own vehicle? 
We’re reviewing the situation. But there’s obviously an 
important issue of fact here as to whether or not an individual 
who rams another vehicle in trying to stop a stolen car and a 
thief, should pay their own deductible. We’re reviewing that. 
 
But I think the more important issue, to the member opposite, is 
the comment that I’m sure the police forces — both in the cities 
and the RCMP — would indicate, that when you’re confronted 
with this, the issue is what would you do if you did get the 
vehicle stopped and the robber has a gun and you are then going 
to do what? 
 
The issue here is, call the police and allow the professional 
people, who we pay and train to do this sort of thing, to do their 
job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 745 — The Tommy Douglas 
Memorial Hospital Act 

 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 745, An 
Act to rename the Plains Health Centre as the Tommy Douglas 
Memorial Hospital, short title, The Tommy Douglas Memorial 
Hospital Act, be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 746 — The Child Protection Act 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
that Bill No. 746, An Act Providing for the Protection of 
Children who are the subject of Custody Hearings in Courts of 

Law be now introduced and read a first time. The short title of 
the Act, The Child Protection Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Act 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 63, 
The Film Employment Tax Credit Act be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 
interest of open and forthright governance, I now table the 
answer to question 63. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 63 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Credit Union Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to rise today 
to move second reading of The Credit Union Act, 1998. 
Saskatchewan credit unions have worked in cooperation with 
this government to put before this legislature a new legal 
framework that will take them into the next century. 
 
In 1937 the first credit union legislation was enacted by this 
Assembly. That legislation was enacted to allow Saskatchewan 
people to establish a source of credit to rebuild the economy 
and their community. That same year the first credit union was 
established here in Regina — the Regina Hebrew Savings and 
Credit Union. The first rural credit union was established at 
Lafleche shortly thereafter. 
 
In his work, Deposits Fully Guaranteed,” Dennis Schroeder 
noted: 
 

. . . rural credit unions had an enormous impact on (the 
Saskatchewan) . . . economy as, for the first time, people 
were able to put their own savings to work for their mutual 
benefit and, at the same time, retain control of (the) . . . 
revolving . . . funds within their own communities. 
 

It is in this same spirit and the Saskatchewan tradition of 
cooperation and community, that this government is proud to 
present this legislation to the House today. 
 
The credit union movement has grown substantially since its 
inception. In 1947, 188 credit unions with assets of 
approximately $5 million served 31,000 members. Today, 152 
credit unions with assets of $6.24 billion serve a membership of 
over 500,000. 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

 
And in the pioneering spirit of Saskatchewan people, 
Saskatchewan credit unions are tackling the forces shaping the 
future. Today’s financial climate is, in many respects, as 
challenging as that faced by credit unions at their inception. 
Perhaps more than any other part of our economy, the financial 
services sector is undergoing rapid change. Globalization, 
advances in technology and home-based computing, and 
consumer demand for quality, affordable services, are some of 
the forces shaping the financial services sector. 
 
While Canada’s banking industry is looking beyond this 
country’s shores for new opportunities and promoting 
mega-mergers, many Canadians are asking, is bigger really 
better? What will bank mergers mean for jobs and the cost and 
availability of financial services? 
 
This government’s response to the prospect of mega-bank 
mergers is to provide the legal framework that will allow our 
own community-based credit unions to compete effectively 
today and tomorrow, and to continue to provide services to 
urban and rural citizens of this province. 
 
Recognizing there were changes on the horizon, in 1995 this 
government began an extensive consultative process to review 
financial services legislation. This process resulted in the 
passage of The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 1997 during 
the last session, and the introduction of The Credit Union Act, 
1998, and The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 
in this session. 
 
From the outset a series of goals have guided the development 
of this legislation: maintaining confidence in Saskatchewan 
credit unions, ensuring credit union competitiveness and ability 
to adapt to market changes, ensuring consumer and depositor 
protection, encouraging access to financial services and 
economic development, preserving the cooperative nature of 
credit unions, achieving elements of consistency with other 
jurisdictions. 
 
This Bill represents two years of extensive review and analysis 
and has the following major features. Credit unions can offer 
services to members and non-members. Credit union 
investments will continue to be based on the concept of the 
prudent person. There will be enhanced access to non-member 
investment capital for credit unions. Members will retain 
control over credit union affairs. 
 
(1100) 
 
The Act establishes market practice codes and provision for 
regulations if necessary. Modernized corporate governance 
processes will ensure that credit unions can benefit from 
developments in communication technology. The Act provides 
for out-of-province credit unions to provide services in 
Saskatchewan. Regulatory roles and responsibilities of credit 
unions, the Deposit Guarantee Corporation, and the registrar are 
outlined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, credit unions are seeking a modern approach to 
business powers in both structure and content that is consistent 
with modern financial services legislation. This Bill will do 
that. Mr. Speaker, this legislation will enable credit unions to 

compete with other financial institutions while preserving their 
long-standing tradition of providing excellent service to the 
people in the communities they serve in Saskatchewan. 
 
Credit unions have requested that they be able to provide 
services to members and non-members. Providing financial 
services to both members and non-members reflects the credit 
unions’ renewed vision of working together to build a better 
community and provide the best financial service anywhere, 
any time, any way. The decision to provide non-member 
services will remain with local credit unions and their 
membership. 
 
Credit unions requested that this government consider a modern 
approach to investment opportunities for credit unions. 
Currently credit unions can invest in permitted investments, 
including investments which satisfy the prudent person 
principle. 
 
This Bill will incorporate this principle and require that the 
board of each credit union act as a prudent person would with 
regard to the type and quality of investments that a credit union 
selects. In conjunction with this principle, regulations or 
standards of sound business practice will provide for a list of 
investments that are either restricted or prohibited. 
 
Additionally, credit unions will be authorized to make 
substantial investments in only those entities set out in 
regulations. Currently there is no restriction on the type of 
subsidiaries that can be owned by a credit union. Adopting a 
permitted list is consistent with the modern approach to the 
regulation of financial service providers and the corporations 
that they control. 
 
Providing for a list of permitted substantial investments also 
provides a framework within which credit unions will be able to 
enter business arrangements. Services of these companies can in 
turn be provided through the credit union to its members and 
customers. 
 
Credit unions have asked for enhanced access to investment 
capital for business purposes. The credit union capital structure 
will be composed of two principal categories of shares — 
membership and investment. 
 
Membership shares will be issued exclusively to members. New 
provisions are being added to provide the legal framework for 
investment shares. However, only the membership can approve 
changes to the articles to authorize investment shares. 
Investment shares will not detract from the members’ control 
over credit unions. 
 
Firstly, the cooperative principles in the former Act are 
retained. These include the fundamental principle of one 
member, one vote; no proxy voting for members; and 
membership control over earnings. In addition, the legislation 
continues the concept that services are primarily provided for 
the benefit of members. 
 
Secondly, the following provisions respecting investment shares 
ensure that control of a credit union remains with the 
membership while allowing for limited participation by 
investors on the board of directors: membership approval to 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

issue investment shares to non-members; membership approval 
to allow non-member investment shareholders, 
shareholder-directors on the board. A maximum of 20 per cent 
of the board can represent non-member investment 
shareholders. No one person will be allowed to hold more than 
10 per cent of the outstanding investment shares. 
 
Turning from internal matters of control and membership 
participation, I come to the relationship between credit unions 
and their members and customers. Market practice regulation is 
the term used to describe how financial products are marketed 
and sold to consumers. This Act will require that a code 
consisting of rules, and administrative procedures in support of 
those rules, be developed or adopted by each credit union. 
 
It is anticipated that the credit union system, represented by 
Credit Union Central, will develop a standard code that will be 
available for credit unions to adopt. However, each credit union 
will retain the option of filing its own code or modifications to 
any standards to tailor the code to its local business. These 
codes will address important consumer issues such as disclosure 
to members and customers with respect to products and 
services, privacy of information, fair sales practices, complaint 
handling. 
 
Credit unions have pointed out that the concept of market 
practices is well established within the system and consistent 
with the credit union’s community outlook and overall purpose 
to serve their membership’s interests. For these reasons, credit 
unions will work closely with the registrar of credit unions and 
develop the necessary code in support of this new regulatory 
direction. 
 
Credit unions have asked that extra-provincial credit unions be 
allowed to operate in Saskatchewan. Presently, out-of-province 
credit unions can only register security interests, collect on loan 
agreements, and participate in the Co-operative Superannuation 
Society. Credit unions ask the fundamental question, why are 
we denying access to sister credit unions when we are already 
competing with a multitude of other financial service providers. 
 
Before a credit union from another jurisdiction can be registered 
in Saskatchewan, the following conditions will apply. The 
credit unions will be regulated by their home jurisdiction with 
regards to solvency. Deposits from Saskatchewan residents will 
be eligible to participate in the home jurisdiction deposit 
insurance scheme or another acceptable source of deposit 
insurance. This approach will lay the groundwork for 
discussions with other jurisdictions in Canada to open their 
markets to Saskatchewan-based credit unions on a similar basis. 
 
An important aspect of the process leading up to the 
development of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, was the considerable 
time and energy spent on examining the regulatory roles and 
responsibilities with respect to the credit union system. 
 
In Saskatchewan there are three participants in regulation: the 
credit unions, the Credit Union Depository Guarantee 
Corporation, and the registrar. This Bill recognizes the 
important role each plays. Each credit union will establish a 
conduct review committee composed of board members to be 
responsible for ensuring appropriate practices and procedures 
are put in place inside the credit union. 

 
This will ensure that business considerations, combined with 
the overriding purpose of credit unions to serve members, are 
the basis on which transactions occur. In addition, credit unions 
will continue to establish an audit committee which will review 
the auditing procedures and work in conjunction with the credit 
union auditor. 
 
The other key participant in the self-regulatory approach taken 
in this legislation is the Credit Union Deposit Guarantee 
Corporation or CUDGC. CUDGC is the successor body to the 
mutual aid board established in the 1950s to maintain 
confidence in the credit union system. CUDGC manages the 
fund which supports the unlimited guarantee on deposits held in 
Saskatchewan credit unions. 
 
CUDGC has most of the ongoing responsibility and authority 
with regard to solvency matters for credit unions within the 
legislation, regulations, and by agreements with the 
government. CUDGC’s responsibilities include inspection and 
monitoring of credit unions. CUDGC plays a key role in 
developing and enforcing standards of sound business practices 
governing the activities of credit unions. 
 
This Bill will clarify that CUDGC has the primary 
responsibility with respect to credit union and system solvency 
regulations, the ability to accept other regulatory 
responsibilities delegated to it, such as market practices, and the 
tools to carry out its mandate. 
 
The registrar of credit unions will continue to work with 
CUDGC on the development of standards of sound business 
practice and will retain broad responsibility with respect to 
CUDGC and its activities and graduated powers consistent with 
that role. The registrar will continue to monitor the credit union 
system from a system perspective. The registrar will continue to 
have direct responsibility for the development and 
implementation of the market practice initiative within the 
credit union system. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, but no less important, is the question of 
credit unions and insurance. Currently the Act contains a 
prohibition against and the extent to which credit unions can 
engage in insurance activities. In this Bill the prohibition 
against insurance activities will be maintained subject to 
permitted activities in regulations. 
 
In addition, neither the Act nor the regulations will allow credit 
unions to own insurance brokerages as subsidiaries. Details 
respecting the permitted insurance activities of credit unions 
will be contained in insurance business regulations. These 
regulations will be based on similar regulations in existence 
under federal financial institution legislation and in other 
Canadian provinces. 
 
The approach taken in this Bill to this issue is consistent with 
that found in federal financial institution legislation and other 
provincial legislation. The most obvious and likely 
circumstance that could lead to changes to the insurance 
business regulations would be changes to the rules that apply to 
federal financial institutions. 
 
However this is not to say that this may be the only 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

circumstance. Saskatchewan may have cause to examine the 
regulations as the role of, and policies respecting, 
deposit-taking institutions change over time. Interested parties, 
including the Insurance Brokers’ Association of Saskatchewan, 
will have the opportunity to review changes in advance and 
provide us with their comments and suggestions. 
 
Consultation is an integral part of the regulation-making 
process in Saskatchewan. This government policy of 
consultation before regulation changes is one of the key 
principles of the regulatory reform initiative and the code of 
regulatory conduct. 
 
I wish to emphasize that the Saskatchewan government is 
committed to consulting with the Insurance Brokers’ 
Association of Saskatchewan and other parties prior to making 
material changes to the insurance business regulations. I have 
given the Insurance Brokers’ Association of Saskatchewan my 
written commitment to give them a minimum of 90 days 
advance notice of material changes to these regulations. Our 
government believes that this approach to insurance activities 
and the ownership of insurance brokerages serves the interests 
of both the insurance sector and credit unions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government will continue to work with credit 
unions to implement a Saskatchewan approach to the changes 
that are facing the financial service sector today. Our trust and 
faith in Saskatchewan credit unions is well placed. 
Saskatchewan credit unions are forward thinking and 
community oriented with demonstrated success. 
 
As part of this forward-thinking approach, Saskatchewan credit 
unions have been at the forefront of finding new ways, 
including the use of new technologies, to better serve the needs 
of their members and their communities. Saskatchewan credit 
unions have a proven track record of customer service and 
recognize that the heart of their success and strength is rooted in 
the communities and the people they serve. 
 
Saskatchewan credit unions have asked for a legal framework to 
ensure that they can continue to provide support to 
Saskatchewan communities and provide quality, affordable, 
competitive services with the same spirit of commitment that 
led to their inception. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
Credit Unions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, to 
introduce quests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1115) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And my 
thanks to my colleagues on the other side of the House for 
extending me this courtesy. 
 
It’s always a pleasure to have young people visit this Assembly. 

And it’s a particular pleasure when these young people come 
from our neighbour south of the border. So, Mr. Speaker, I am 
very pleased to introduce to you and my colleagues in the 
legislature today, 29 grade 6 to 8 students from Fairview School 
in Fairview, Montana. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Melinda Berkram, who 
is also their principal, Karen Shaide; their chaperons, Charles 
Larson and Paul Mueller; and of course they wouldn’t have got 
here without their bus driver, Dennis Duda. 
 
So I thank you for choosing to visit Regina and making this 
Assembly part of your tour. We welcome you here and hope 
you enjoy the proceedings. Please join me in extending a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to also 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
our colleague across the way in welcoming the folks from 
Fairview, Montana to our Assembly. I’ve had the privilege to 
visit Fairview and it’s a very nice community. 
 
I hope you find the proceedings very interesting. They’re 
certainly a lot different from what your state capital . . . the 
manner in which things are done. I’ve had the opportunity to 
visit in North Dakota. And while we come both from the British 
parliamentary roots, we have taken different branches to 
achieve our government styles, and I hope you find it 
interesting and informative. And welcome to the Queen City. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Justice on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
two more important people from the credit union system who 
arrived after I introduced guests before. And I would ask that 
Mr. Sid Bildfell please stand. Sid is the chief executive officer 
of Credit Union Central. 
 
And sitting beside him is Mr. Bill Turner, who is the former 
president of Credit Union Central and has been very 
instrumental in bringing forth the legislation which was brought 
to second reading today. 
 
Let’s all welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to also 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
Liberal caucus, I want to also extend our sincere welcome to 
our guests from the States and also the gentlemen from the 
credit union and the ladies as well. 
 
We certainly hope that you learn a lot from the Assembly. And 
I also want to put a special note to the credit unions that the 
work that you’re doing is most commendable and we certainly 
look forward to continuing supporting that direction that you’re 
going. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
begin by thanking the opposition for allowing me this 
opportunity to speak briefly on The Credit Union Act, 1998 as 
well. My comments today will be more from a personal 
perspective and I hope not too self-serving. 
 
As a former manager in the credit union system it is with a great 
deal of pride that I stand in my place to speak in favour of The 
Credit Union Act, 1998. As the Minister of Justice has just 
pointed out, the first credit union was established in 
Saskatchewan in 1937. Three short years later my grandfather, 
Henry Sonntag, Sr., began organizing, with his neighbours and 
other members of his community, to start a credit union in 
Goodsoil, Saskatchewan. 
 
They believed that a community-owned financial institution 
was the vehicle that would offer them the best service for the 
future. After six years of organizing, the Goodsoil Credit Union 
was officially established on September 23, 1946. They, like so 
many others, began by only offering share accounts. It was and 
I believe, some number of years before anyone could actually 
borrow any money and the maximum loan, as I understand it, 
was for $50. And that wasn’t very easy to get. Now I still have 
trouble borrowing $50, Mr. Speaker, but that’s another story. 
 
At the end of year one, the Goodsoil Credit Union had an 
amazing asset total of $840. By the third year however, this had 
grown to an astounding $3,400. At a time when large banks had 
little time for ordinary people, my grandfather and others 
continued working with the community, convincing them that 
neighbour helping neighbour was the way to go and that the 
local credit union could provide good quality service. 
 
You could always go to the credit union because the people that 
worked there were almost always local and they understood 
your needs. And so the credit union continued to strive and 
grow. In 1956, a grandson, yours truly actually, was born. Less 
than a year later my grandfather passed away before I ever got 
to know him, but he started something, Mr. Speaker, that would 
never die. 
 
In 1979, after much coaxing by several local board members, I 
agreed to submit my résumé for the position as a manager 
trainee at the Goodsoil Credit Union. I was fortunate enough to 

be the successful candidate. And early in 1980, nearly 34 years 
after my grandfather started the credit union, I began work at 
that very same credit union. 
 
Now this may date me just a little bit, Mr. Speaker, but when I 
started we calculated all of the interest and services charges 
manually and then posted the results onto the ledger cards with 
an old posting machine. 
 
As we in the provincial credit union system continued to grow, 
it was sometimes difficult to keep up with the rapid change. 
This change required legislative change as well and so in 1985, 
now as a manager myself, I was able to contribute in a very 
small way to The Credit Union Act rewrite of 1985. 
 
Our assets continued to grow, and we were now worth nearly 
$2 million. As time went by I became more involved in 
provincial committees of the credit union and the credit union 
managers association. I met many wonderful people in the 
system, many of whom are sitting in the gallery today and many 
of whom remain my very close friends. 
 
By 1988 the Goodsoil Credit Union had grown to over $4 
million in assets. I decided to move, and took on a position at 
the Meadow Lake Credit Union. As I continued my 
involvement in the system, my interests in its survival and its 
future grew. The credit union seemed to me to be the model that 
served people best. Owned and controlled locally, the profits 
were returned back into the community. It seemed a recipe for 
ongoing success. 
 
In 1990 with the moral support, if nothing else, from the 
Meadow Lake Credit Union, I sought the nomination for the 
New Democratic Party of the Meadow Lake constituency. In 
October of 1991 I was elected to this Legislative Assembly and 
the rest of course is history, as they say. 
 
With the amalgamations taking place in the banking industry, I 
think there are comparisons that can be made to 1937, when the 
credit unions were first formed. Credit unions will, in my 
opinion, be called on again to provide service to many small 
communities in Saskatchewan where, because of the 
amalgamations, the same level of service may no longer be 
provided by larger banks. 
 
To a large degree this is why legislative change is now required. 
I believe credit unions will see this as an opportunity, and 
because of their uniqueness will continue to strive and grow. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as I stand here I am sure my grandfather, 
like so many others from those early days, would be proud to 
know that his credit union now has assets of over 12 and a half 
million dollars. I think, and I say this modestly, Mr. Speaker, 
that he would also be proud to know that his grandson was 
standing in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan speaking 
in favour of legislation that would allow his dream to continue 
and to grow. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

pleasure to stand in this Assembly this afternoon and make a 
few comments regarding The Credit Union Act that we have 
before us that’s been presented to the Assembly. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated before, we certainly in the 
official opposition want to thank the staff and interested parties 
from the credit unions for their involvement and for giving us 
an opportunity to touch base with them as well regarding the 
Act. Because they know very well from our discussions that we 
had some concerns, that some issues were being raised by other 
interested groups who felt that the Act might impede their 
ability to provide a service in their small communities. 
 
What I appreciate, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that credit union 
members, managers, board members from across the province 
that I’ve had the privilege of dealing with, are very cognizant of 
that fact. They’re very aware of the fact. While there’s changes 
in their system, and while they’re calling for changes, there are 
small business that had some concerns and those were brought 
to their attention. And it would seem to me that a number of 
those concerns have been addressed. 
 
One of the issues that we were concerned about is the fact that a 
number of the terms of services were now being moved from 
legislation into regulation. However, Mr. Speaker, as we are 
aware of the changes taking place in the banking community, 
we’ve heard talks of major bank mergers much larger, I would 
assume right now, than the credit unions. But also with the fact 
that the credit unions provide a much needed service in rural 
Saskatchewan — not just rural Saskatchewan, all of 
Saskatchewan — but certainly as was pointed out and brought 
to our attention, a lot of small rural communities have nothing 
but the credit union to work with. 
 
And certainly in my area credit unions have . . . while they were 
all individuals, we now see even smaller credit unions working 
together and amalgamating to form larger bodies so they can 
provide a larger service to the communities they represent. And, 
Mr. Speaker, no doubt individual members and credit unions 
across this province see that as something that was needed. And 
certainly the membership in our area are quite pleased with the 
amalgamations that have taken place and the services that 
continue to be provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about groups that had some concerns, 
the insurance brokers certainly have raised a number of areas 
that they felt might . . . their business area might be affected 
with. I understand this legislation is addressing that. And in 
chatting with insurance brokers they feel quite comfortable with 
the legislation as it’s currently drafted. 
 
One of the areas I guess when you talk about the fact that it’s 
been a number . . . changes have been . . . will be moved to 
regulations — and I can appreciate where credit unions are 
coming from — is that as the change takes place, and if we had 
everything always confined to legislation, it would certainly be 
an impediment to credit unions if indeed they didn’t have a 
chance to move right in and work along with the banks or least 
keep up with the banks. 
 
And so as we chatted with members from Credit Union Central, 
representatives from the credit union boards, we’d appreciate 
the reasons why they felt it was imperative that we move 

towards setting some of the guidelines into regulations; so that 
when changes came and the federal Bank Act, they would be 
there and they’d be able to respond immediately so that they 
could continue to provide the service that the customers were 
looking for rather than maybe having to come to governments 
to look for legislative changes which may take place 12 to 18 
months down the road. 
 
Which means that customers would then be torn between do I 
continue to support my local credit union or do I take advantage 
of some of the advantages that the banks may have as a result of 
changes. So in this regard, Mr. Speaker, we certainly don’t have 
a problem with that. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, as well though however, the piece 
of legislation before us is very extensive. There’s a lot in this 
legislation. While we’ve had a lot of discussion, we would like 
to have some more discussion before we move into further 
debate on the piece of legislation as it’s walked through the 
Assembly. 
 
And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s only 
appropriate that I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Bill No. 50 amends The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. This 
Bill introduces amendments to assessment and taxation 
processes and focuses on modest, legal fine-tuning and other 
adjustments to assessment and taxation provisions. 
 
With the 1997 reassessment now virtually complete, we have 
identified some adjustments that are required and some 
additional changes that will streamline the process and respond 
to the changing needs of municipalities. 
 
Many of these amendments were identified as people worked 
through the reassessment experience. We are pleased to provide 
a number of improvements to the existing system. The 
amendments illustrate our commitment to providing legislation 
that works for people. 
 
As well, every year a number of administrative issues are 
brought to our attention by local municipal administration and 
department staff. These amendments contain changes to a few 
administrative processes and are in keeping with our ongoing 
efforts to develop user-friendly legislation. 
 
Since the early 1980s, Saskatchewan has undertaken 
incremental legislative amendments with periodic 
comprehensive revisions to individual statutes or to specific 
subject areas within statutes. This approach helped to keep 
municipal legislation up to date. However, this incremental 
approach has its limitations. 
 
Occasionally we need to take stock and consider our directions 
in a broader sense, Mr. Speaker. In February the Premier 
announced that a task force on municipal legislative renewal 
will be appointed to consult with municipalities, stakeholders, 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

the public, and government departments. 
 
(1130) 
 
Since that announcement, we have discussed the terms of 
reference for the review with municipal associations and the 
individual municipalities. The task force will undertake a 
comprehensive review of directions for the municipal sector 
and the legislation that pertains to it. It will also consider the 
province’s needs and goals. 
 
We need to define a new provincial-municipal relationship 
based on shared interests. We need to ensure that municipalities 
have the ability and capacity to provide appropriate services in 
the context of province-wide systems and programs. These are 
the kinds of needs that will define a new relationship and 
clearly set out provincial interests and provincial municipal 
roles and responsibilities. 
 
The task force will examine and help to define these new 
relationships. It will set in motion an exciting process that has 
the potential to change the future of municipal government. 
 
With that picture of the future in mind, Mr. Speaker, I will now 
briefly touch on a few highlights of this Bill. 
 
First there is some fine-tuning of some of the legal wording and 
unresolved concerns on assessment and taxation issues and 
appeals. One in particular is an amendment permitting towns to 
create a residential subclass of property assessments for 
condominiums to address high tax shifts from reassessment. 
 
Other amendments clarify provisions with respect to assessment 
appeals, requirements for notices of hearings, terms of office, 
and remuneration for boards of revision. All of the provisions 
related to assessment will benefit municipalities, boards of 
revision, or assessment appellates by clarifying some of the 
provisions and by giving parties to appeal more flexibility. 
 
Another amendment provides authority for a municipality to 
collect the taxes on behalf of a regional park by agreement, 
even though the regional park is within a neighbouring 
municipality. 
 
Another provides a property tax exemption for off-reserve, 
Indian band-operated schools similar to the exemption provided 
for school divisions to create a level playing-field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proposed amendments clarifying the 
application of penalties relating to costs associated with the tax 
enforcement process, and preventing the removal of fixtures 
from a building for which taxes are outstanding. Although 
amendments like this aren’t the stuff of headlines, they can 
improve the efficiency of local administrations. 
 
Lastly, we propose amendments giving the government the 
ability to adjust by regulation the annual timetable for 
assessment and taxation. Such adjustments may become 
necessary as we approach the next reassessment. 
 
This change responds to three significant municipal concerns: 
the lateness of SAMA’s (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency) delivery of assessment of numbers for 

1997; the limited time which municipalities had available last 
year to make tax policy decisions; and the financial uncertainty 
associated with assessment appeals for municipalities and 
school boards. 
 
Appellants have also complained about insufficient time to 
appeal assessments. If a change is made in this respect, it will 
be implemented in conjunction with the next reassessment so 
that the resulting new assessments are used for taxes in the year 
2001. 
 
At this point it is not at all clear whether SAMA and 
municipalities that do their own assessments will be able to 
provide sufficiently accurate assessment estimates in advance of 
the next reassessment. Timely assessments are necessary to 
permit completion of the required analysis and tax policy 
decisions, such as relating to percentages of value and tax 
exemptions. The amendments in this Bill will permit 
adjustments if they are needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments should be supported by all 
members of the legislature. They are in the best interest of 
municipalities and all Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 50, The Urban 
Municipality Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to address Bill No. 50. The minister talked quite a 
bit about tax adjustments and making some changes to the tax 
structures brought about because of the reassessments done by 
SAMA. 
 
There certainly was a lot of difficulties experienced across the 
province when it came to this reassessment process. A lot of 
properties went up in their taxation, while others dropped. This 
caused a shift in the tax burdens, the ramifications of which are 
still being felt across this province, and certainly there does 
need to be some adjustments made to it. 
 
Also the minister talked about a new relationship between 
municipalities and the province. And certainly there has been a 
new relationship developed over the last couple of years. The 
provincial government cut $30 million out of the municipal 
budgets in ’97 and cut a further $8 million in ’98. 
 
I hope this is not the direction the minister is talking about 
when she talks about a new direction between municipal and 
provincial governments. Does that mean that the provincial 
government is simply going to remove their entire allocation 
towards municipal governments? I hope not, Mr. Speaker. And 
I hope that the minister will see to it that that does not happen 
because I know that the minister was at one time a reeve of a 
rural RM (rural municipality). 
 
The minister talked also about a province-wide interest in a task 
force that she’s proposing to put in place to look at how 
municipalities can work together on joint-interest projects and 
how those interest projects will affect the entire province. 
 
Mr. Minister, is this code words for amalgamation? Forced 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

amalgamation? I hope not, because we have certainly seen how 
disruptive . . . and how the service has deteriorated with the 
forced amalgamations in the health care system. It has not been 
to the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. It may have been 
to the benefit of the government, but not to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Because we have all these questions, Mr. Speaker, in dealing 
with this particular Bill, in dealing with the possibilities of task 
forces that are aimed at forced amalgamations in this province, I 
would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 51 amends The 
Rural Municipality Act, 1989. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is consistent with many amendments that 
are proposed for the urban and northern municipal Acts in this 
session. It adjusts and improves upon some amendments that 
were introduced in 1996 and 1997 respecting assessment, 
assessment appeals, and taxation processes. 
 
As mentioned in my earlier remarks regarding amendments to 
The Urban Municipality Act, we propose to amend the 
assessment and taxation provisions by including authority to 
change, by regulation, the annual assessment and taxation 
timetable. This change could allow municipalities to complete 
their assessment procedures the year before they levy taxes on 
those assessments. This procedure will only take effect if, closer 
to the next comprehensive reassessment, it is required. 
 
Some concerns of an administrative nature have been expressed 
about the assessment and taxation timetable by the rural 
municipal administrators association. We will continue to 
consult closely with all municipal associations on this matter 
and will only make the change if it becomes absolutely clear 
that all necessary information and decisions cannot be finalized 
in time for the next reassessment. 
 
The provisions in the Bill that relate to assessment appeals will 
benefit municipalities, boards of revision, and assessment 
appellants. Another amendment provides authority for a 
municipality to collect taxes on behalf of a regional park by 
agreement, even though the regional park is within a 
neighbouring municipality. Another provides a property tax 
exemption for off-reserve, Indian band-operated schools similar 
to the exemption provided for school divisions to create a level 
playing-field. 
 
Similar to the other municipal Acts, some changes to legislation 
are brought to our attention by local municipal administrators. 
This Bill contains several changes to administrative practices in 
keeping with our ongoing efforts to maintain up-to-date 
legislation for municipalities. 
 
These amendments include: clarifying the application of 
penalties relating to costs associated with the tax enforcement 
process, and preventing the removal of fixtures from a building 
for which taxes are outstanding; providing a licensed owner of a 

mobile home the same voting privilege as an assessed owner of 
an improvement; allowing RM councils to impose a special 
charge for specific services and to set tax penalty rates and 
other matters that will improve the efficiency of local 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are in the best interests of rural 
municipalities and all Saskatchewan residents and I ask that 
they be supported by all members of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 51, An Act to 
amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again we’re 
dealing with another one of the municipal Bills that is a result 
of the reassessments and the changes to SAMA that occurred 
over the last couple of years, which created, as I said earlier, a 
great deal of difficulty with the tax shifting from one piece of 
property to another. There certainly needs to be some changes 
made there, Mr. Speaker, but people do have some concerns 
about how those changes are going to be made and who they’re 
going to affect. 
 
When you talk about, Mr. Speaker, talk about taxing ratepayers 
to support a regional park in another area, there certainly may 
be some benefit to that because people throughout the whole 
region do gain benefit for that, but sometimes you have to 
wonder just how far afield are you going to go to try and collect 
those taxes. Are you going into regions that are not utilizing the 
services provided by those regional parks? 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions here 
that need to be dealt with. As the minister said, the rural 
administrators have some concerns here. We believe they need 
time to assess the particular piece of legislation before it is 
debated and carried forward in this House. Therefore I would 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 52 amends The 
Northern Municipalities Act. The Northern Municipalities Act 
is a major piece of legislation setting out the powers, duties, and 
responsibilities of our northern municipal governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in general terms this Bill contains many 
provisions that are very similar to those in the amending Bills 
pertaining to The Urban Municipality Act, 1984, and The Rural 
Municipality Act, 1989, which have just been described. Many 
of the amendments relate to assessment and taxation provisions 
and other matters respecting the administration of 
municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my remarks respecting the amendments to The 
Urban Municipalities Act, 1984, have addressed those issues. 
Because the details are described more fully there, I will just 
focus on the amendments that are specific to the North. 
 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, a unique amendment in this Bill provides new 
authority to establish a Northern Revenue Sharing Trust 
Account Management Board. The purpose of this board will be 
to advise the minister on allocation of northern grants and to 
make recommendations for future funding. 
 
This is a new approach that gives northern municipalities an 
opportunity to have direct input into the application of funds in 
the northern revenue sharing trust account by allowing northern 
municipalities to make recommendations for changes in the 
northern grant programs funded from the NRSTA, as it is 
known. 
 
This will be a welcome change for Northerners. It follows a 
number of discussions with the Saskatchewan Association of 
Northern Municipalities, or New North, as they are commonly 
called. By making these changes in legislation, the arrangement 
will enjoy more permanence and stability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I respectfully urge members to join me in support 
of this Bill which will further enhance and improve the 
development of our municipalities in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I move second reading of Bill No. 52, The Northern 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will not 
attempt the title. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, as across the rest of Saskatchewan, the 
assessments and reassessments have caused a great deal of 
difficulty, and it’s a good thing that the government is taking a 
look at reviewing this on how it’s done because it certainly is 
needed. 
 
When you come to dealing with the sharing of the trust 
accounts, Mr. Speaker, and northern grant programs, I think it’s 
important that the stakeholders be thoroughly consulted and that 
they be given the opportunity to express whether or not the 
program . . . the Bill actually addresses the needs and concerns 
that they have in relationship to the allocation of these grant 
programs, and exactly what they’re being funded and how it’s 
being funded and how it’s determined which projects will 
actually receive any of the money. 
 
I think it’s very important that Northerners should have an 
opportunity to have some input into that, but they also need an 
opportunity to express whether or not this Bill does deliver that 
in the terms that they require, Mr. Speaker. Therefore I would 
move that we adjourn debate on this particular Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Scott that Bill No. 32 — The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’m sort of on my feet the way 
people were with their pronunciation there just a minute ago. 
 
The official opposition agrees, Mr. Speaker, with the general 
intent of this Bill. We have seen several areas of concern that 
we wish to address, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As the minister pointed out, this Bill basically does three 
particular things. It increases the maximum fine for all major 
hunting offences to $100,000. It strengthens — this is the 
second one — it strengthens legislative references to night 
hunting. And it strengthens the Crown’s power to seize and 
cause forfeitures of articles involved in hunting offences such as 
vehicles. 
 
Clearly all of us in this Assembly should be concerned about 
growing problems with night hunting and other hunting 
offences. Our province’s natural resources are a vital part of our 
environment, our tourist industry, and our overall quality of life. 
Mr. Speaker, it is a valuable commodity that we must protect at 
all times. 
 
Many people talk about hunting as an integral part of the native 
way of life, and that is probably certainly true. In addition, I 
think we should all acknowledge that hunting and fishing are a 
similar part of the rest of Saskatchewan’s way of life — no 
matter whether you are native or non-native. 
 
That way of life has increasingly come under attack as 
poachers, night hunters, animal parts exporters, and other 
hunting criminals kill off our wildlife in an unethical and 
unsustainable way. To that degree, we certainly support what 
this Bill’s attempting to do. However, there are several areas 
where we believe it needs improvement. 
 
Since this Bill was introduced and first debated, a new court 
ruling has come out regarding Metis hunting. It is vital that the 
impact of this ruling is fully reflected in the provisions of this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As our caucus has previously noted, the original Act described a 
range of penalties for different sorts of offences. Some incurred 
fines of up to $500 while others went up to as much as $25,000. 
I think, Mr. Speaker, we can all agree that in many cases those 
maximum fines were clearly too low, which is supported by the 
fact that other jurisdictions already had much higher penalties 
than we had here in Saskatchewan. 
 
None the less, the approach of this Bill seems peculiar. Instead 
of creating a new range of fines, it simply jacks them all up to a 
maximum of $100,000. Our caucus still remains to be 
convinced that this one big fine approach is the best way to 
handle infractions. You have to wonder if some of the minor 
offences or first offences that are now going to be covered by 
this 100,000 limit really deserve it. 
 
As legislators, Mr. Speaker, we always have to be mindful to 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

ensure that the penalty fits the crime. Our caucus is not 
convinced that this Bill accomplishes that goal. At a minimum, 
our caucus will want to hear assurances from the government in 
committee that this Bill will be accompanied by regulations that 
will spell out a definite schedule of the penalties within that 
$100,000 upper limit. 
 
This is especially important because fines and penalties like this 
are often subject to abuse at the enforcement level. While we 
want to do everything we can to ensure that illegal hunting is 
stopped, none of us would want to see law-abiding hunters 
being harassed by the provisions of this Bill. It is this kind of 
bureaucratic abuse that has made firearms legislation such a 
flashpoint and we don’t want to see that sort of a thing repeated 
here. 
 
The official opposition also wants to take this opportunity to 
repeat our call for a complete and unequivocal end to night 
hunting. We appreciate that the government is trying to do 
something about it in this Bill. However, it is still uncertain 
whether they have the cooperation of the Metis community in 
enforcing it. More can and should be done to ensure this 
dangerous and abusive practice is eliminated. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on the provisions that 
increase the Crown’s power to seize and expropriate vehicles 
and other articles that are involved in night . . . in hunting 
crimes. 
 
Again, this is an important power to have when dealing with 
criminals, but we have all heard horror stories of one hunter or 
another who got involved in a minor hunting infraction or who 
was accused and later cleared of an infraction who none the less 
had his vehicle impounded for a long period of time. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, whenever we look to 
punishing criminals, we have to be sure that we are not 
punishing innocent people at the same time, and we would like 
to review all of these concerns again in the Committee of the 
Whole. But at this time we see no reason to delay second 
reading passage of this Bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 33 — The 
Provincial Court Act, 1998 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I would like on this particular 
one to reiterate the importance of this particular piece of 
legislation. It is a Bill which deals with the appointment, 
compensation, and in turn the independence of a judiciary. I 
think this is becoming very important in our province as we’ve 
seen some concerns in these areas voiced by the public of the 
province. 
 
This legislation therefore is crucial because it is clear that the 
people of Saskatchewan have lost faith in this government’s 
justice system. And I think that’s been very indicative by the 
various meetings that have happened across this province. But, 

Mr. Speaker, although this Act is important I would like to 
make the point that this government’s actions speak louder than 
words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they put this Bill before the Assembly to create an 
independent commission to determine compensation levels for 
judges. Sound good? More important, doesn’t that sound 
familiar? Doesn’t the previous minister of Justice create . . . or 
didn’t they create a similar commission? Sure he did. 
 
But what did he do when that commission put forward 
recommendations that his government didn’t like at that time, 
Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you and the members 
opposite exactly what he did. He got rid of it. Interesting, Mr. 
Speaker. This government seems to shop around for 
commissions like they shop around for lawyers. 
 
And the result of this government’s actions, Mr. Speaker, was a 
potential court battle between the government and provincial 
judges. Certainly this created a rift between the two arms of 
government, a breach of trust that will take some time to repair. 
 
So although we are pleased to see the members opposite are 
giving this commission another go, we have very little 
confidence that we won’t find ourselves passing new legislation 
next session to create another new commission because this 
government may decide they’re not happy with this one. 
 
That is why I say, Mr. Speaker, that actions speak louder than 
words. And that would be a lesson well learned for this 
government. Judicial independence is simply too important a 
principle to only pay lip-service to. I would also like to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that besides judicial independence, the other important 
issue we must discuss whenever we are discussing 
appointments this government has to say, is patronage. 
 
I do have some concerns that what may be a minor change in 
this legislation gives the government an ability to appoint 
judges who plan to retire after two years. Now that on its own 
may not sound too serious, but I certainly have some questions 
about the section of this Bill which shortens the requirement 
period for life pension to two years. This could be a powerful 
loophole for the government, and on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan I want to ensure that isn’t the case. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Speaker, these questions I have just raised 
can be raised further in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 36 — The Vital 
Statistics Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 modifiant la 
Loi sur les services de l’état civil be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Public Service Act, 1998 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Today we’re 
joined by Mr. Rick McKillop at my side, who is the executive 
director of the employee relations division of the Public Service 
Commission. Just behind Rick, Mr. Darryl Bogdasavich from 
the Department of Justice. Immediately behind myself, Wynne 
Young, who is the Chair of the Public Service Commission. 
And seated in the back is Nancy Croll, a policy adviser with the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Welcome, Mr. Minister, and to 
your officials. On The Public Service Act we do have a number 
of questions, and a lot of those are matters of interpretation. We 
would like to ask a few of those. 
 
The summary that accompanied the Bill, Bill 27, made some 
rather bold pronouncements and I’ll quote a number of lines 
first then ask a question that comes out of that: 
 

This new Act is required to facilitate the process of human 
resource management transformation, a process currently 
under way which will ultimately redesign the human 
resource management function with respect to governance, 
structural design, and with changes to systems and 
processes. 
 

And the question coming out of that quote, Mr. Minister, is the 
following one. Define exactly what is involved in this human 
resource management transformation. 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thanks, Mr. Chair, to the member for 
the question. There’s a rather lengthy response in fact to the 
member’s question. I will try to highlight it. But when we speak 
of a human resource management transformation, we are 
talking about a broad subject here and there are many, many 
facets. Through 1996, 1997 we conducted a rather broad review 
of human resource functions across government generally. 
 
That articulated division within the public service and the 
Public Service Commission, which then was put to paper and 
described as a picture for the future of human resource 
management. Here are some of then the principles of what we 
would describe as the management transformation. 
 
We would talk about human resources as a management 
partnership integrating an alliance to support strategic goals of 
public service. We would want to develop further line 
management of accountability where managers are provided 
more responsibility and therefore more accountability for the 
management of human resources in their specific areas in 
government or departments. 
 
This vision talks about continuous learning for the public 

service, and to begin to view learning and development in the 
public service, to see it as valued and to see it also as an 
investment in the future. Understandably I think the member 
will understand we’re always in search of less costly, more 
efficient processes for our human resource delivery systems. 
 
With the changing technology that we’re all aware of and 
involved in, we want to see that technology as a real enabler to 
our public service. And to be sure that our information 
technology, that IT, is nicely aligned with timely decision 
making and what is essential to the work. 
 
We want to emphasize again some of the very fundamental 
principles and values, and that to be sure that those principles 
and values become the basis for decisions. 
 
We want to see again a re-emphasis in terms of management 
transformation partnership with our unionized workers within 
the public service, human resource competence. And we want 
to be sure that we are in partnership with all of our 
professionals within the public service. And again, part of that 
vision is to capture the representativeness of the general 
Saskatchewan population within the public service. 
 
I know it’s broadly spoken, and we could provide the member a 
copy of the vision and some of this material if you would be 
interested in it. That’s broadly spoken, what we’re talking about 
when we talk about human resource management 
transformation. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I realize, as I said when I 
read the question, it was a fairly involved one, so no problem 
with the length of the answer. It needed to be that. 
 
In section 3(d) there’s a statement made that the purpose of the 
Act will be, and I quote again, “to strive to develop a public 
service that represents the diversity of the people of 
Saskatchewan.” And I guess essentially it’s the concept of the 
diversity of people of Saskatchewan — what is meant by that 
specifically? Who’s going to define that one? Because I’m sure 
each one of us has different definitions of it. And is it going to 
be based on race, sexual preference, age, other factors? And 
will this ultimately, once that has been done, lead to a type of 
quota system for public service jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — When we talk about diversity in the 
public service it is in a twofold sense. We want to, on one hand, 
recognize within our public service the diversity of 
Saskatchewan’s population; so that we would look towards the 
kind of equity things that we’ve talked about before, we may 
talk more about today — to be sure that within our public 
service we recognize the diverse races and cultures and so on of 
our population generally. 
 
On the other hand, diversity in the workplace also says to us 
that within the workplace itself we want to recognize the 
diversity of those who are public servants in our province, 
recognizing each others’ differences, making sure that this is a 
fair and equitable workplace for all who will come therein. 
 
We have, as you know, an ongoing employment equity policy 
that has targeted four groups. Those being women in 
management and non-traditional roles, persons of aboriginal 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

ancestry, persons of visible minorities, and persons with 
disabilities. I would hope as minister that our public service 
could reflect in its diversity those groups in some appropriate 
match to their representation in the population. It doesn’t mean 
that there’s different requirements for any particular position. 
 
The qualifications for positions are established in a different 
way. Equity seeks to bring those under-represented groups into 
more representation within the public service and thereby 
reflect the diversity in the province. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member for Lloydminster on 
her feet? 
 
Ms. Stanger: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Stanger: — I want to thank the member opposite for 
allowing me to introduce my family. I’d like to introduce some 
four very important people in my life, my grandchildren. Would 
you stand when I name you, please? Desiree, Sonia, Alex, and 
Bjorn, the youngest one; my youngest daughter, Denise, and her 
husband, Scott. 
 
They have taken the day off from teaching in Duck Lake and 
have come to the legislature to watch proceedings and to visit 
and see my office. And my oldest daughter, Dawn, also joins 
them. And I’d like to welcome all of you to the legislature today 
and ask the members to welcome them also. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 27 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and if I may, I’ll just sort of add a 
little welcome there as well. Having taught at Duck Lake, it’s 
always good to find someone else that’s been there. I’ve heard 
about those grandchildren many, many times, having spent a 
long trip with their grandmother at another time. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe in the answer that you’ve stated, and I’ll 
give you a chance to clarify this, you said something that went 
something like this: that you’re going to redefine the 
qualifications needed for a job to ensure that this affirmative 
action program can work. Did I understand that correctly or at 
least in meaning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’m glad that the member raised that 
because it was just the opposite. Just the opposite. That the 
qualifications for any position within the public service, the 
qualifications for the position are established by what is 
required in that particular position. Qualifications are 
established quite outside of any equity initiatives. 
 
Then after the qualifications are established, equity 

considerations may be given to filling that position. But for the 
position to be filled, it must be filled by a qualified applicant. If 
I can give an example, we’re now establishing an office of 
disability issues. I think it would be understandable that we 
would see that as an equity position within government where 
some or all or a portion of those who will be at work in that area 
would have, would be a person with a disability. But the 
qualifications for the work are described without reference to 
who might fill the position. So the qualifications are set outside 
of equity. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. It seems that we’re going to end 
up in a bit of a problem situation because on the one hand, 
government seems to have an intention to develop some 
directions as far as affirmative action hiring is concerned. On 
the other hand, we’ve just been told that the qualifications for 
the job are . . . sorry, the only criteria that are there, and 
government will always hire the best qualified person. 
 
I personally happen to think that any of the, I believe it was four 
groups you mentioned, should be as able and have the 
qualifications and could do those jobs as well as anyone else 
could. And therefore to go ahead and even verbalize that always 
puts into suspect whether, when you’re doing the hiring, you 
are actually hiring the best qualified person. 
 
And I think you can find each one of those four areas without 
specifically saying we’re going to do this, and we’re still going 
to hire the best qualified person. I think we’re walking down 
two different roads at the same time. 
 
However in the list of definitions for the Act, the definition for 
war veteran, which was included in the previous Act, has been 
dropped. And I’m wondering why that was done. I believe in 
the past there was some very good reasons why that was put 
into place. And I’m wondering what the thinking is that that has 
been removed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, all members today had an 
opportunity, thanks to the member opposite, to again be 
reminded of the importance of the veterans, particularly those 
who fought in the second war, some still from the first war, 
some from the Korean War, and so on. 
 
As the son of a veteran and an active member of the Royal 
Canadian Legion, in fact I was, I much appreciated what your 
caucus did today. In terms of The Public Service Act, the clause 
which identified as a specific category of individuals war 
veterans, was put in place immediately after the Second World 
War when many of the vets were returning, many of them 
young, of course. And there was some real need in those days to 
seek re-employment opportunities for the veterans as they came 
home. 
 
As the member I think will recognize, the number of veterans 
from that conflict is now growing smaller, and certainly they 
are growing much older. And very few of that generation of 
Canadian war veterans would today be making any application 
for the Saskatchewan public service, given that it’s now 53 
years since the armistice was signed in May 1945. Most of 
those who are now in their 70’s are not actively applying for 
positions within the Saskatchewan public service. 
 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

Equally, at that time we routinely used in the public service in 
those days, in the ’40s, late ’40s — and remember we’re 
dealing with a Bill that hasn’t been amended essentially since 
the ’40s — we used to use what . . . or the commission used to 
use what were called employment examinations. We had such 
things as employment examinations to determine who were 
eligible to work in the public service and which employment 
examination used to inquire about military service and overseas 
service and so on. 
 
Those employment examinations are no longer used and so the 
specific reference in the Act to war veterans is being taken out. 
Now that is not to say that when we are in the process of 
receiving applications for positions in the public service, of 
course we invite résumés, and anyone who has had experience 
with the Canadian military, that would become a significant 
part, I believe, of their résumé in seeking positions now. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Section 12, Mr. Minister, deals with the issue 
of allowing the Public Service Commission to delegate its 
powers. And that’s always rather an interesting concept when a 
commission delegates its powers. And I guess I have two 
questions on that particular section and the delegation of 
powers. 
 
One is, in what way do you foresee that that’s going to improve 
the functioning of the commission? And the second part is, does 
the commission maintain responsibility for the actions of 
whoever or whatever is delegated to fill in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This is a crucial question the member 
raises. It may be the most crucial question which is at the heart 
of some of the change which is happening as a result of these 
changes. This is a very crucial issue. 
 
By delegation, point number one, the commission does not in 
any way delegate its ultimate responsibility for the public 
service of Saskatchewan. Accountability and responsibility will 
remain with the Public Service Commission. 
 
And what is meant by delegation is to provide greater 
flexibilities for departments and managements and human 
resource folks in the departments, to make decisions — to make 
decisions. To reduce what has become over the years a huge, a 
huge bureaucratic chain for decisions to be made within 
government around human resources. 
 
And so the concept is we will provide to those people who are 
actually at the front lines or closer to the front lines in the 
department, responsibility for making decisions in terms of 
hiring. 
 
Now I can give you an example. In some circumstances if you 
want to get a maternity leave with government it has to be 
approved by about 32 people all the way up and then all the 
way back down, for something as simple and as is guaranteed 
within contract and so on as a maternity leave. It’s that kind of 
thing we want to smooth out. 
 
However your question is absolutely crucial because in 
delegating this, responsibility and accountability must be 
maintained by the Public Service Commission. And so what we 
will do before any process of delegation is undertaken is that 

the commission will work with whichever particular department 
in question, and create between the commission and the 
department what we will describe as a service agreement, which 
will absolutely ensure that expectations and standards are 
outlined. 
 
(1215) 
 
And results will be monitored for compliance, and should we 
find a circumstance where the standards and the expectations 
are not being met, then that service agreement would be severed 
and we would take the appropriate steps. 
 
So I want to make it very clear that in delegating, the 
commission is not delegating either its responsibility or 
accountability. We are trying to find a more efficient, and we 
think more attuned human resource mechanism for the late 
1990s and the early 21st century. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think that covers most of 
what I was asking but probably not all. To the extent . . . and I 
think the example that you gave is fairly impressive, that you 
have to go through a number of dozen of okays to get that 
particular leave you were referring to. And to the extent that it 
lessens red tape, I think we support that. 
 
My next question comes out of sort of the last part of what your 
answer included, and that was that a delegation could be 
revoked if someone who’s been delegated abuses that position. 
Is there any other disciplinary action that the commission can 
take simply just in saying well, your delegation of authority has 
now been revoked and you’re back to where you were before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, my officials assure me that if 
a circumstance arose — which we would hope and pray would 
never arise — but if a circumstance arose where someone 
having received the delegation of authority abused that 
circumstance or did something totally inappropriate, of course 
there would be other further disciplinary measures in the 
ordinary course of discipline of either in-scope or out-of-scope 
people. 
 
We would not anticipate that happening, but if it did happen the 
commission would take what I think would be the appropriate 
steps. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I guess that question sort of 
came out of what has happened with SaskPower where people 
were delegated authority to sell things and do things and we 
know that that just ran very badly amuck. And hopefully none 
of this would happen on that same scale, but still the concern is 
there. 
 
Moving on to section 14(2), and again I’ll quote briefly from it 
and then come up with a question: 
 

Before making the regulations, the commission may allow 
any trade union representing employees in the public 
service to review and comment on the proposed 
regulations. 
 

And that seems to be rather special privilege where you picked 
one group out of society and said, you can go ahead and tell us 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

what you think of the changes to regulations. And I’m 
wondering why is it necessary to give the unions what seems to 
be a special privilege because they’ve been isolated and 
identified. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Just to note with the member that, point 
number one, this section of the Act speaks only of those trade 
unions which represent employees in the public service. And so 
we are here talking about public service government employees, 
not extending that to other trade unions. Secondly, the same 
kind of privilege would be naturally extended to management. 
 
Thirdly, this provision is not new; it has been in the Act for 
many years. We do believe that we will build better regulations 
for the government and the public service if we do in fact 
consult with those who are organized workers, those who are 
out-of-scope workers, and those who are at senior levels who 
will be recommending and making some of the regulatory 
change. 
 
There’s no change here in what has been the practice. The 
section only of course commits to giving opportunity for 
comment. There is no sense of veto built into this provision, and 
it’s only extended to those public servants who are unionized 
within the Saskatchewan public service. We extend the same 
kind of a consultative process to out-of-scope people. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Continuing down that same road to some 
extent. I guess the question is why did we not expand that 
clause so that more stakeholders in the Public Service 
Commission could have some input. And I’ll give an example. 
 
Public service regulations affect who is hired into the civil 
service — and we know that; we’ve talked about it already this 
morning and afternoon. This would affect college graduates 
who may be preparing for a public service career. Maybe the 
post-secondary education community who is looking at that 
area very definitely should be given an opportunity to have 
some input in those regulations as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In doing this, the work of the Public 
Service Commission, which is essentially providing for the 
staffing of government departments and programs, we do, not 
through the mechanism of consultation around specific 
regulations that will be attached to the Act, but in what we do 
generally, the commission does in fact consult with the broader 
public. That will happen through the elected folks of course, but 
it also happens through the commission. And the example you 
raise is not a bad example. 
 
For instance, if our universities or our technical schools are 
developing co-op programs, then we will be in contact. We’ll 
work with them to see if there is a relationship between some of 
the co-op programs and the training institutions and the 
universities and opportunities that we might provide in the 
public service. So that kind of consultation does go on. 
 
We’re not regulating or legislating that it would happen in 
terms of specific regulations to the Act. They tend much more 
to apply to the actual functioning of those who are at work in 
government and those who manage government. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. We’re discussing right now the 

discussion with the various stakeholders before passing 
regulations, and the one I mentioned was one in addition to the 
unions. And I guess I’m just a little concerned about sort of 
enshrining the unions in that area. 
 
Now you did mention that unions would not have a veto over 
every regulation. But in spite of that fact, as we well know, 
unions are frequently known to pursue political agendas 
because there’re very political animals. So by the inclusion of 
that clause, it would seem to the public I believe to diminish 
what should be the appearance of the commission to be very 
politically independent, and it doesn’t do that at that point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Two things, Mr. Chair. The provision 
that we’re discussing right now has been in the Act since 1947. 
This is not a new provision. It’s been there since 1947. Over 
these 51 years it has not been a problem or an issue. 
 
I also, point number two, would ask the member to remember 
that in the in-scope employees of government, their trade union 
is their legal representative who speaks on behalf of the 
employees. And that is only appropriate, it’s only right, and in 
fact it’s the law. And we want to have the opportunity to 
communicate and consult with our employees. Their trade 
union is their legal representative body. 
 
It just seems to me entirely appropriate therefore, and it has 
seemed for the last 51 years to be appropriate, that this 
provision be part of the Act. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Moving on to section 36, and I’ll 
again make a quote from there. In section 36 it states that the 
commission may, and I quote: “engage the services of or retain 
any technical, professional or other advisers, specialists or 
consultants that the commission . . . (may deem) necessary.” 
And I would like to know how this coordinates with section 12, 
the section on delegating powers, once these outside contractors 
are retained. Are they then eligible to have the commission’s 
powers delegated to them and is there any danger in allowing 
these short-term employees to exercise the authority of the 
commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s an appropriate question, Mr. 
Chair, in my view. The answer clearly is no. No, there could not 
be delegated to any contracted agency the powers of the 
commission. The delegation of the powers of the commission 
must go to the designated head of a government department or 
agency. It could then be designated by that chief or deputy 
minister to someone else within that department. But there 
could not be a circumstance where we would delegate authority 
or power to a contracted body. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And that concludes 
the questions that I have on Bill No. 27. And thank you to your 
officials as well. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 43 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27  The Public Service Act, 1998 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(1230) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 
 

The Deputy Chair: — Before I call the first item I will invite 
the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, again we’re joined by Wynne 
Young, who is the Chair of the Public Service Commission, 
now at my side; behind Wynne, Sharon Roulston, who is the 
director of the administrative information and services division 
of the Public Service Commission; directly behind me, Mr. 
Rick McKillop, the executive director of employee relations 
division; and just at the back, Ms. Nancy Croll, who is our 
policy adviser. 
 
Subvote (PS01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — And welcome to your officials, Mr. Minister. I 
have just a few questions to ask you today. I’m wondering if 
you can tell me how many people are now in the public service 
and how this number has changed from last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, these figures are as of March 
this year, 1998. The actual total, and this includes permanent, 
temporary, part time, casual, and labour service employees, the 
entire workforce, March 1998: 10,136, compared to March of 
1997: 10,004. And so there will have been a growth in the 
period of 132 positions. But again I repeat, that may be part 
time, that’s the entire public service. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the budget for the Public Service 
Commission is going to go up by about $200,000. Can you give 
me an idea of where this extra expenditure is going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This, Mr. Chair, is essentially in three 
areas. The largest area would be in labour relations, working to 
build what we believe is a strengthening and growing 
union-management committee structure, interest-based 
bargaining, some of the resources going there. 
 
Some will be going into new resources to management 
development, education and development. And some of it is 
going into information technology around the year 2000 
problem in the computers. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, under the employee relations 
subvote, the operations expenditures are nearly doubling. Can 
you first explain to me what this particular . . . what role this 
particular office actually plays and why the budget is doubling 

this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I would ask the member if she could 
provide a little more clarity. In our summary of expense, 
employee relations last year was at 2.087 million; this year 2.3 
million — the 200,000, or thereabouts that we just talked about. 
That’s not a doubling at all, that’s the increase of about 
200,000, little better — 300, not quite. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I said it like a man, so here I am, apologizing. I 
believe a couple of years ago when the government unveiled its 
early retirement program there was a number of individuals 
took part in that. Can you tell me how many government 
employees actually took advantage of this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we have the figures for 
’97-98 if that will suffice for the member. Those who took 
advantage were . . . employees retired, 101 people took early 
retirement in ’97-98. 
 
Ms. Draude: — How many were actually eligible under this 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We wouldn’t have, Mr. Chair, I think 
exact numbers of those who would be eligible, total, to the 
public service. The criteria for this early retirement is 
essentially twofold. It requires years of service plus age to equal 
80, and it also requires that a position is being eliminated or 
abolished from the public service. 
 
And so only in that circumstance, where your position is being 
abolished, or in fact a position could be traded for your position, 
but only where a position is abolished is an early retirement 
position then opened. 
 
And so it’s not a voluntary early retirement where anyone who 
desired early retirement could step forward and take advantage. 
It had those two criteria — age plus years of service equalling 
80 and a circumstance where a position was being abolished. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So then in order for the 101 people to actually 
retire early there must have been a lot of positions that are no 
longer required, or what happened in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That is correct. There will have been 
then 101 positions. And again we’re here speaking government 
wide, but that would be correct. Through changes in 
programing, changes in departments and so on, those 100 
positions will no longer be in the public service. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I believe the staffing and development 
component of the Public Service Commission is charged with 
developing the government’s employment equity program. Is it 
also overseeing the pay equity development issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, no. Staffing and development 
— although every segment of the Public Service Commission 
will have interest in the pay equity issues in question — staffing 
and development are not particularly charged with the pay 
equity issues. In government generally we have focused the 
centre of the pay equity issue in the Women’s Secretariat, who 
oversee the pay equity issues from the Women’s Secretariat. 
 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

The Public Service Commission has involvement in pay equity, 
particularly through the process that we’ve adopted as 
government, and that is to negotiate pay equity through our 
negotiations with the public sector unions. That process falls to, 
essentially, to the Public Service Commission, the process of 
negotiation, the process of developing the class plans that bring 
about pay equity. 
 
And we’ve been very hard at work, across government, the 
commission has been very hard at work, working with 
departments to bring forward pay equity. We’ve now seen a 
number of our workplaces reach pay equity. And we’re working 
very hard with our very largest representative employee body, 
the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union), at 
achieving that equity government wide. 
 
Ms. Draude: — In terms of the hiring policies of government, 
can you tell us the changes in last year in terms of the 
percentage of women that are in the Public Service 
Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, here are the current numbers 
for the four criteria which I identified in some earlier 
discussion. Here we talk of women in management of the public 
service — not women generally in the public service, but 
women in management — now represents 35.2 per cent of the 
public service. 
 
Women in what would be described as non-traditional 
positions, i.e., positions not traditionally filled by women, now 
is 19.2 per cent. 
 
Visible minorities represented in the public service, 2.5 per 
cent. Persons with disabilities, 3.1 per cent. And people of 
aboriginal ancestry, 7 per cent. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, does the government have a goal 
that it is trying to reach for each of those areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I should have done that while 
I was on my feet. Again, to go through the categories, and 
maybe I’ll lay the numbers side by side because they indicate 
we have made progress; they indicate equally that we have 
much distance to travel. 
 
Women in management now at 35.2 per cent, our goal would be 
45 per cent. Women in non-traditional positions, now at 19.2 
per cent; our goal would again be 45 per cent. Visible 
minorities, now at 2.5 per cent; our goal would be 5.1 per cent. 
Persons with disabilities, 3.1 per cent now; our goal would be 
9.7. And persons of aboriginal ancestry, now at 7 per cent; our 
goal would be 12.2. And our goals essentially are set around the 
demographics of our province, trying to match our public 
service I said, to represent the diversity of our province. 
 
The employment equity program has been in place since 1989 I 
believe. We’ve done some tracking since 1991. We have seen 
improvement as I say, but we have not reached our goals. For 
instance in 1991, persons of aboriginal ancestry represented 
only 2.9 per cent of the public service. We’re now up to 7 per 
cent. We’re headed in the right direction. We haven’t set sort of 
a target completion date, except every year we want to see these 
figures becoming better. 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, for some time we’ve been 
hearing about the government’s grand scheme for pay equity. 
Can you give us a update of where you’re at right now with the 
introduction of pay equity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — As I indicated a little earlier, Mr. Chair, 
we have chosen as government to work through the negotiating 
process with our representative trade unions and management to 
achieve pay equity in the various workplaces that are in the 
public sector, and here I refer also to the Crowns, the agencies, 
and to the direct departments of government. 
 
We have concluded those negotiations and arrangements now 
with the Workers’ Compensation Board, with the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation, and with SaskEnergy. 
 
(1245) 
 
We have completed work around the first jointly developed 
classification plan. And we are now in negotiation, and my 
reports tell me successful, ongoing and progressing 
negotiations, with out largest employee representative group, 
being the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union, 
SGEU, and that we hope certainly by the end of this year, to 
have had the new class plan which will bring about pay equity 
within the largest of the government employee bodies. 
 
And then we will be continuing to work along, as we are in 
some of the other Crowns and some of the other, smaller 
agencies. 
 
To date we have completed the work with the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, Sask. Gaming Corporation and 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I believe there was some sort of committee set 
up that was going to try and work out a formula to determine 
the value of work. Can you give us the nature of that formula 
that they worked out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — As I indicated earlier, Mr. Chair, the 
member may also want to have some of this discussion with the 
minister responsible for the Women’s Secretariat, who has a 
depth of knowledge in this area. 
 
The criteria being used to establish the sort of evaluations for 
the jobs and so on are four: the skill required for a position; the 
effort required; the responsibility attached to that position; and 
the working conditions which surround that position. And so 
those are the four broad categories which are used to assess and 
classify the position. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I think you probably will agree 
that there is a lot of confusion, not only in Saskatchewan but 
probably in the country, regarding pay equity. More often than 
not most people take it to mean that people in the same job 
should be paid the same wage or salary. And very few people 
really disagree with that. 
 
I think the truth is though that it means equal pay for equal 
value, which means somebody is deeming that, and that’s 
totally different. And I’m just wondering if that’s your view as 
well, that the people in the province probably are not under the 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1998 

same . . . they’re not thinking in the same way as we are when 
we talk about pay equity and the other issues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I think it’s fair to say — I think the 
member’s comment is accurate — that there is and there can be 
confusion around the definitions when we are talking of pay 
equity. Labour standards by law guarantees that there must be 
equal pay for equal work. If I and you both work the same 
number of hours in the workplace, there must be, for those same 
number of hours, equal pay — that’s a labour standard — if 
we’re doing the same work. 
 
What pay equity seeks to achieve of course, is equal pay for 
work of equal value. And that takes us then into the need to 
define, as you say, the value of certain workplaces and 
occupations and so on. To do that is the work that is going on 
based on the criteria which we talked about a moment ago — 
skill, responsibility, working conditions, and so on. 
 
That is the difference and it can be I think confusing when 
we’re using the language of equal pay or pay equity. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, and officials, thank you for coming today. 
 
It’s my understanding that the Public Service Commission deals 
with the hiring procedures within government and that the 
Public Service Commission is to do that in a non-partisan 
manner in the sense that partisan politics is not to play a role in 
how someone is hired or why they’re hired; rather it’s to be 
done on a merit basis, not on a political basis. Yet I have a long 
list here of people who are on the government payrolls with 
obvious partisan political connections. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give us the assurance that the people that 
are hired . . . the procedures that the Public Service Commission 
goes through in dealing with employees are done on a 
non-partisan basis, that politics plays absolutely no role in the 
hiring and the training in anything that the employees deal 
with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to assure the member who asked 
the question here this morning that that is the case without 
question. 
 
He will have of course lists of those who work for the 
provincial government, some of whom I’m sure at election time 
will have an NDP sign on their lawn. I’m sure of that. 
 
I am sure that there are those in the public service today — I 
don’t understand it quite myself — but I am sure they will have 
a Conservative sign on their lawn. And I’m sure there are . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m sorry they won’t have a 
Conservative sign, that’s right. The will have for sure . . . some 
will have Liberal signs. 
 
In a public service of 10,000 people in this province, there’s no 
doubt about it that you will find people from every political 
persuasion represented in there. No doubt about that. But I want 
to assure the member that when it comes to the classified 
service — and here we’re talking about the work that the Public 
Service Commission does, the classified public service — that 
there is no partisan, there’s no partisan choices being made by 

the Public Service Commission, I guarantee you that. 
 
There are those positions in government that do not fall under 
the purview of the Public Service Commission, those positions 
which are placed by order in council. They are very few, they 
are very few in number. 
 
Last year the commission reminds me that the province of 
Saskatchewan’s public service hired 1,007 people; 99.3 per cent 
of the hirings were done through the Public Service 
Commission in the classified service. I think I read somewhere 
there was eight people hired outside of the Public Service 
Commission, or a number like that, without a competition. 
 
So I want to assure the member, and all members, that, in terms 
of the Public Service Commission and in terms of the Act that 
we just moved through the House, that that is guaranteed. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you 
guarantee that there is no partisan activity taking place within 
the Public Service Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, I can. I want to repeat though that 
I’m sure that within the Government of Saskatchewan, you will 
find employed, people who support the political party of the 
current government. You will find people who support the party 
to which the member belongs and you will find people who 
support the Liberal Party, and there may be someone in the 
province who supports the Green Party. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just have one other set 
of questions to go through and maybe I can just ask the minister 
now whether this is . . . if I should be asking him through his 
department or if I should be dealing with it through the 
Women’s Secretariat. I’m not sure which department deals with 
this. 
 
The March 26, 1998 article in the Leader-Post talks about 
government employees with same-sex partners being eligible 
for spousal benefits. I’m wondering if this initiative is dealt 
with through your department or through the Women’s 
Secretariat? If it’s your department, can you tell me when this 
change was made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in fact the matter of benefits 
are in PEBA, the Public Employees Benefits Agency, and now 
that is technically the Department of Finance that manages the 
file there, but I can share with the member that the change was 
made in response to a human rights complaint. The change was 
effective October, 1997. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Normally when the government makes 
something that’s considered a major change, and I guess I 
believe this is a major change, there is a news broadcast made 
or some kind of a public announcement. Is this considered a 
major change to the Public Service Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Again, Mr. Chair, it is to the PEBA 
regulations not to the Public Service Commission. But again 
I’m happy . . . and the member may want further questioning 
with Finance, but given the circumstances across Canada where 
in fact many of these benefits are being paid federally in other 
provincial jurisdictions, given that the change here came in 



May 15, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

response to a human rights complaint and on the basis of court 
decisions, Human Rights Commission decisions across Canada, 
while we see it as an important change, we would not have 
viewed it as a major change. 
 
Ms. Draude: — According to an internal memo from the 
Health department dated April 24, and obtained by the media, 
the Department of Health now recognizes gay and lesbian 
couples as families and they’ll extend employment benefits. Is 
this part of the earlier policy that we were just talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’m a little unclear of the 
reference that the member makes to, I believe she said, 
employee benefits. We’re having a little trouble getting a clear 
understanding of her question. Perhaps if she wanted to provide 
us a copy of the memo we could refer to it or say a little more 
perhaps. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I think we read in the paper that there was . . . 
the Department of Health specifically announced that they 
recognized gay and lesbian couples and that they would extend 
employment benefits, and I’m wondering if this is actually part 
of that policy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, if we’re here talking about 
employees of the Department of Health because they are 
employees of government and because they will be involved 
with the PEBA plans, therefore this policy in that circumstance 
would apply to employees of the Department of Health. I mean 
it would not extend to others who would not be employees of 
the Department of Health that may be funded by the 
Department of Health, but not employees thereof. This change 
reflects a change that was made in PEBA which affects 
employees of government proper. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, does the provincial government 
not recognize same-sex couples on par with common-law 
relationships in legal terms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, this has only to do with the 
benefits provided by the Public Employees Benefits Agency, 
PEBA. This is not reflective of beyond that; it is reflective of 
that alone. The change was made as a result of a human rights 
complaint and in sync generally with what’s happening in 
benefit plans across Canada and in other governments and 
federal government. 
 
So it doesn’t reflect on anything broader than the Public 
Employees Benefits Agency. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We sent out some 
global questions awhile ago to the department. We haven’t 
received any of them back again, and just with the 
understanding that we will receive them as quickly as possible, 
I have no further questions for you or for your officials. And I 
thank you for attending, and have a good weekend. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the questions have been . . . 
the work is almost completed and we’ll have them to you just as 
soon as possible. I want to thank the member for her questions 
today. 
 
I also want to, just before taking my place, thank the officials 

who have joined us here today and so ably, ably assist us in the 
House but who on a day-to-day basis very ably assist the people 
of Saskatchewan, and working particularly as they do with the 
public service of Saskatchewan. So I want to, on behalf of all 
members, to thank them for their work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Subvote (PS01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (PS02), (PS03), (PS04) agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Public Service Commission 
Vote 33 

 
Subvotes (PS03), (PS04) agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being past the hour of adjournment, 
this House stands adjourned until Tuesday afternoon at 1:30 
o’clock. And with that I recommend to all hon. members to 
enjoy the long weekend with your constituents and your 
families. Have a wonderful and relaxing long weekend. This 
House stands adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:05 p.m. 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1171 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1171 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1171 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1171 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1171 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1171 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1171 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1171 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1171 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1172 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1172 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1172 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1172 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1172 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1172 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1172 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson .............................................................................................................................................................................1172, 1183 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1173 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1173 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1173 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1173 
  D’Autremont .................................................................................................................................................................1173, 1183 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1173 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1173 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................1191 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 The Importance of Credit Unions to Rural Saskatchewan 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1173 
 National Nursing Week 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1174 
 Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1174 
 Benefits for Veterans’ Spouses 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1174 
 SABEX Award Winners 
  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1174 
 Good News Headlines 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1175 
 College Mathieu 80th Anniversary Celebrations 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
 Good News for Weyburn Economy 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskPower Computer Project 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1176 
 Benefits for Veterans’ Widows 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1176 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1177 
 Child Protection Legislation 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1178 
 



 

 Election Campaign in Nova Scotia 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1178 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1178 
 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1179 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1179 
 Saskatchewan Government Insurance Damage Policies 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1179 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1179 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 745 — The Tommy Douglas Memorial Hospital Act 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1180 
 Bill No. 746 — The Child Protection Act 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1180 
 Bill No. 63 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Act 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1180 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1180 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 46 — The Credit Union Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1180 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
 Bill No. 50 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1186 
 Bill No. 51 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1187 
 Bill No. 52 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1998 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1187 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1188 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1188 
 Bill No. 33 — The Provincial Court Act, 1998 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1189 
 Bill No. 36 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur les services de l’état civil .....1189 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 27 — The Public Service Act, 1998 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1190 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1190 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 27  The Public Service Act, 1998 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1194 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Public Service Commission — Vote 33 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1194 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1194 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1196 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Public Service Commission — Vote 33 .....................................................................................................................................1197 
 
 
 


