





























































Hansard: October 19, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1981 
 October 19, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Deputy Clerk — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present to open this sitting. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I hereby inform the Assembly that 
the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has received from the 
Chief Electoral Officer a certificate of election and return of 
Judy Junor as member for the constituency of Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to 
present to you, Ms. Judy Junor, a member for the constituency 
of Saskatoon Eastview who has taken the oath and signed the 
roll and now claims the right to take her seat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Ms. Junor, I want to say welcome to 
the Legislative Assembly and I hope that your time here will be 
one that serves to be a record of honour to yourself and to your 
constituencies. Welcome to the Legislative Assembly. Let the 
hon. member from Saskatoon Eastview take her chair. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Ladies and gentlemen of the 
Assembly, I wish to introduce the pages for this portion of the 
session to the members of the Assembly. And I’ll ask that the 
pages stand as I introduce them: Graham Condo, Ellen 
Crumley, Diane Normandin, and Megan Saum. These are your 
pages for this session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Resignation of Member 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I also wish to inform the Assembly 
that I have received the resignation of Mr. Buckley Belanger, 
member of this Assembly for the constituency of Athabasca, 
effective September 2, 1998. 
 
In view of the resignation of the member for Athabasca, items 
of business standing in the name of Mr. Belanger will be 
withdrawn from the order paper. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of, again on behalf 
of concerned, very concerned citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan: 

Petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly may be 
pleased to consider saving the Plains Health Centre by 
enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that those essential services provided at the Plains may 
be continued. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Melville. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I present a 
petition this afternoon . . . the prayer of relief which reads as 
follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Assembly may be 
pleased to save the Plains Health Centre by enacting 
legislation to prevent its closure, and by providing 
adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that 
essential services provided at the Plains may be continued. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise today on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to present a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good people 
from Coronach. I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too rise to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens of this province that are 
concerned about the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
with my colleagues and the some 110 to 120,000 people that 
have signed petitions in this province and . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Now the member knows 
that the prayer is all that’s allowed to speak, and a small 
preamble, but nothing more. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 



1982 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions 
are all from the area of Coronach. These are the last petitions 
we have. It’s up to the Premier to stop this foolishness. I so 
present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Now the hon. member was 
warned once about the prayer and no preamble and no debate. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m happy 
to present a petition. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately start work on the rebuilding of our secondary 
highway system to provide for our safe driving on what are 
becoming known as pothole roads; to enter into 
negotiations with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) for a long-term plan of rural 
road restitution reflecting future needs and to provide 
safety for all drivers as the new trucking regulation 
changes safety factors on these roads. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Deputy Speaker, these folks come from Bienfait, Portal, 
Frobisher, and Estevan today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received. 
 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 
praying that the government should immediately start work 
to rebuilding on our secondary highway system; that the 
government should reach necessary agreements with other 
levels of governments to fund the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; thirdly that the Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to act to save the Plains Health Centre; that 
the government work with aboriginal Metis leaders in an 
effort to end the practice of night hunting; that the 
government cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer 
and to immediately call an independent public inquiry 
surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco; and finally that the 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to take immediate action to 
ensure that the required level of service in radiology is 
maintained in the North Central Health District. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day 68 move first reading of a Bill, the 

Crown corporations managers’ salary Act, an Act limiting 
SaskPower management salaries. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 71 ask the government the following 
question to the Minister of Highways: 

 
What plans do you have for painting lines on secondary 
highways so that rural people and highway travellers can 
navigate these highways through winter storms and heavy 
fogs without being killed or injured? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased today to point out someone in the Speaker's gallery that 
I’d like to introduce. Dr. Jim Melenchuk, Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party, is here this afternoon and sitting 
next to him in the Speaker’s gallery, Dr. Adam Niesner, Jr., 
who is a Liberal candidate for Regina Wascana Plains, who’ll 
be picking out a seat in the legislature here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to welcome people that we saw earlier — I believe 
they may or may not still be in the galleries — however, Mr. 
Gordon Gunoff, business manager of IBEW (International 
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers), Barb Byers, president of 
SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour), Rosalee 
Longmoore, president of Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, and 
Stephen Foley, president of health care council of CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees). We welcome them to 
the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Before continuing, I would like to 
remind everyone that it is a long-standing tradition in this 
House that visitors in the gallery are not allowed to participate 
in the proceedings either by clapping or with verbal . . . and I 
would ask the co-operation of the visitors in that. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to 
add my welcome to all of the workers in the House, in addition 
to the third party. Thank you for coming today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition we would certainly want to welcome all of 
the guests to the legislature as well. It’s difficult days. We 
certainly all understand that. The proceedings here will be of 
great interest I’m sure. And we’d ask all members to join in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Condolences 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is with great sadness that I stand today just recently . . . in 
respect of and in paying tribute to the late Michael Fredrick 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

Mitchell. Fred Mitchell died on Saturday, October 17, at 
Stanford University Medical Centre near San Francisco, 
California. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues I extend our deepest sympathy to 
Fred’s wife, LuAn, their children, Freddie, Ryan, and Jinji-Jo, 
and to the rest of the family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while attending university, Fred spent his 
summers working in the Saskatoon and Vancouver 
meat-packing plants of Intercontinental Packers, where his late 
grandfather, Fred Mendel, taught him the meat business. Fred 
Mitchell worked in all areas of the plant and progressed through 
various management positions, becoming president and chief 
operating officer following Fred Mendel’s death in 1976. 
 
Fred served as president of the Canadian Meat Council where 
he was named an honorary member in recognition of many of 
his contributions to the meat industry. 
 
In 1995 Fred Mitchell left Intercontinental Packers. When he 
returned to the company in late 1996 it faced some problems. 
Under Fred’s leadership the company made a remarkable 
recovery including the completion of a private sector 
recapitalization, a $14 million expansion, and modernizing of 
the company’s Saskatoon plant, specifically increasing sales 
and jobs. 
 
Fred’s accomplishments were recognized by the international 
management and consulting firm of Ernst & Young where he 
was named Young Entrepreneur for the Prairie Region in the 
turnaround category. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Fred Mitchell’s extended family was Gourmet 
Foods. All you had to do was walk through the plant to 
understand the respect, admiration, and loyalty bestowed upon 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I rise with great sadness and regret today to pay tribute 
to Fred Mitchell, a prominent businessman and citizen of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Fred Mitchell died Saturday at the age of 51 following a 
long fight with cystic fibrosis. It comes as no surprise to 
members of this Assembly that Fred Mitchell was not only 
successful in business, but also gave of himself to his 
community and to the province. 
 
Mr. Mitchell joined the staff of Intercontinental Packers in 1965 
as a part-time employee. He eventually rose to become 
president and CEO (chief executive officer) of the company, 
despite serious health problems that plagued him in his life. 
 
Among his many interests and causes, Mr. Mitchell was also a 
supporter of the Arthritis Foundation of Saskatchewan; sat on 
the Board of Governors at the University of Saskatchewan; was 
a past member for the Centre for International Business Studies 

advisory board; served as past president of the Canadian Meat 
Council and was the past president of the Mendel Art Gallery in 
Saskatoon. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this by no means exhausts the 
lists of the boards and organizations Mr. Mitchell served on. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the loss of Fred Mitchell leaves our 
province a poorer place today. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I’m sure all members . . . 
and I’m sure on behalf of all members, I want to express our 
deepest sympathies to the friends and family of Mr. Fred 
Mitchell. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Housing Starts Increase 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
What’s very noticeable in Prince Albert right now, Mr. Speaker, 
is the activity in the construction field. When I visited many 
people in the industry, both workers and suppliers, over the last 
month or two, I found that they were very busy and they were 
looking for people to hire. 
 
So this led me to check on the statistics on housing starts. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the statistics pleasantly affirmed what the workers 
and business people were telling me. In fact January to June 
housing starts in Prince Albert showed a 12.5 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Regina they showed a 25.9 per cent increase 
and in Swift Current, my colleague’s town, they showed a 74.5 
per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. This is in private homes, 
multiple homes, condominiums. In the province as whole there 
are 1,420 new dwellings going up — that’s a 31 per cent 
increase over the last year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these residences are needed because we do 
have a steadily increasing population growth in Prince Albert 
and in Saskatchewan. In fact it’s been growing for 19 
consecutive quarters — that’s nearly five years. 
 
Doesn’t it seem odd to you, Mr. Speaker, when you hear 
members claim that people are leaving the province in droves? I 
guess when they’re leaving, one of the last things they do is 
they buy a permanent residence in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Condolences 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to 
on behalf of the Liberal caucus join the Minister of Agriculture 
and the member from Canora-Pelly in expressing our sincere 
sympathy and condolences to the family of a great man, a great 
business person for the province of Saskatchewan. I would like 
to add our sympathy and condolences to all the people that 
share in this great loss. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Opening of Outlook Bridge 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the beautiful fall 
morning of October 8, I was delighted to join the Minister of 



1984 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

Highways and Transportation, the hon. member for Arm River, 
and a large crowd of residents, builders, and community leaders 
to officially open the new Outlook bridge. 
 
Also joining in the opening were two members of the Conquest 
band which had played at the opening of the original bridge in 
1936. 
 
This was indeed a celebration of progress — progress from the 
ferry to the first bridge, and progress from the first bridge, 
which was increasingly being battered by loads a little too big 
for the available space, to this new, wider, open design. 
 
The economy on both sides of the river is booming, and this 
new link will ensure that that growth continues in traditional 
agriculture and specialty agriculture, in processing and 
manufacturing, in tourism, and in every other area of our 
economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this beautiful river, the Saskatchewan, has 
given our province its name, it has defined our history, and its 
bountiful clear water reflects our hope in our future. This new 
bridge across the Saskatchewan represents the partnership of all 
Saskatchewan people to work hard, to fulfill our hope to keep 
Saskatchewan the best place on earth in which to live. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Welcome to Member from Saskatoon Eastview 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to welcome the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview to the legislature. It’s nice to finally meet 
one of those $100,000-a-year nurses the former minister of 
Health likes to talk about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s more than a little ironic that on the first day 
the former nurses’ union president takes her seat in this House, 
she is here to pass back-to-work legislation. 
 
It’s amazing how a cabinet minister’s salary in office can make 
one a lot more flexible in their views, and a few of the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) backbenchers there should be paying 
attention, like the member from Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, we would like to congratulate the new 
member for Saskatoon Eastview on her election to this 
legislature, and we look forward to watching her vote today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

YTV Series Filmed in Lumsden 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
My good news story is similar to hundreds of others taking 
place all around our province lately thanks to a thriving and 
rapidly growing film and movie industry. In this case, I am 
delighted to report to the House that Lumsden is one of the 
latest Saskatchewan towns to be in the movies. 
 

In September two episodes of the YTV series Incredible Story 
Studio were filmed in Lumsden, which of course, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is a delightful community in my constituency. The 
Incredible Story Studio is a program that is in its first season 
this fall on YTV, Canada’s leading youth network. This show 
takes stories written by Canadian children aged 10 to 14 and 
turns them into short movies. 
 
The stories that were filmed in Lumsden last month will be part 
of the show’s second season which starts airing in January 
1999. One episode is called The Mystery of Sam McNall, 
written by 13-year-old Robbie McLellan of Regina. 
 
The second episode is Moving is Such a Hassle. It was filmed at 
the riverbank, the playground on Broad Street, and the two 
locations on Colbourne Street in Lumsden. 
 
Saskatchewan’s own Minds Eye Pictures is involved with the 
shooting of this TV series and most of the actors are from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the town of Lumsden on this 
their second foray into TV programming. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Negotiations 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, today I’d like to surprise the House by offering 
applause to a deserving Saskatchewan New Democrat. Well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I regret to inform the heavy-handed, 
uncaring members across that it isn’t to do with anything that 
they’ve done recently. And after today, if the members hear any 
applause it will very likely be because they clap for themselves. 
 
But thankfully there’s still one New Democratic who deserves 
applause and can generate a hearty round of it from the average 
working people. I’m not certain whether it’s his recent crashing 
experience on the road that almost goes to Avonlea but Dick 
Proctor, unlike this government, appears to know what is fair 
for working people. Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unlike the 
members opposite, instead of crossing a picket line of working 
folks, Dick Proctor showed he cared and turned around. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I close I would just like to 
advise the Assembly that out of respect and kindness to Mr. 
Proctor, I’ll be sending him a newspaper clipping here and it 
points out, and I quote, “Romanow road 339” is just as bad as 
motorcycle . . . just as bad on motorcyclists as the potholes in 
the gravel on Highway 334. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower Management 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, we are here today because of the NDP’s gross 
mismanagement of SaskPower. This labour dispute that should 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

have been resolved between the union and SaskPower 
management; instead your NDP patronage managers have failed 
once again. That’s the same NDP patronage gang that brought 
us Channel Lake and Guyana. That’s the same NDP patronage 
gang that left us . . . that may leave us on the verge of a power 
shortage this winter. I’ve got my power generator hooked up 
out at the farm and I would advise everyone else in 
Saskatchewan to do the same thing. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you admit that your NDP patronage managers 
have completely botched up the labour negotiations? Will you 
admit that the reason we are here today is because of NDP 
patronage and mismanagement at SaskPower? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite from Kindersley who indicates to us that had he been 
in government, indirectly he says he would not have these 
problems, I want to say very clearly that we all know what you 
would be doing if you in fact were in government. Because I 
have here quotes from an interview done with you in 1995, it 
says PCs (Progressive Conservative) — that’s when you were a 
PC before you slipped across and became a Reformer — PCs 
definitely alive at the end of 1995. And I want to quote what 
you said at that time. It says here and I quote the member from 
Kindersley saying: 
 

We would be looking at wage rollbacks. I think many 
people would look at the situation and suggest government 
employees are extremely well-paid when you compare 
them with private sector workers. Well I think there is a 
view towards downsizing government. I think there is also 
a view, we would support it, that government would be 
looking at ways to reduce payrolls. 

 
You talk about rollback. I ask the members and the people of 
the province, are you in favour of rollbacks that that member 
clearly indicated is the policy of his party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Premier, 
and look at who is bringing in legislation today — you. For the 
last few years SaskPower has been run by a bunch of people 
whose only experience at power was how to get power, not how 
to provide it to the people of this province.: Jack Messer, your 
campaign manager; Carole Bryant, your election planning 
co-ordinator; Bill Hyde, the Minister of Social Services 
campaign director. 
 
Mr. Premier, I wouldn’t trust these people to plug in a toaster 
let alone run a million dollar corporation. And what have we 
learned and what have you learned from the NDP’s 
mismanagement and patronage in SaskPower? Absolutely 
nothing. 
 
In fact just the other day in Crown Corporations Committee we 
moved a motion to end patronage — in the Channel Lake 
hearings. And what happened there? The NDP unanimously 
voted it down. Mr. Premier, when are you going to learn? When 
are we going to see an end to NDP patronage and 
mismanagement over at SaskPower? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 
members opposite when they talk about the issue of people we 
appoint and people we hire. During the review done in 1996 of 
our Crowns and the following appointment of new boards, we 
appointed people like Frank Proto, Susan Milburn, people like 
Bill Heidt from over at Crown Life, Tom Kehoe from Swift 
Current, Jimmy Scharfstein from Saskatoon, and the list goes 
on and on. 
 
But I want to say that although the member from Kindersley 
didn’t become the leader of the new Saskatchewan Party — an 
individual by the name of Mr. Hermanson did — and I want to 
say that his position as it relates to who should be hired and 
what we should do with employees of the government is, I 
think, shocking. 
 
Because what he said is this: “that the MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) in his caucus” — that would be you 
people here — “knew where the skunks were in government, 
the people who had to be fired”. That’s what he said. 
 
And good old Yogi said that he would fire all of them. That was 
the guy that didn’t win. But that is the policy of your 
government. And I say to government employees in this 
province, and as it would relate to . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I would say to the 
minister opposite that if he wants a little bit of help in 
identifying the skunks, I’m sure some of the people in the 
gallery could help you this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I would remind the 
member from Kindersley not to bring the people in the gallery 
into the debate on the floor. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, the 
Saskatchewan Party is going to support the back-to-work 
legislation, not because it’s a good solution, not at all. But 
because of NDP’s mismanagement, it’s made it the only 
solution. 
 
We realize the government has to keep an eye on the purse 
strings, but it’s a shame you were paying to . . . the same kind 
of close attention when you blew $5 million on Channel Lake. 
It’s a shame you weren’t paying the same kind of close 
attention when you blew $2 million down in Guyana. And it’s 
all because the people in charge of SaskPower are NDP 
patronage appointees that have no idea what they’re doing. 
 
Mr. Premier, when are you going to bring in some professional, 
qualified managers to clean up the mess at SaskPower? When 
are you going to put an end to the NDP patronage that’s 
resulted in back-to-work legislation here this afternoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious what the 



1986 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

member opposite is referring to in a roundabout way because 
we know what the Devine government did with Crowns during 
the 1980s, obviously selling off Saskoil and the Potash 
Corporation, Sask Minerals, the gas fields, preparing 
SaskEnergy to be sold. We know what we’re talking about from 
that member. 
 
More than that, Mr. Hermanson is quoted in the Eston . . . the 
Press review, and he says this about the Crown corporations. 
This is the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. He said: 

 
That his government, if elected, should be allowed to sell 
off the Crown corporations . . . 
 

That’s what he said. 
 
That’s what you say as well when quoted, when quoted . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well you challenge him; ask 
whether or not it’s true. It is true, and I quote again: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party leadership candidates meet in the 
Kindersley constituency. 

 
And what did he say there? Hermanson said, he said: 

 
That his government, if elected, should be allowed to sell 
off the Crown corporations on a selected basis. 

 
Well SaskPower, SaskPower is the one that you’re talking 
about today. And I say to the member opposite, come clean. 
That’s your plan, that’s your strategy, and you should put it in 
your policy so everyone knows what it is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Management Salaries at SaskPower 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, my questions are also for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, you seem to have a double standard here. You talk 
tough about maintaining your 2 per cent wage guideline, but 
your NDP-patronage managers continue to get huge pay hikes. 
Last year, two-thirds of SaskPower’s managers got pay hikes 
averaging 8 per cent — 8 per cent, Mr. Premier — four times 
your salary cap for union workers. 
 
Mr. Premier, why the double standard? Why is there a cap for 
workers and no salary cap for NDP-patronage managers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Again I say to the members 
opposite and to that member in particular, Mr. Speaker, that we 
know what the policy of that party is as it would relate to 
privatization. And they’re talking about privatization. 
 
And what I would ask that member opposite, what I would ask 
that member opposite, is to check what has happened with what 
was Saskoil as to the differential between hourly waged 
employees and the CEO. That’s what he should ask himself. 
Because he will know that the differential in Saskoil, now 
Wascana, now CanOxy, between a wage earning person in that 

corporation and the CEO has more than doubled. That’s what 
you’re talking about. 
 
You’re speaking, as always, out of both sides of your mouth. 
Because if you look at the differential between the CEO in 
SaskPower and the hourly wage earners, you will find that the 
spread is lower than in any private sector corporation in 
Canada. So be honest, come clean, and tell us what your 
privatization plan is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, over the weekend I had a SaskPower worker clearly 
indicate the double standard that you guys are allowing to have 
happen. He said when a SaskPower lineman goes up a power 
pole to fix something and makes a mistake, he winds up dead. 
When a SaskPower manager makes a mistake and blows 
millions of dollars in Channel Lake or Guyana, the NDP give 
him a big fat severance package. What’s that about fairness? 
What does that say about your double standard? If workers are 
going to live with 2 per cent, then managers should live with 2 
per cent. Will you pass legislation today holding the line on 
salary increases for managers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say obviously when 
we review the pay scales of our employees and managers, we 
want to be fair to both mangers and employees, and to the 
people of the province who pay the salaries. But what I would 
say to you if you’re honest, check the Potash Corporation, 
we’re in a privatized situation, and see whether or not, see 
whether or not you people who privatized the Potash 
Corporation — which is your plan for our Crowns — whether 
or not there would be a cap on managers under your scheme, 
Mr. Hermanson’s scheme, to privatize our Crown corporations. 
 
Tell us the spread between the hourly wage in the Potash 
Corporation today and the CEO. Is that your idea of fairness? 
That’s where you’re coming from and your only grandstanding 
today because the galleries are full of people who are concerned 
about their salary. And I should be . . . the employees should be 
concerned. We are concerned; you’re playing politics with 
privatization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Premier, if you’re not prepared to get rid of the double 
standard, the Saskatchewan Party is prepared to help you with 
it. Immediately after question period we will be introducing 
legislation that will put a cap on all Crown corporation 
managers. If workers can live with 2 per cent, so can the 
managers. 
 
Will you support the legislation? Will you allow that legislation 
to pass today, Mr. Deputy Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, when the legislation is 
introduced we’ll look at all the parts of the legislation, any 
amendments that are put forward. But I want to say to the 
member opposite when it comes to what his plans are for the 
Crowns and the discrepancy between hourly-wage earners and 
CEOs, you know what it will be in a privatized format because 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

you privatized the Potash Corporation and you know the 
differential between Chuck Childers and the hourly-wage 
earners. It’s not two-and-a-half times which it is between the 
CEO of Power and the average wage of an hourly-wage earner, 
it’s 10 or 15 times as much. 
 
Here’s your policy. It’s in your brief you gave to us in 1996 and 
it says this: 
 

The government immediately takes steps to privatize 
SaskTel through a public share offering under the 
guidelines of section 3 of this submission. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say this in the third bullet: 
 

The experience gained from the privatization of SaskTel 
would enable the province to undertake other privatizations 
of SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and SGI. 

 
That’s your policy, and don’t tell me that you’re in favour of 
workers and keeping these corporations that are there now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Labour Negotiations at SaskPower 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is for the Premier, not his seatmate. Mr. Premier, you 
have publicly stated that you will not subcontract your 
provincial responsibilities to a third-party arbitrator. However 
your actions tell a different story. You did it with your own pay; 
you did it with the judges’ contracts; and you did it with your 
old friend Jack Messer. 
 
How can you justify having a third party decide the huge 
severance package for your buddy Jack, but you can’t be fair 
and reasonable in the treatment of our provincial employees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite from the constituency which is represented by 
the town of Shaunavon, and I know the member is attempting to 
be sincere about what he’s saying, but I want to say to him that 
I hope that his statement made in January of 1996 where he 
said, and it’s quoted, the headline in the Leader-Post, 
“Opposition prepared to force SaskPower employees to work.” 
That’s a picture of you, sir, where you say, and I quote: 
 

Liberal MLA Glen McPherson said Friday, “The people of 
this province can’t afford to have games being played by 
either side. The power must remain on, and we speak for 
the consumers in the province.” 
 

Here you are urging back-to-work legislation — that’s you — 
saying to the people of the province, I’m the protector of the 
consumer. 
 
And so today I want to say to you, if your plan is to support the 
Bill, to support the Bill, do it today. Don’t play politics, as you 
advise yourself right here. Don’t play politics. 
 
This is not about . . . 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Supplementary question, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Premier, you make the claim that you cannot trust 
an independent party to fairly look at this dispute. Yet when it 
comes to plugging your pals into jobs all throughout 
government and especially the Crown corporations, you weren’t 
concerned. 
 
Or when you bought your multimillion dollar jet or blew money 
in Guyana or Channel Lake, you said nothing. When you lost 
16 million bucks on the NST deal or risked hundreds of 
millions of dollars in your foreign ventures all throughout the 
world, you said nothing again. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Premier, there’s one set of rules for you and 
your pals; there’s another set of rules for the rest of us. 
 
In 1993 you gave your assistants and those of your ministers a 
twelve and a half per cent pay increase at one shot. Mr. Premier, 
how can you justify giving your political hacks a twelve per 
cent . . . twelve and a half per cent pay raise and yet take a 
heavy hand again and take the rights away from these workers 
here in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — To the member opposite who yells 
from his seat about how we’re going to vote, obviously we will 
find that out in a few hours. But I want to say to him that given 
the fact of your call for back-to-work legislation, back in 1996, 
I want to say that on Friday, on the 19th of January ’96, you 
said this, and I quote: 
 

If the government comes to us and the people say, listen 
we have got to bring in back-to-work legislation — hey, 
we’ll support that. 
 

That was you. 
 
Now I say to the member opposite, all of a sudden today, all of 
sudden today, because you’re judging the political wind a little 
different, because you’re in political trouble in your own seat, I 
know what you’re doing. The Liberals are in trouble in all of 
rural Saskatchewan. I know what you’re doing. You’re 
attempting to shore up your vote by flip-flopping on an 
important issue for your own political benefit. That’s typical of 
you. I remember when we were making tough decisions in this 
government on this side of the House, you slipped across to the 
other side without a vote because you believed it was the most 
popular thing to do. Well I’ll tell you there’s nothing going to 
save you, my friend. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, a few years ago your government raised the pay for 
your MLAs and cabinet ministers. The Liberal caucus refused 
the MLA pay raise of $4,400 per person and every New 
Democratic grabbed that money and ran. That’s what you did. 
 



1988 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

Your seatmate, the Deputy Premier, is quoted in a August 21, 
1982 Leader-Post article as saying: 
 

MLAs should take two thousand bucks off their pay and 
give it to those workers to help meet their demands. 
 

Well, Mr. Deputy Premier, now if you say there isn’t a set of 
rules for you and your pals and another for the rest of us, will 
you announce today that your caucus is going to pony up that 
forty-four hundred bucks that you grabbed and ran with; and 
Mr. Premier, will you agree to give it to the families of these 
people that you walked out of their jobs . . . locked out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite, when 
it comes to dealing with this issue, we’ll deal with it in a 
professional manner after a great deal of consultation. And you 
know how this has come about as well as I do. But I want to say 
to the members opposite, I want to say to the member opposite 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Now the 
hon. member from Wood River has asked a question and then 
refuses to listen to the answer. Does he want an answer to the 
question or not? Then I would ask him to stay in his chair and 
ask the Deputy Minister to give him an answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that when it relates to pay scales of MLAs and when 
you talk about pensions and when you talk about the salaries of 
civil servants or upper management, there is a system in place 
to deal with all of them. The process of negotiated settlements 
is a principle we believe in and we are doing our best to achieve 
at every table — collective bargaining through a bargain 
position. 
 
And I say to the members opposite that sometimes it doesn’t 
work. And in this case it didn’t and that saddens us. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, I say this to you, sir, who 
called for back-to-work legislation in 1996 — you called for it 
— today you’re saying something very different. What has 
changed? Is it a principle position that has changed? No, it’s 
difficulty in your politics that has changed. 
 
And I’ll tell you what you’re doing. You’re trying to save your 
political hide in Shaunavon because you’re in big trouble 
because you jumped across the floor, and unlike Buckley 
Belanger who had the decency to resign his seat and let the 
people choose, you went across at the dead of night. And I say 
you’re in political trouble. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Negotiations between Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations 

 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Health minister or her junior, the former president of the 
Sask Union of Nurses. Madam Minister, will your 

government-imposed guidelines also apply to the province’s 
nurses, essentially robbing them of their right to bargain or . . . 
if they don’t accept this heavy-handed approach by the 
Premier? 
 
Will you explain to this Assembly how legislating the nurses 
back to work will stop the exodus of nurses, much less attract 
the some 4,000 nurses the Canadian nursing association predicts 
this province will need over the next 13 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to answer 
that question on behalf of the associate Health minister and 
myself. And to all of the people that have offered us their 
congratulations or, in some cases condolences, we say thank 
you very much. We’ve been enjoying our last month as the 
ministers of Health in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As the members will know, we are not yet . . . we have not yet 
seen bargaining with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations. It’s my 
understanding that the nurses’ collective agreement with SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) expires at 
the end of March of 1999. We anticipate that negotiations will 
begin in due course and we will arrive at a mutually acceptable 
collective agreement with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Power Supply in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is also for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, NDP patronage and mismanagement has created a 
much bigger problem than just this labour dispute. It’s now 
clear that SaskPower will probably not have enough power to 
get through the winter. While you guys were stirring up 
Channel Lake and messing up in Guyana, you forgot to mind 
the store at home. 
 
Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan want to know. Are we 
going to run short of power this winter? I’m not talking about 
power outages because lines are down or transformers fail; I’m 
talking about the lights going out across Saskatchewan because 
SaskPower has simply run out of electricity. 
 
Mr. Premier, can you stand in your place today and absolutely 
guarantee there will be no power shortages in Saskatchewan 
this winter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite who raises a serious concern and I say to him 
in the most legitimate way that I can that the reports we’re 
getting from our power corporation is that the power will be on 
and there will be power supplies to meet the needs of the 
families and homes and hospitals, schools and factories and 
steel plants in our province. 
 
But I can say that in western Canada with the very fast growth 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1989 

of the economy in Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, that all of 
the power corporations . . . Yes, Saskatchewan has one of the 
fastest growing economies in Canada. The member from 
Kindersley would know that. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, there is a power shortage already in 
Alberta — brownouts have occurred. We’re confident that 
we’re going to meet our commitments in Saskatchewan. 
Manitoba is in a very unusual situation where, because of low 
water levels, they too are having difficulty meeting their 
demands. 
 
And so this is not an issue of one power company; this is an 
issue of an economy in western Canada that, because of the 
resources we’re blessed with and the management, I would 
argue, and the work being done by employees, but we will be 
able to maintain . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Purchasing Power from other Suppliers 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well with answers like that, Mr. 
Speaker, if we had wind generation in this province we would 
have no problems. 
 
Mr. Premier, industry experts including the professionals at 
SaskPower have been predicting three and a half per cent load 
growth per year. Your NDP geniuses over at SaskPower, 
however, have been basing their planning on one and a half per 
cent. And you listened to your NDP patronage appointments 
over the power professionals. 
 
Mr. Premier, this morning I spoke with Basin Electric in North 
Dakota. They say the most they can provide Saskatchewan is 
150 megawatts this winter. That’s 50 more megawatts than 
usual. They say also that we’ll pay a terrible high price for it — 
as much as three times more than normal. 
 
Mr. Premier, Alberta doesn’t have any power for us; Manitoba 
doesn’t have any power for us; North Dakota has a little power 
for us, and we’re going to pay through the nose for it. 
 
How did you let our power supply reach this critical situation? 
Why aren’t you taking steps to ensure an adequate power 
supply in Saskatchewan this winter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to just follow this logic 
because like normal Tory logic there’s big leaps of the gears 
and grinding going on here. Because he says, first of all, the 
mismanagement of SaskPower has led to shortages. Then he 
goes on to say that Tory Alberta has these shortages — private 
sector companies. Tory Manitoba has these shortages, and 
Basin Electric. 
 
Now Tory logic is what got us to the point of having $15 billion 
in debt — $750 million a year interest being paid. But I say to 
the member opposite that we are being told, and we believe we 
will have enough power to meet the demands of the province 
this winter. But for you to say that it’s because of the 
mismanagement of the engineers and planners in SaskPower is 

absolute nonsense. Go and say that to TransAlta and to the 
private companies. 
 
Why is it that you are so bent on attacking government 
employees? Why isn’t it the fault of the managers in Alberta 
that they have a shortage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the minister on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of this Assembly, I 
move that Bill No. 65, The Maintenance of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation’s Operation Act, 1998 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Maintenance of Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation’s Operations Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that Bill No. 65, The Maintenance 
of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s Operation Act, 1998 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
right now. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I will advise the minister that the 
House will pause momentarily while the Bill is being 
distributed. We cannot proceed into second reading until all 
members have the Bill. I would ask the pages to please 
distribute the Bill to the members. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 65  The Maintenance of Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation’s Operations Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Maintenance of Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation’s Operations Act, 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I 
would like to say that the recall of this Legislative Assembly to 
legislate the end to the ongoing labour dispute between 
SaskPower and its workers is a reluctant last step. It is a step 
that we must take to fulfill a clear and immediate responsibility 
which this government has to the people of Saskatchewan to 
ensure that the light and heat stay on this winter. 
 
SaskPower is in urgent need of ensuring that essential winter 
maintenance is completed soon in order to meet this pressing 
public need. If SaskPower is not able to complete its pre-winter 



1990 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

maintenance and repair work on time, the reliability of electrical 
services in Saskatchewan this winter will be jeopardized. 
 
(1430) 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is not prepared to let this 
happen. Mr. Speaker, this government wants a settlement of this 
dispute that is fair to the workers and fair to the people of this 
province. 
 
Our teachers, our public servants, and Crown corporation 
employees . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Our teachers, our 
public servants, and the Crown corporation employees at SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) have already reached 
such agreements. It was our most sincere hope that bargaining 
in good faith, IBEW and SaskPower could arrive at an 
agreement within the government’s public sector bargaining 
guidelines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the inability of these parties to reach a settlement 
which is fair not only to them but to all the people of 
Saskatchewan has forced this government to act in the public 
interest and legislate an end to this dispute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill puts an end to all work stoppages within 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation; extends the existing 
collective bargaining agreement for a period of three years; 
directs SaskPower to implement the government mandate by 
providing a wage increase to its employees of 2 per cent in each 
of the three years of the extension of the collective bargaining 
agreement; allows the parties to agree to the application of an 
additional 1 per cent in monetary and other benefits, excluding 
salary, which is also a component of the government mandate; 
and it implements significant enforcement provisions to ensure 
compliance with these provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan compels us to bring an immediate end to this 
labour dispute to ensure an adequate power supply this winter. 
We will do everything we can to heal the difficult labour 
relations within SaskPower. 
 
As a first step, it is the government’s intention to ask 
SaskPower to cover wages lost by SaskPower workers during 
this dispute. The government will ask SaskPower to agree to a 
non-discrimination clause in the collective agreement. And the 
government will ask SaskPower to recall all workers affected 
by the dispute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we take these steps to promote a better 
atmosphere, we also express our profound gratitude and 
appreciation to the people at SaskPower who worked so long 
and well for so many hours to restore the heat and light in our 
province during the snowstorm just over a week ago. 
 
I’m hopeful that all hon. members in this Assembly will support 
the timely passage of this important Bill. Mr. Speaker, I move 
second reading of An Act to provide for the Maintenance of 
Operations of Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when I got into politics, I kind of suspected there’d be 
the odd surprise from time to time. But if someone told me 

today that I’d be standing in the legislature being asked to vote 
on back-to-work legislation written by the NDP, introduced by 
the NDP, as a result of the NDP, the supposed friends of labour, 
I would have been very, very surprised and thought they didn’t 
know what they were talking about. 
 
If someone had ever told me a year ago that the former 
president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses would become 
a member of the legislature and her first act in the legislature is 
to vote for back-to-work legislation, I would have thought that 
perhaps they should have been seeking some health care. But 
here we are. 
 
Last March when the session of the legislature began, the big 
debate around this province was the mismanagement of 
SaskPower by NDP-appointed hacks. Now at what I presume is 
the end of the current session, barring any more emergency 
caused by this government, we are still talking about the same 
thing, a very serious situation over at SaskPower. 
 
Let’s make no mistake about it. This mess, this labour mess that 
we have before us today has been brought to you courtesy of 
the inefficient, ineffective management over at SaskPower — 
management that has been hand-picked by their political 
masters sitting opposite us. 
 
The problem with the union should never have gotten in . . . 
pardon me, the problem is this should have never gotten this far 
to begin with. But the friends of this government handed the 
problem off to the legislature in the same manner that they hand 
almost everything else off. They’ve let this thing spin totally out 
of control. This is a situation that should and could have been 
handled by the corporation, had it good management. 
 
Instead once more the legislature is asked to step in and do 
something about SaskPower’s disputes. The NDP should be 
absolutely ashamed and embarrassed that their incompetence in 
running SaskPower has forced this dispute, this labour dispute, 
into the legislature. It should have been handled through the 
collective bargaining process that you people opposite speak so 
highly of and say that you support. 
 
That being said, let me begin by making one thing clear. The 
first priority for the Saskatchewan Party in this matter is the 
safety of the people of Saskatchewan, both in terms of 
providing them with a safe and reliable power supply as we 
head into another expected cold winter and in terms of reaching 
a settlement that is acceptable and affordable to the residents of 
this province. 
 
Certainly we agree that the government must pay attention to 
how much the taxpayers can handle in terms of labour 
settlements, including wage settlements with its many unions. 
As I understand the two, two, and two settlement that will be 
imposed by the NDP will cost the taxpayers about $6 million 
over three years. 
 
We opposed binding arbitration because we felt that the figure 
could come back far higher than the people of this province 
could pay. We have hoped both sides would agree at mediation 
and work this thing out without measures taken today. 
Unfortunately, the collective bargaining process broke down. 
 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

We understand the government and SaskPower management 
not wanting to spend any more money than that. At a time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when we have $2 wheat, 70 cent barley, $13 a 
barrel oil, retail sales going down, we don’t think the people of 
Saskatchewan can afford any more unfortunately. 
 
However, I wish the people of Saskatchewan, and the people of 
Saskatchewan wish this government and its friends over at 
SaskPower, would have been more worried about watching its 
nickels and dimes when it came to the ill-fated and ludicrous 
Guyana deal which cost the taxpayers of this province about $2 
million. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan wish that the government and 
SaskPower would have been as careful with their management 
when it came to things like Channel Lake. Perhaps the 
taxpayers could have saved another 5 to $10 million. And most 
especially the people of Saskatchewan — with SaskPower 
management — have been so worried about their money when 
they granted themselves last year, far in excess of 2 per cent 
increases in their own salaries. 
 
While these managers were involved in Guyana, involved in 
Channel Lake, and while they were prepared to tell the union 
that they could only receive 2 per cent, the managers at 
SaskPower were awarding themselves big, fat increases. How 
can they explain that to the people of this province? It simply 
defies logic. 
 
But what can we expect? These managers, the people put in 
place by the NDP administration opposite, NDP political 
appointees, parachuted into the corporation through the good 
graces of the Premier himself. 
 
And look . . . and just look at the trouble that all this has led to. 
We have had Jack Messer, campaign chairman of the NDP as 
president, running things over there for a period of time. We 
still have Carole Bryant as vice-president, another NDP 
appointee. And we have, of all people, of all people over there, 
we have Bill Hyde, the NDP point man on labour negotiations 
for SaskPower. His main claim to fame, his main claim to fame, 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan was that he was campaign 
manager for the NDP member from Regina Victoria sitting 
opposite — the new Social Services minister. 
 
After all the headaches these patronage appointees have caused 
for the members opposite, do they show any sign, any sign 
whatsoever that they’ve decided to change their ways and, 
instead of rewarding their friends, put people that can actually 
manage the corporation? Not in the last. 
 
One week ago, just one short week ago, those members 
opposite, the NDP members on the Crown Corporations 
Committee voted down a Sask Party motion to end patronage in 
Crown Corporations. So while those members opposite, while 
the NDP members opposite claim today to be saving the people 
of Saskatchewan money through an imposed settlement, I’m 
afraid the days of mismanagement of our Crowns is far from 
over. 
 
In moving this Bill the government states it wants to save 
money and also continue to supply a reliable supply of power to 
the people of this province. I’ve already covered certainly the 

money aspect. Now let’s look at the supply of electricity. 
 
The government, no doubt, wants the people of this province to 
think that any problems that have come up this winter with our 
power supply are completely due to the union’s handling of this 
labour dispute. That’s what they’re going to do, ladies and 
gentlemen. The moment, the moment, I predict the moment that 
we see any problems with power supply in this province, the 
NDP opposite will be pointing at each and every one of you 
saying it is your fault. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Now the hon. member knows 
not to include the visitors in the gallery in the debate, and I 
would ask him to proceed and not to continue that way. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll attempt to refrain 
from doing that, but giving the political-charged atmosphere it’s 
certainly difficult. 
 
SaskPower’s supply has been under scrutiny as you all know 
for some time. Figures that your union supplied us indicate that 
SaskPower currently has a capacity of 2,835 megawatts and a 
peak load capacity of about 2,830. 
 
That’s cutting it real close. The generator on my farm is 
probably the kind of edge we have in whether or not we have 
adequate supply or not. What is going to happen in this 
province if we have an unusually cold winter as a lot of 
forecasters are predicting? 
 
The third week, generally speaking, of December is peak load 
time. Everybody’s got their factories still running, businesses 
still operating full out, the Christmas rush is on, Christmas 
lights are on, all the Christmas spirit is there. Everybody is 
using the maximum amount of power generally speaking. 
 
Throw in a little bit of 40 below weather and we are loaded 
right to the maximum. And we have 5 megawatts to play with 
— 5 megawatts. Not enough hardly to run this building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are in a crisis situation 
and it is not, it is not the result of the IBEW union workers. 
They work . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I will say to the people of this province, when 
you’re sitting around your home the third week in December 
and it gets down to 40 below zero and the lights start flickering, 
who are we going to lay this at the feet of to blame? 
 
I say to you, the people of Saskatchewan, that the people that 
are responsible for this are the people sitting opposite — the 
Premier of this province, the Deputy Premier of this province, 
the entire cabinet, the NDP caucus — and their NDP hacks over 
at SaskPower that couldn’t manage. 
 
(1445) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1992 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Now I must say again the 
visitors in the gallery are not allowed to participate in the 
debate, either clapping or whatever, and I would ask them to 
refrain from doing so. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Hearing some comments around the Chamber 
here this afternoon, it certainly indicates to me that the people 
of this province are owed an explanation by this administration, 
by the Deputy Premier, and by the Premier of this province. 
 
As I said, when the lights of this province start to flicker, who 
are we going to say is responsible? 
 
The last couple of days, the last couple of days while this 
government has dithered about what to do, there was a lot that 
could have been done in terms of managing this affair. There’s 
a lot that the people of Saskatchewan wanted to be done. They 
want to see labour harmony — make no mistake about it. I 
think the people of this province want to see SaskPower 
employees working effectively, working for the betterment of 
this province, working to provide electricity to heat our homes, 
to provide light, to operate our factories, to provide power, to 
look after our health care, to look after the sick and aged in this 
province. 
 
That’s the responsibility that the IBEW is charged with. That’s 
the responsibility that I think they’ve taken seriously. That’s a 
responsibility that I think this government owes them an 
explanation as to why, why have you allowed things to 
deteriorate to the point that you have. 
 
In Saskatchewan today we have an NDP administration, the 
supposed friends of the labour movement, legislating people 
back. How ironic is that. I never in my wildest dreams, taking 
my seat in this legislature, thought I would see the kind of 
labour advocates opposite — as many of them like to point out, 
some of them just recently elected to this legislature — standing 
in their place, as they will be shortly, and voting to impose a 
wage settlement and ordering people back to work. My how 
things have changed, my how things have changed. 
 
The people of this province are owed an explanation by the 
Premier. I am hoping the Premier of this province will summon 
up the courage and come into the Legislative Assembly and tell 
the people, tell the workers, tell the IBEW, tell SaskPower why 
the situation has deteriorated to the point that it has, and offer 
up, offer up the apology that each and every one of you people 
are owed here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We will be attempting, we will be attempting to 
hold this administration accountable. The power supply in this 
province is inadequate. It’s a result of the mismanagement 
opposite. There were times when this government could have 
taken steps to address that — many, many times. 
 
There’s cogeneration projects that are on the table. There were a 
whole host of options available to this administration. And now 
the Deputy Premier gets up in question period and he says to 
the people of Saskatchewan, well, you know, golly gee, I hope 
that we have enough power here this winter. Maybe we won’t 
because the water levels are a little low in Manitoba and the 

Americans might not want to sell us any. 
 
But the fact of the matter is if it wasn’t for your incompetence 
opposite, we would never be in that situation. We would have 
been planning, we would have been planning accordingly for 
the growth that there is here in this province in terms of 
electrical load. You know what I think has happened, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In the province to the west of us, in Alberta at least, at least the 
government has had the decency to get up — and courage — 
and get up before the people of the province and say to them, 
we may not be able to supply power because of the growth that 
there is in this province and because we may have not been able 
to plan adequately. 
 
What has happened in Saskatchewan is exactly the opposite. 
Instead of planning for the growth, instead of getting up before 
the people of Saskatchewan and saying to them, look we may 
have a problem this winter because we haven’t planned 
adequately, because our NDP appointed friends over at 
SaskPower haven’t been able to manage this place, now we see 
ourselves in a position where we may be running short of 
power, what are they going to do? 
 
They’re going to blame everybody but themselves. And I think 
it’ll start with the IBEW workers. Mark my words. Mark my 
words. You people are going to be the ones that this is laid at 
the feet of. They’re going to say that your winter maintenance 
program hasn’t been allowed to take place. We haven’t had 
adequate time to do all the winter maintenance that’s been 
necessary. We haven’t had opportunity to plan accordingly as 
we should have been because the IBEW has been out; even 
though they haven’t been out. 
 
They’ve been locked out. They’ve been locked out — the 
government and SaskPower certainly made sure of that. 
They’ve been locked out, but now they are going to lay it at the 
feet of the union and blame it all on them or anybody else that 
dares to get in the way of the NDP roller, the steamroller, that 
they use when it comes to using this House in anyway they see 
fit. Anyway they see fit. Anyway they see fit. 
 
The fact of the matter is I don’t think the legislature has a lot of 
choice. It doesn’t have a lot of choice in the matter. The 
members opposite can bring in an amendment calling for 
binding arbitration; the government isn’t going to accept it. The 
government isn’t going to accept it. They can do anything they 
want to try and subvert the will of this government but the fact 
of the matter is at the end of the day, the government’s going to 
have its will because it has a massive majority. 
 
I suspect that majority is slipping away fairly quickly these days 
however. I think there’s some uncomfortable people over there 
and I suspect the member from Estevan is sweating bullets back 
there. I can just imagine the debate, the debate in the Estevan 
constituency when it comes time for the next election. What are 
you going to say to these people — I supported you, I worked 
with you all along. What a joke! As a member from one of the 
Regina . . . told me one time, he said you won’t even get your 
family to vote for you. Well I predict that’s what’s going to 
happen to you. Along with a whole host of others opposite over 
there, you’re in a lot of trouble, you’re in a lot of trouble. 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1993 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We will, Mr. Speaker, we will, Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately support the legislation. We will support the 
legislation. We will offer, we will offer each and every one of 
you, we will offer each and every one of you people here today 
the apology that you are owed. 
 
I’m sorry it’s come to this. I’m sorry it’s come to the fact that 
we have to offer up nothing other than legislation from this 
legislature to deal with the matter. I’m sorry that this 
administration opposite hasn’t planned, hasn’t planned 
adequately to deal with the management over at SaskPower and 
the negotiations that should have taken place. 
 
But we are charged with the responsibility of maintaining 
electrical supply to the best of our ability. Even though 
SaskPower hasn’t planned accordingly for that, we are charged 
unfortunately with the responsibility of ensuring the safety of 
supply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be reluctantly supporting the legislation. 
We reluctantly support it because of the fact that this 
government has mismanaged this corporation. It’s loaded up the 
NDP-appointed SaskPower management over there with the 
likes of Bill Hyde that have no more right to be in management 
over there than anyone does. He couldn’t . . . I don’t think the 
man is capable of managing the affairs over at SaskPower, and I 
suspect if an independent board of people looked at who is in 
charge of things over there he’d be the first one to be gone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll conclude my remarks by 
saying, yes we’ll support the legislation. It is with a great deal, 
it is with a great deal of remorse that we’ve had to adopt this 
position. We offer up the apology to all the IBEW workers here. 
We offer up the apology to all of the managers and all of the 
SaskPower people that have been in charge of the responsibility 
of trying to manage the affairs of SaskPower even though the 
people opposite don’t seem to care about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is with a 
good deal of disappointment that we have to be here this 
afternoon to be debating this issue before us when we all know 
what the government could have chosen prior to ever having 
called us back in here. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a few questions for the 
Premier. I know he’ll be in the building and be listening to this, 
this afternoon. I’d have to ask him: first, you lock out . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Now the member 
knows that he cannot refer to the presence or the absence of 
anyone from the House and I would get him to withdraw that 
and continue on. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I withdraw 
that. But I still have to ask why this government would lock out 
652 SaskPower employees and create a self-made political 
crisis for the people of Saskatchewan. Then they come out and 

they don their badges and guns and they come out shooting. 
Now is that a dignified statesperson that would do that sort of 
thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I think not. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will not be 
fooled by these cheap political antics. You locked them out, Mr. 
Premier. You are the one who locked them out. And they’re still 
locked out. 
 
It’s a shame for a Premier that you would lock out employees 
and force them to apply and go on welfare, because that, Mr. 
Premier, is what you forced them to do. If your offer is so fair 
and these workers are making so much money, why would they 
have to be applying for welfare after being off work for two 
weeks. 
 
You know perfectly well, Mr. Premier, that the wages in this 
Crown corporation are not right and that’s why you are denying 
them due process to binding arbitration. When it came time for 
a political purpose . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — When it came time for a political purpose for 
you to ensure that your wage was adequate, then you appointed 
a third party to decide that for yourselves. You talk about 
fairness, Mr. Premier. You talk about the Saskatchewan way, 
Mr. Premier. The Saskatchewan way is that you use your power 
and your heavy-handedness and your political clout to deny 
people their democratic right to a fair hearing. Is that your 
Saskatchewan way, Mr. Premier? To lift yourself out of the 
mire of cheap political trickery and shoot down everyone who 
stands in your way? 
 
Mr. Premier, this is nothing more than being a cheap political 
opportunist. You’ve governed not by fairness; you’ve governed 
by polls. And that’s unacceptable. 
 
I say this to you, Mr. Premier. When it came to your wages, it 
was cream. It was cream for Jack Messer, cream for Ms. Carole 
Bryant, cream for Mr. Bill Hyde. When it comes to the 
electrical workers of Saskatchewan, it’s watered down skim 
milk for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the electrical workers 
who we depend on to keep this corporation SaskPower running 
smoothly, is that acceptable to you, Mr. Premier, that you 
would treat them in that fashion? Is that your idea of the 
Saskatchewan way? Is it not going against the very principles 
that put you in power? 
 
It’s not our idea of the Saskatchewan way. The SaskPower 
workers have asked for fairness. You’ve denied them that, Mr. 
Premier. You denied them fairness. The people of 
Saskatchewan will not soon forget your action, Mr. Premier. 
They’ll not soon forget. 
 
Let’s continue on fairness, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Premier, is 
it fair that you should spend $30 million on the Guyana affair? 
Well I think not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Is it fair that you gave 
your political hack friend Jack Messer close to $300,000 in 



1994 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

severance pay after he fouled up Channel Lake? 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Premier, that you reward mistakes and dole 
out political patronage to party hacks. These hacks have wasted 
far more in millions of dollars than these workers could have 
had in a fair wage for the next 10 years of their livelihoods. 
That’s how much money has been wasted by your hacks, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
(1500) 
 
And yet that’s okay. That’s okay, Mr. Premier. Is this what your 
government has come to believe in? Reward incompetence for 
your political friends who helped you get elected but deny the 
basic right of SaskPower workers to a decent living. 
 
What are you covering up, Mr. Premier? What are you covering 
up with Mr. Hyde? Why are you trying to protect him? Why 
have you been mute on that issue? Why would you not step in 
or publicly tell us why Mr. Ed McQuarters was fired from 
SaskPower? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — What are you hiding, Mr. Premier? What are 
you covering up? The truth will eventually come out. 
 
Show us your statesmanship and come clean right now, Mr. 
Premier. Do what’s right. How can you sit here in silence and 
not tell us that this was a well-devised plan by yourself to try to 
hide the incompetence of the people running SaskPower . . . the 
poor planning that we all know has taken place under your 
direction. You know full well, Mr. Premier, that you should 
have built more generation. You know full well, Mr. Premier, 
that the system doesn’t have the capacity to provide enough 
power for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s now time to come clean, Mr. Premier, and admit to that. 
You’ve tried to bamboozle the people of this province by 
making SaskPower a cash cow for your political re-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Here are some of the facts from the 
SaskPower’s annual report, Mr. Premier: $132 million in profit; 
$12 million in capital reconstruction fees and yet, still yet, 
rotten poles exist and are falling down throughout this 
corporation; $145 million in profit to pay down debt; $39 
million in royalties taken away from the corporation. 
 
I’d like you to stand and admit it now, Mr. Premier, that you are 
gouging the people of this province, plain and simple. This is 
nothing more than a misrepresentation of what this corporation 
was intended for, for the people of this province. This 
corporation was put in place to supply reasonably priced 
electrical power for all of the people of this province — safe 
and reliable power for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
You in turn, Mr. Premier, have placed the future of this 
corporation in jeopardy by running it to the bare bones and 
demanding profits — profits, Mr. Premier. Profits first and the 
people of Saskatchewan second. Shame on you for doing that. 
That’s not what good leadership’s all about — profits first and 

people of the province second. Is that what your political 
mandate is? Is that what the Regina Manifesto says, Mr. 
Premier — profits first, people second. I think not. You know 
better. The people of the province know better too. 
 
You’re finally showing your true colours, Mr. Premier. I’d 
suggest to you very strongly that you should rethink and run for 
the governorship of the state of Georgia because of the actions 
and style of statesmanship you’ve displayed over this past 
week. 
 
I’m sure that your political future would be a lot more secure in 
Georgia where they enjoy the type of heavy-handedness that 
you’ve imposed on the SaskPower workers. What’s next, Mr. 
Premier? Right-to-work legislation by the NDP? Is this what we 
can expect from the governor of Georgia north? 
 
Mr. Premier, we are the voice of reason in this dispute. And the 
voice of reason demands that you amend this legislation and 
give these workers a fair hearing in front of an arbitrator. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what fairness and 
justice in a democratic system is all about. That’s what 
democracy is all about, Mr. Premier. What you are proposing 
today shakes the foundation of democracy in this province for 
everyone in this province, Mr. Premier. 
 
The Liberal Party of Saskatchewan will not sit idle and allow 
you to impose this injustice. Mr. Premier, we’ll be voting 
against this heavy-handed legislation. We’ll be opposing it and 
we’ll show the people of the province that this is not a good 
choice; it’s not a fair choice. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is not an easy day 
for this government, and in particular it’s not an easy day for a 
member from the Estevan constituency. This morning when I 
woke up I had three choices. I’ve eliminated one of those by 
being here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve spent more than half my life in the union 
environment. I know that labour disputes are not always 
monetary issues as depicted in the media, and the members 
opposite have named a few of the reasons why this dispute is 
on. There are usually a long series of events leading up to and 
including the bargaining process that are triggered by the final 
nail of a monetary issue. And I believe that is, in this instance, 
what has happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the union has taken the position that the only way 
to settle this is for both parties to go to binding arbitration. I 
cannot support that position. Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe this 
government can take the chance that an independent arbitrator 
would stay within the guidelines of our mandate. 
 
Why is this so important to us, Mr. Speaker? I know that the 
province of Saskatchewan has an annual wage bill of $2.5 
billion. And to maintain the ability of controlling our budget 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1995 

and maintaining our electoral commitment to balance budgets, 
reduce taxes, and lowering the debt, we cannot risk a wage 
settlement that would trigger a Me Too campaign throughout 
the public sector, throwing this province back into deficit 
financing and doing exactly what the Liberals are predicting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward: — I also know, Mr. Speaker, that many of the 
IBEW workers in this gallery supported me and assisted me in 
my campaigns. And I sincerely appreciate that assistance. I will 
continue to try and assist them as we bring this dispute to a 
conclusion in a way that I hope will help to alleviate the pain 
and the suffering that this dispute has caused within this 
corporation and within the families involved. I will work to 
improve these relations by trying to get some changes in the 
near future to help facilitate the healing process that must take 
place to preserve the Crown corporation for the benefit of all 
the people of this province. 
 
To start that process, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has stated that 
all employees who were locked out will be reimbursed for the 
locked-out time. Also, Mr. Speaker, the non-discrimination 
clause will be entered into the collective agreement. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I have had many inquiries into the status of 
those employees who had disciplinary action taken against them 
before the lock-out notice was issued. I know that this issue is 
an integral part of the acceptance of this legislation — if there is 
any. And I will continue to try to bring that issue to a 
conclusion within the immediate future. This, along with future 
actions by the corporation, will help to start the healing process 
that I spoke of earlier and I believe to be so important to this 
province. 
 
It’s noticeable, Mr. Speaker, that when the member from 
Kindersley was speaking, that he is reluctantly, reluctantly, 
going to vote for this legislation. It’s amazing then that his 
reluctance would allow him to introduce a Bill, No. 207, that’s 
still on our order paper — The Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement Revocation Act, Mr. Boyd; Bill No. 218, The 
Saskatchewan Right to Work Act, Mr. Boyd; Bill No. 219, The 
Democratic Unionism Act . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member 
knows that you cannot use proper names whether they’re listed 
on the order paper or not. And I would ask him to discontinue 
that. 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bills that I’ve just 
mentioned were introduced by the member from Kindersley — 
reluctantly, I suspect. 
 
And the member, the Liberal member that just spoke, Mr. 
Speaker, who wants binding arbitration, is he prepared for 
deficit financing? Is that what he’s suggesting that this province 
go back to? 
 
I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. I can’t support that and I will be 
supporting this Bill. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. My comments will be very brief but I do want to be on 
the public record because of the comments that have been made 
to me over the last several weeks from different citizens, not 
only those from my own constituency but the many faxes and 
phone calls that I have received as well. 
 
It appears that a lot of people in Saskatchewan are very 
confused about what’s going on. Most people, for example, 
who have called or dropped by my constituency office do not 
know that the IBEW workers have been locked out. They 
believe instead that they are on strike. 
 
Now that’s no different from what has transpired of course with 
this very House — that I can be going down the street and 
people are wondering, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why it is I’m not in 
Ottawa. 
 
There’s always confusion in the general public but there’s one 
thing that they are not confused about. They are confused often 
about things that seem very distant from them, when it doesn’t 
affect their own lives. They are not distanced when it does. 
 
They are not distanced from the fact that their utility rates seem 
to go up and up and up in a way that’s inexplicable to them. 
They are not confused when their tax dollars seem to be going 
up and up and up in a way that seems uncontrollable to them. 
They most certainly are disturbed by the fact that so often their 
incomes have either remained stable or go backwards in time 
and they feel that they’ve been living on a treadmill, if you will. 
 
There are people who are also afraid. I’ve received faxes and 
phone calls from people who are very directly affected by this 
lockout. These are people who are very much concerned about 
their well-being, the well-being of their families, just like all the 
people are in the province of Saskatchewan. They want things 
to be better for them. 
 
And the average person out there who doesn’t understand the 
nuances and the dotted i’s and the t’s being crossed and the 
gamesmanship and the entrenchment — all that they know is 
that they want some stability. They want security in their lives. 
They want it not only in their power source, they want it in 
other ways too, with their sense of being able to have proper 
health care, their way of being able to know that they can afford 
to send their children to university education or post-secondary 
education training. 
 
People are concerned about what is transpiring because of how 
it may affect them. And this very action of what is transpiring 
here today does affect people. We do have an inherent 
responsibility, as members of this Legislative Assembly, to 
make decisions that are not purely politically expedient but are 
in the best interests of all of the people in this province — the 
primary interests of the people in this province. 
 
And as much as I have really deep feelings for what a lot of 
people are undergoing who are members of the IBEW and how 
much they want their lives to be better, there are some 
overriding factors that I think need to be discussed here. And 
we should finally put some of this political rhetoric aside and 



1996 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

get down to what really is transpiring. 
 
For example, I know with people who have taken the time to 
send faxes to me — and I want you to know that I’ve read them, 
and I am interested in what you have to say, and I’m genuinely 
concerned about what has been transpiring. I have read them, 
and I know that you are genuinely concerned about what has 
happened. 
 
(1515) 
 
I too am genuinely concerned about what has transpired at 
SaskPower. And I do believe that there are some very 
fundamental issues that are happening at SaskPower — that 
have been going on for some considerable time — that are not 
going to be addressed and fixed by this legislation. In other 
words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this legislation is simply going to 
be a band-aid solution to a problem which is very, very broad in 
nature. 
 
That problem does indeed point to the management of 
SaskPower. And it does indeed point to some problems which 
. . . It isn’t just about choices of people who are there. It’s the 
decisions that are being made, the way they’re being made, and 
even the poor overall planning. This idea that two, two, and two 
over the next three-year period is going to be a good long-term 
plan — I think not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That does not solve 
anything. But there are some fundamental problems there. 
 
And in fact one individual phoned me and said I think that what 
had been said prior to the 1991 election where, if you recall, the 
NDP ended up saying let’s open the books and jail the crooks, 
or something like that. 
 
I think that SaskPower has so many problems within it that it’s 
about time that SaskPower was opened up and maybe we open 
the books of SaskPower; open SaskPower up in a way of trying 
to understand how do these problems continue to rear their ugly 
head. Why is it that we have even come to this point is a very 
significant question, but other questions are equally important. 
 
Questions like, why is it that I have in my possession an issue 
here regarding harassment at SaskPower; the kind of issue that 
has been covered up by management even after an independent 
individual was brought in to study this issue, came to the 
conclusion that in fact this individual, this gentleman’s claim 
was absolutely correct, this complaint was indeed steeped in 
harassment, and it was management of SaskPower that actually 
covered it up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — So this goes far beyond, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the issues of Channel Lake or not Channel Lake, 
Guyana or not Guyana. There are fundamental problems in the 
way that people are being treated and that problems are not 
being resolved at SaskPower. 
 
Now having said that, I’m going to stand in my place and let 
people know where I come from on this issue because I think 
that it explains how I conceptualized where I was going to vote 
on this issue. 
 

I support workers. And how do I define workers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? I define anyone who tries to make a living and live a 
decent life as a worker. And so that includes management, it 
includes unionized workers, it includes non-unionized workers. 
And when I talk about my brothers and sisters, I’m talking 
about my brothers and sisters in the way in which we have been 
addressing that issue for 2,000 years. It’s all the people who 
surround me and I genuinely want us to be concerned about the 
quality of life of all people. 
 
Some of the people who called me are not people who have 
been working for SaskPower and have been locked out. Some 
of these people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are employees in this 
province who, in the private sector, have received no increases 
for years. These are individuals who too are very concerned 
about their quality of life. 
 
Other people who have called me are employees too, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They are workers who work for businesses 
who will be fundamentally, inextricably harmed by any 
brownout or blackout in this province. And these people are 
worried about their jobs too. They’re worried that if something 
happens, they will lose their jobs. And it’s not unlikely. 
 
There are so many different things that concern me. We don’t 
even have to simply talk about those who are workers. Let’s 
talk about those who don’t have the benefit of a job. The people 
who too are directly affected by increases in utility rates and all 
of these secondary forms of taxation. These people who live in 
poverty and they feel completely helpless in this situation, and 
they too are afraid, and seniors on fixed incomes. 
 
When we’re talking about this kind of thing, we’re talking 
about everyone, all of us — men, women, children, people who 
are in unions, people who are not, people who are in 
management, those who own businesses, those who are part of 
large industry. And we have to be thoughtful about the overall 
piece to this situation. 
 
Now if I may I’m going to make a brief comment about binding 
arbitration and it will be linked with my having listened to a 
gentleman who is a general manager of an NHL (National 
Hockey League) hockey team saying why it is it is so dangerous 
to go to binding arbitration. 
 
For him, he indicated that so often one of the reasons why being 
able to go to NHL games if you live in a city that has one 
becomes more and more unreachable for the average citizen to 
be able to afford is in direct correlation with how much people, 
players, are paid. And one of the reasons why these players are 
paid as they are — some are more than worth it, some are not. 
But what he pointed out was this. So often in binding 
arbitration, when control is . . . (inaudible) . . . of it, the very 
people who are the most deserving of the raises are not the ones 
who get them. 
 
And I believe that when we are having to make important 
decisions, we most certainly want to be able to have all the facts 
at the table, and too often in binding arbitration there’s a very 
narrow slice that’s looked at. 
 
As you know, I would not be sitting here if I were a proponent 
of all of the policies of this government, and I most certainly 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1997 

would not be on this side of the House if I supported the New 
Democratic philosophy. I don’t support the latter and I’m not 
over there for good reason, but I do believe that any 
government that is interested in good governance has to be able 
to review all of the pieces of the puzzle in order to be able to 
make good, solid, long-term decisions on behalf of the people 
of this province. I cannot support binding arbitration for that 
reason and I shan’t be supporting binding arbitration for that 
reason. 
 
Now I am going to, believe it or not, conclude here. Quebec’s 
ice storm was the result of an act of God. If, in fact, 
Saskatchewan people and I’m talking about all of us here. I’m 
talking about our grandbabies and our children and everyone 
when they’re going to school — these little people — and our 
teens and our seniors and people in hospitals and those who 
work in industry and everything. If, in fact, Saskatchewan 
people are placed at risk this winter, this winter, because of 
brownouts or blackouts, they simply will not — as one of the 
members stated — blame the IBEW workers. 
 
You know who they’re going to blame? They’re going to blame 
all of the above. When people are placed at that kind of risk and 
they have to face that kind of fear, which is not the result of an 
act of nature or an act of God, but the result of people who 
could not use common sense and come together to resolve 
issues, they will blame everybody. They will blame SaskPower; 
they will blame the management, they will blame the workers 
and yes, they should blame us. 
 
And I believe that if that occurs, it will be unforgivable because 
we most certainly in this province should be able to provide 
safety for our people on something like this in a land where we 
know it’s going to get to 40 below. 
 
For these reasons, I will of course be supporting this legislation 
and I do so with a heavy heart and I tell you why. Not because 
— as everyone knows here — I am a great proponent of union 
work and everything else. I am a proponent of employment, 
okay? I’m the proponent for all of workers in this province, 
everybody who wants to make a decent living. 
 
I do it with a heavy heart, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I 
believe unequivocally that this was preventable. This situation 
should not have come to this. I feel badly that it has. But people 
who hold entrenched positions are not often very open-minded 
to be able to see the greater piece. And I most certainly hope 
that people will be able to come together and resolve the very, 
very important and difficult and challenging issues that are 
facing SaskPower. Because what we do here today, and because 
of this majority in the House with the government, this is going 
to pass anyway. 
 
The truth of the matter is this. What transpires here is not going 
to solve the problems. The people who are here today in our 
galleries, and all those who couldn’t make it, they deserve to 
have their major issues addressed. And if we think that that 
major issue is simply money, then we are very foolish indeed. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I at 
one point there wanted to quickly jump up and say, not me, I 
didn’t do it. But the reality is I guess that we all have an 
important task today, and that is to face this issue. 
 
I thought that as we came into this week, Deputy Speaker, that 
it seems ironic that last year we came into this Assembly just a 
little later than now for a special session. We came into this 
Assembly for a full week planned ahead, with everybody 
agreeing that we would all tour around the province because we 
wanted to talk about Quebec unity and keeping them in the 
country because that was important. We took a week. 
 
Now we’re talking about power for Saskatchewan and the need 
of course to do something to make sure that we have electricity 
in our province, and we’re supposed to get it done in about half 
a day, I guess. Maybe that’s something to do with the priorities 
of our government of the day; I don’t know. But it makes me 
wonder just exactly what we’ve been doing when we look at 
our own province and try to determine what is important to us. 
 
People were laying blame here earlier and people are pointing 
fingers and they’re already projecting into the future, you know, 
who we are going to blame if the power does go off. Well how 
about if we take a look for a minute who we blamed when the 
power was off before, and what we could have done to prevent 
those things. 
 
Who stopped the rural underground power development 
program? Who stopped the program that would’ve built power 
lines underground so that we could’ve been sure that things that 
happened like the ones that happened up in the Richmound 
community this fall wouldn’t have happened. In that 
community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had nine power outages 
through harvest time — not one, but nine. Three were planned; 
six were from accidental occurrences, so they put it. 
 
I have a letter here from the minister’s office. I don’t think I’ll 
bother going into reading the letter because sufficient to say that 
if three of them were planned and six of them weren’t, then a 
power system failure caused the rest. Some of them were 
man-made, some of them were machine caused. Nevertheless 
most of them could have been prevented if we had had the rural 
underground program continued and those lines hadn’t been 
above ground so that the birds couldn’t sit on the wires, so that 
the insulators couldn’t have been shot off, and so that the posts 
wouldn’t have been there for cars to drive into, all of those 
things that happened. 
 
In the wintertime when the ice lands on all of those wires and 
they all come tumbling down like they did in Quebec, 
somebody’s going to say — believe it or not — we should have 
buried those wires. Well maybe we should be looking at that 
possibility still . . . that we have cut off programs that are going 
to make all the power workers look bad. It’s going to make all 
the management look bad and we’re all going to sit in the dark 
and try to blame someone else. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have other things that spin off as 
ramifications of what has happened here, things that we need to 
look at. Today I had a call from a gentleman from northern 
Saskatchewan who pointed out to me that he’s negotiating his 
insurance claims or his insurance policy, rather. He’s into this 



1998 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

negotiation with SGI and his agent told him, beware. It is very 
possible that SGI will deny you any kind of a claim if the power 
goes out this winter. They are presently looking at a program to 
deny responsibility for power outage damages if you hold a 
policy in this province. Now that’s a serious spin-off if that’s 
true. 
 
(1530) 
 
And I so challenge the government to look into this matter on 
behalf of that person and all of the people of Saskatchewan that 
hold policies. He indicated to me that the private companies are 
also looking at some avenues to try to get out from under their 
responsibility for any damages caused as a result of power 
outages. 
 
Now suppose the power’s out for five weeks in Saskatchewan 
like it was in Quebec. Your freezer goes bad, your meat’s lost, 
and you’ve got no insurance. Your power’s out, your waterlines 
are froze up, and you’ve got no insurance. 
 
This is a big side issue but it’s very important to people and I 
think we’d better take a look at it. Not just because we’re here 
today because today focuses on those kind of realities that we 
are coming into. Insurance companies are trying to find ways to 
get out of having to pay claims. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with all of those kinds of things are 
issues that we need to address. We have to get back to this Bill. 
 
I looked it over today; it’s the first time I’ve seen it. I’m sure 
most of them here today have seen it for the first time today. 
And I have to say that I’ve seen worse legislation passed by this 
government. I remember some of the labour legislation that we 
went through. And I have to say that if we are truly at the end of 
the day and it’s the eleventh hour and you have to do something 
to force the issue, this is probably as good as you could get. 
 
But it raises some questions. The question like, Deputy 
Speaker, what do we do when this piece of legislation is over 
and done with and we’ve come to 2000 on December 31 and 
the unions are back at the table again saying, let’s bargain 
again. What happens when the nurses come to want their 
negotiations? Well what’s going to happen is that we are going 
to be back here legislating each and every union claim in the 
same way unless we come up with a solution. 
 
Now we have advocated in the past — those of us that sit on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker — we have advocated that 
SaskPower, SaskTel, and most corporations that are Crown 
corporations should have compulsory review committees to 
review the rates at which our gas prices go up and at which our 
power rates go up. 
 
We’ve advocated that there should be a system in place, 
because we’ve known for a long time that if you have one 
person appointed to take a look at these things you put all of 
your eggs in one basket so to speak. And if you happen to have 
an old retired judge that becomes a little senile when you least 
expect it, you don’t know what you’re apt to get. And that is 
risky. 
 
But if we’re going to look at having to watchdog the system, 

then we’re going to have to look at a system where we put into 
place a committee of people that can work on solutions. And 
I’m suggesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what we’re going to 
end up having to do is to set up a tribunal or some kind of a 
committee appointed by people from SARM, SUMA, and other 
working groups in the province. And you’re not going to be 
able to put it into the hands of one retired judge. You’re going 
to have to put it into the hands of a committee of people that 
will sit down and negotiate with the unions. 
 
Either that or you have the government saying, we’re going to 
do it — which they have in the past — and they come to an 
impasse and they fail and we’ll be back here passing pieces of 
legislation for each and every dispute that comes. So we’re 
going to have to look for a solution. And that solution, Deputy 
Speaker, I believe, has to be one where we put it back into the 
hands of the people and get it out of this Assembly and away 
from the politics. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will support the government’s 
legislation. It’s reasonable at this point in time. 
 
And in our corner of the province if I went home saying that I 
wouldn’t support it, I’d be in a lot more trouble than I will be 
facing these union fellows outside, because my ranchers are a 
lot tougher than these guys are. 
 
And I tell you they will not take no for an answer when I come 
home and say to them how I voted. They’ll want to know how I 
voted and they’ll want to know that I voted to guarantee that 
they’ll have electricity for their cow herds and for their water 
supplies this winter, for their homes. Those people that live 30 
and 40 miles away from anybody else out in the country, 
they’re going to demand that I supported giving them 
electricity. And I’m here to do that. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was 
slow to rise in my seat today because I thought there’d be a lot 
more New Democrats wanting to get up and explain their 
actions, but of course they’re not going to do so. So I’m going 
to ask them a few questions, some of those backbenchers over 
there. 
 
I wonder if they’ve taken the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
actually take a look at this Bill — really take a good look at it. 
Well I’ll tell them where this Bill came from. This Bill was 
plagiarized, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was plagiarized from The 
Dairy Workers (Maintenance of Operations) Act, 1983, brought 
in by Grant Devine, clause for clause, word for word. Do the 
backbenchers even know that you can’t even come up with your 
own legislation? You’re going to use the Devine angle? 
 
But there is a difference. Although it was plagiarized, there are 
some things that have been changed. What has been changed is 
that, what has been changed is that, when you get to clause 7 or 
8, whatever it is, where at least Devine knew at the end of the 
day he would have to have this brought before a binding 
arbitrator, this group is not of that view. They feel that it’s 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

better to be, I guess, further to the right, further to the right of 
Grant Devine, if you can believe it. Maybe you can. We can’t 
tell the difference between those Tories there and those New 
Democrats there. 
 
But to plagiarize the Bill word for word, didn’t you have any 
more imagination than that? Now all you’ve done is taken out 
the part about binding arbitration and imposed your own views. 
You’ve imposed your own contract and you’re taking away the 
people’s rights. 
 
This is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is why later today I guess 
it is, we thought it most appropriate, we thought it most 
appropriate to bring in an amendment. And that amendment 
will be brought forward by my colleague, the member from 
Melville, and it essentially plagiarizes what was in this Bill, 
binding arbitration. Be fair, be fair with the people of this 
province. 
 
Even Devine . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh. Well I see the 
members are talking about sincerity. Well I will make sure that 
you’re in your seat today when it comes time to vote. And that 
former member of Shaunavon, I hope you’re in your seat. Don’t 
run away. No, don’t you run away, because I’ll be looking for 
you, boy . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh and I’ll be here. I’ll 
be here. 
 
Well you know when it comes right down to seeing who votes 
and how they do, today’s the day, buddy, today’s the day. So 
let’s do it. 
 
Now you talk about surprises today. I listened to the member 
from Kindersley. Oh, he claims he understands the problems, 
you know, that these workers are faced with today. He claims 
he accepts that this has been a heavy-handed process by the 
Premier, claims all of that, you bet. But he claims he has no 
options but to vote with the New Democrats. He claims he has 
no options. I like to listen to all these people who decided to 
sort of walk that fence today. Because I’ll tell you, at the end of 
the day, you’re only going to have slivers. That’s all you’re 
going to get out of this. 
 
And who are you fooling with this stuff? Who are you fooling 
with this stuff? Look at the orders of the day. Look at our daily 
orders. They’ve got Bills on back-to-work legislation, 
right-to-work legislation; I don’t know how many, there’s 
probably 10 Bills that the Tory caucus has brought forward. 
That’s how much they understand. You bet, that’s how much 
they care. And later today I guess it will really, really come 
clear. 
 
You know question period was interesting today because it 
certainly wasn’t answer period, was it. The questions were put, 
and I think it’s only fair, I think it’s only fair, that the Premier 
stand up and give a speech today in second reading and explain 
some of the things that were put to him today. 
 
Now the Deputy Premier, the Deputy Premier, he choose to 
take over, he choose to take over today . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — The Deputy Premier choose to take him 

off the hot seat. Well he shouldn’t have because I think this 
Premier has some stuff that he should answer. Not just to these 
workers, but to everyone in this province today. That is, why is 
it fair that he has two sets of rules? Why is it fair that he has a 
set of rules for his buddy, Jack Messer? Why is it that he has a 
set of rules for all those hundreds of patronage positions that he 
has stuck into the Crowns? Why is it fair that he can give 
twelve and a half per cent pay increases to his staff over here in 
his office and all those ministers’ offices — why is that fair? 
Every time it has to go to a third party, you know, it’s to his 
benefit and his friends’ benefit. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, you got some answering to do to these 
people. Why is it fair that the former member from Shaunavon 
— the Premier-to-be, I guess he is — can take a position in 
1982, oh, he’s going to cough up two thousand bucks, he wants 
everyone to join with him, cough up two thousand bucks and 
help the families of these people that were having some labour 
disputes of the day. Well I’m saying there isn’t one of you over 
there that doesn’t have $4,400 more, if you want to cough it up, 
than the people here. Because we refused to take that pay 
increase that the Premier brought forward. Okay. You each got 
4,400 bucks. How many are there? There must be a quarter 
million bucks there. Pony it up. And pony it up and give it to 
the families of the people that you locked out. Because let’s be 
clear . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I’m saying, Mr. Premier, get your people 
to pony it up today. A quarter million bucks. You know, there 
was an agreement I guess reached at one point. And what was it 
— 7.1 per cent that the IBEW and SaskPower management 
came to an agreement on? Your government, and it ends with 
you, Mr. Premier, chose not to take that. 
 
What did that mean in dollar terms? It meant 1 million bucks, 
roughly, over three years; 300,000 bucks a year. Is that not 
coincidental that Jack Messer’s severance was 300,000 bucks or 
that you’ve got almost 300,000 bucks from the money you kept. 
Where’s the fairness? 
 
You think it wasn’t 300,000 bucks worth of money that went to 
your twelve and a half per cent pay increase to your staff, your 
political hacks — because that’s all they are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — One other thing that is so disappointing, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is when there’s a dispute, a 
disagreement on really what, you know, on both sides here. But 
we’ve got a Premier who everyone should be looking to for the, 
I guess, leadership, the direction. And surely we can accept 
what he’s saying as fact. 
 
Leader-Post, Saturday, October 17 . . . I read this the other day, 
and I could not believe it. There are some comments in here by 
the Premier. And I will quote right from it: “the danger that 
something could happen to a hospital and have its power and 
lights go out.” If he isn’t trying to escalate this crisis, get the 
public on board, why did he do that? 
 
I would like him to name me one hospital that doesn’t have a 



2000 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

backup generator that has ever been put into a position where 
they wouldn’t have the light and power on. You can’t name 
one. And so you shouldn’t have used that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see another part in 
this editorial, and I’m going to quote: 
 

That would prompt other unions that have already settled 
within the guidelines to re-open their contracts . . . 
 

He’s a lawyer . . . supposedly one that fought for people’s 
rights. Could he stand up and explain how these contracts could 
be reopened? That can’t be done, so why did you say it? 
 
Fairness . . . just be fair with the truth. Be fair with the truth, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the Premier. I should say Mr. Deputy 
Premier . . . don’t want to include you in the debate. 
 
That is where the problem is. We have a Premier and his group 
of cronies and his government that have decided to escalate this 
war of words — didn’t have to be the truth, didn’t have to be 
the truth — they wrestled with that. 
 
We hear too often from him that the power is in jeopardy. Well, 
Mr. Premier, if you feel the power was in jeopardy, would you 
look at the people here today, get up and tell them why you 
locked them out. That’s the part that the people of 
Saskatchewan can’t accept from you. 
 
You’re saying there’s this crisis and you boot them out of their 
jobs. Why would you do that? Now you can turn in your seat, 
face the other way all you want. You will have to answer to this 
before your next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — You will answer it. He’s making the 
claims that to go beyond his own imposed wage guidelines is 
just not affordable. I don’t know. I don’t have access to the 
figures. I don’t. That is exactly why our position has been firm 
all along that there should be binding arbitration; somebody 
who can take and look at the facts and the figures and make a 
decision based on fact, not on politics like you do. Well, that’s 
what you’re doing. That’s what you’re doing. 
 
And is it affordable? You know what the constituents in Wood 
River are telling me? They think there are many things that 
aren’t affordable. They don’t think that new jet was affordable. 
They don’t. And if you took that same amount of money, 
maybe you should have filled the potholes in some of the 
highways in the south-west. That would be affordable. Okay. 
 
I know it’s a priority thing with you, that you can’t get a grasp 
on and you can’t get a grasp on it because you’re 10,000 feet 
above the people that are driving those roads. 
 
You know what else they say they can’t get a handle on? Why 
this group, why this group, that hopeful Premier and the one 
beside him, why would they want to spend 30 million bucks in 

Guyana? You know, what good is that going to be doing for 
Saskatchewan? What does that help us right here, back at home. 
 
Well you got all these problems and you’re, you’re fessing up 
to them. Well what about the moneys that you’re spending in 
Chile and Argentina and now we hear El Salvador? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Now the people in the 
gallery have been very excellent this afternoon in not taking 
part in the debate and I appreciate that, and I would ask them to 
continue it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well there’s another thing when we’re 
taking about money. You know if they’ve been looking for 
300,000 bucks a year, whatever it was going to come to, to 
really give us that safe and secure power supply, and it sits with 
the hopeful Premier right there, does anybody in here think that 
he does not spend a half million or so a year on his travel 
around the world? Is there a country you haven’t been in at our 
expense? 
 
Yes, that’s quite an answer for you, the guy that has been all 
around the world at taxpayers’ expense. Your . . . (inaudible) 
. . . your travel alone would have taken care of this problem. 
Yes. And, sir, I hope you stay here for the vote later today. I 
don’t want to see you do what the Premier did and take a hike. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Now I know that the member 
knows better than to refer to the presence or the absence of 
someone in the House and I would ask him to withdraw that 
statement and continue with his debate. I will ask you to 
withdraw that statement. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I withdraw that 
remark. 
 
But it comes down to just a few things. And really it shows why 
we have taken the position that we are taking. Because really at 
the end of the day this is not about money. You can try and sell 
that to the people all you want. This isn’t about money; it’s 
about people’s rights. That’s what it’s about . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, I do know about it and, you know, you are 
going to learn about it. This is about people’s rights, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know, when we were deciding and Jim Melenchuk was 
deciding, how can we be fair to the people of this province, 
what position are we going to take, we met with the SaskPower 
management; we met with the workers of SaskPower. And we 
put questions to them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We put questions to 
them. 
 
And in fact we have letters here with us today. We have letters 
here today asking . . . and I will be quoting from a letter from 
the Liberal leader, Jim Melenchuk. He’s asking two questions: 
 

If SaskPower ends its lockout and gives you binding 
arbitration prior to the legislation coming into effect, will 
you direct your membership to cease all job action and 
return to work? 

 
We have a response from the workers of SaskPower, from Mr. 
Gord Gunoff, the business manager . . . 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2001 

An Hon. Member: — For the record, get it in there. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — For the record, the answer is yes. Yes! 
 

However, yesterday evening, Saturday, October 17, 1998, I 
called and spoke to Mr. Kelly Staudt, president and CEO 
of SaskPower, requesting that in light of the coming 
back-to-work legislation, SaskPower lift its lockout and 
our members would immediately begin working. 
 
Not only did Mr. Staudt deny this request, he also turned 
aside my Saturday morning directive to have all IBEW line 
staff respond to trouble calls. 

 
When I asked Mr. Staudt why he could not pursue these 
logical steps to de-escalate our dispute, he told me he had 
been given no direction. And we have to assume that is 
right from the Premier’s office. There’s no question that’s 
where it’s coming from. 

 
The other question that was asked: 
 

Will you direct your membership to cooperate with 
SaskPower in completing the maintenance required to 
prepare for Saskatchewan’s electrical needs this winter? 
 

This answer: 
 

I will instruct our membership to work diligently to get 
SaskPower’s generation prepared for the coming winter 
load as we have always done to ensure a reliable source of 
power for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
And you know, it’s not just us that he gave this answer to. Mr. 
Gord Gunoff has been in probably almost daily contact with the 
Premier. And I have letters stating that. And in fact he’s been 
telling the Premier the same thing he’s been telling us. Let our 
members go back to work; lift the lockout; we’ll be there; we’ll 
get this work done. 
 
The only reason that that couldn’t happen — the only reason is 
because of politics from the Premier’s office. No question about 
it. 
 
One has to wonder why it is that other people can take the word 
of the people that work hard in this province, but the Premier 
can’t. What is it and why is it that he doesn’t trust these people? 
 
Now I know members here today would like to . . . and I’ve 
heard this a lot here today. I know that members would like to 
blame everything on SaskPower management for every problem 
that this corporation has been in and/or has created. And I 
agree; there are a lot of management problems over at 
SaskPower. They come right back to that cabinet room because 
you fill the Crown corporations with your political hacks. And 
that’s where really the problem starts and ends. 
 
However I will end by saying this. Blame as many people as 
you want. You can blame us; you can blame the workers. Mr. 
Premier, the buck stops with you and you’d better start showing 
leadership as a Premier should. 
 
Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this legislation is 
without precedent. Of course there have been many occasions in 
which striking workers have been legislated back to work. 
 
I am not aware of any time in history, anywhere, where workers 
have been legislated back to work who have not been on strike. 
Of course in point of fact, they are under lockout, and they are 
under lockout by the same people now who would legislate 
them back to work. 
 
This is without precedent and probably will qualify the 
Saskatchewan legislature into the Guinness book. 
 
However having said that, we do have a serious situation. 
Winter is coming, the pre-winter maintenance is behind 
schedule, and the overriding concern of the people of 
Saskatchewan is that our power supply will be guaranteed this 
winter. 
 
How can that be accomplished? Well my colleague from 
Melville will be moving binding arbitration, and I would ask all 
members to seriously consider that option because if that is 
followed, that would mean that the workers will go back into 
the plants with a dedicated and good frame of mind, giving their 
most to power service in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think we all have some concern that disgruntled workers 
are not always the best workers. Binding arbitration I think can 
get the good spirit back into Saskatchewan Power that we 
desperately need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — It has come home to me in the last few weeks 
that there is serious concern about generating capacity and 
power service to this province, a concern that has nothing to do 
with the current labour dispute. 
 
It has come to my attention that we have consistently in 
SaskPower management underestimated the amount of power 
usage that we will need to plan for. That SaskPower 
management projected for 1.5 per cent increase a year; in fact 
it’s been 3 per cent. 
 
Of course, as we all know, SaskPower management called for 
increased generating capacity: they asked for co-gen proposals; 
money was put up; plans were made; applications came forward 
from various concerns and companies; and then Saskatchewan 
Power cancelled the whole thing saying that the generating 
capacity would not be needed. 
 
Now we are told the generating capacity was very definitely 
needed and our generating capacity may be inadequate to see us 
through the winter, and that is an enormous concern to all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
My constituents are very concerned that Saskatchewan Power 
has not been well managed. There is great concern that routine 
maintenance has not been done, despite large profits from 
Saskatchewan Power going into general revenue, and despite 
the $2 reconstruction fee on every power bill. 



2002 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

Hundred-million-dollar profits going into the provincial 
treasury. Much bragging that Saskatchewan Power has been an 
efficient cash cow for the government of Saskatchewan, but 
meanwhile the infrastructure has been ignored. 
 
I am told that leaning power poles are not replaced; that instead 
Saskatchewan Power waits until they fall down and then need 
to be fixed on an emergency basis. I am told that Saskatchewan 
workers are phoned at home about power outages because the 
com-line, the hotline simply is rarely working. You can’t get 
through to it. There’s no answer or it’s ringing busy. It is 
severely underserviced. 
 
However, my constituents say that the first priority must be 
safety — it must be to ensure that power will be on this winter. 
I congratulate my colleague for Thunder Creek for making an 
excellent speech on the rights of the workers, but we must also 
balance that on the rights of the people of this province to 
power supply. 
 
Well I also . . . I listened with great interest to the member for 
Wood River, yes, and I’m proud of the fact that the Liberals 
have led the charge for respect for the workers’ rights in this 
matter. 
 
However I must tell you that in terms of fairness to workers, my 
constituents believe that 6 per cent over three years is fair, given 
the present financial situation of our province. We know that 
many people in our province will not be getting even the 6 per 
cent increase over the next few years. 
 
We are told that net farm income is likely to be cut in half this 
year. We know that many of our oil workers are being laid off. 
We know that sale of oil royalties is declining and I think it is 
inevitable that on many fronts provincial revenues this year will 
decline. 
 
So I have to say in this House that my constituents believe that 
6 per cent over three years is fair given the present financial 
climate of our province. However the government’s own 
position on 6 per cent of course has been undermined by the 
way they have treated the patronage appointments in 
Saskatchewan Power. 
 
Last week in the Crown Corporations Committee I moved that 
political interference and patronage be removed from the Crown 
corporations, and incredibly, every single New Democratic 
member of the committee voted against that motion. 
 
I must say in all fairness that the Saskatchewan Party did 
support that motion, but the NDP voted against it to a person, 
those selfsame patronage appointments that the NDP believe 
ought to be there get more than the 6 per cent. And I guess that 
is why the government continues to support and believe in 
political interference in our Crowns. 
 
(1600) 
 
My constituents have made it clear to me that they want me to 
support this legislation. However I believe that it can be 
improved and strengthened by accepting the amendment of my 
colleague from Melville. Because if we accept binding 
arbitration, we accomplish two things. We get the workers back 

to work in a good frame of mind; and we then get the guarantee 
of power service this coming winter. 
 
Well I hear a member saying that that would cost more than 6 
per cent. I think that would be a question for the arbitrator. I 
think there is a good issue to be made in arbitration that 6 per 
cent would be seen as fair. As I say, my constituents tell me 6 
per cent is fair. And so why would an arbitrator not consider the 
financial situation of the province and the fact we have zero 
inflation in North America today when deciding whether or not 
we would have 6 per cent through arbitration. 
 
It is also clear from what Mr. Messer has told us recently that 
collective bargaining could have worked in this situation had 
not the cabinet intervened. So it is sad that we have been called 
back to legislate when in point of fact the collective bargaining 
process could have been successful. 
 
I want to congratulate the Power workers who last weekend 
came out in the snowstorm and suspended all job action in order 
to deal with the crisis when 30,000 homes were without service. 
And I think we all should recognize the dedication of our Power 
workers for that. 
 
And I want to say that I have also been impressed with the 
number of Power workers I have spoken to over the last few 
weeks who come across to me as having a dedication to the 
corporation and to the people of Saskatchewan they serve and 
to having a broader interest here than merely getting a large 
increase. 
 
I want to say that I am proud of my leader and my colleagues 
for having placed the issue of workers’ rights in the centre of 
this debate. However, workers’ rights must also be balanced 
against the overriding public interest. Liberals have traditionally 
supported back-to-work legislation and have supported binding 
arbitration where the public interest demands. 
 
Ironically, Premier Ross Thatcher was a proponent of 
arbitration for essential services to prevent strikes in essential 
services. At that time he was considered anti-labour for that 
demand, and of course today we see that that is precisely what 
the union wants, is binding arbitration in essential services. 
 
And we no longer hear the NDP saying that that is anti-labour; 
instead we hear them saying that would be far too rich and 
cannot be granted to labour. So now we see the NDP endorsing, 
one, back-to-work legislation which they criticized, but also 
denying the right to binding arbitration. I’m proud that the 
Liberals have led the charge on workers’ rights and I would 
remind all members that liberalism is based on the rights of the 
individual. But we all recognize that there simply are times 
when the overriding public good must come first. And I have 
come to the conclusion that this is such a time. 
 
Legislating the workers back to work will not make up for the 
mismanagement and poor planning at Saskatchewan Power. But 
I cannot in conscience say that we do not need back-to-work 
legislation today. It is clear to me that back-to-work legislation 
is required, is required to make sure that the pre-winter 
maintenance work gets done and to make sure that within the 
very best efforts of the Corporation and its workers that service 
will be assured to the people of Saskatchewan this winter. 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2003 

More important though, I think what is really needed is to get 
back to the purposes for which Saskatchewan Power was 
created in the first place. You know the phrase, power for a 
province. That’s why we got Saskatchewan Power. We did not 
create Saskatchewan Power to be a cash cow for the 
government. We did not create Saskatchewan Power to get 
involved in risky foreign investments. 
 
We created Saskatchewan Power to provide service for the 
people and province of Saskatchewan. I think there is great 
concern on the part of everyone that this has been lost sight of 
in recent years. And we have to get back to it; we have to get 
back to the Crown corporations serving the people and province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So in conclusion, my position is simply this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I would ask all members of this House to seriously 
consider the issue of binding arbitration as a way of resolving 
this dispute. However after that question is resolved, I find 
myself regretfully in the position that I must support 
back-to-work legislation in order to assure power service to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Normally 
I’m very proud to be able to stand up and speak to a piece of 
legislation in this House; unfortunately I don’t have the same 
enthusiasm today with this particular type of legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I could I’d kind of like to bring this 
down to . . . away from the big union, big government scenario 
that we’re talking about and get it down to the people that work 
and live next to me in my constituency not only at Gardiner 
dam, but as well within the other sectors of health care, 
education, what have you. 
 
As I was out this morning when some of the workers were 
picketing out front and walking amongst them a bit, I noticed 
that many of them had jackets on that said, fan or coach on the 
sleeve, or supporter. And we have to realize that these people 
that have been locked out of their jobs are members of our 
communities and members that may well live next door to you 
or to me or to any of the members across the floor as well. 
They’re contributing members to the community in terms of 
they’re coaches on hockey teams, they support the bingos, 
they’re members of service clubs, you name it. They’re there; 
they’re one of us. So I think we need to bring it down to that. 
 
And that’s the reason I rise today, to give support to the workers 
that I have . . . certainly with IBEW in my constituency. And I 
want some questions answered by the members opposite and 
certainly the Premier. 
 
I guess some of the questions that the workers are wondering is 
why would a worker from Gardiner dam be locked out? Wake 
up some morning, go to work, have a locked door slammed in 
his face and that’s the end of it. No questions, no answers. 
 
Well I guess maybe, why did they get locked out? Well is it 
because they did their jobs, Mr. Speaker? Was it because as one 

gentleman talked to me and said, I worked 600 hours of 
overtime last year and I got no thanks for it. Is that why they 
locked him out? 
 
We’d like some answers, and the Premier, the Deputy Premier 
as well, is not very forthcoming with those questions, or with 
those answers to those questions, and I’d like to know exactly 
why that is. 
 
The perception in the public’s eye, and I know that all the 
members in this House today and certainly the members on this 
side including the Saskatchewan Party, know full well that 
people out there are saying that they want their power on. 
They’re concerned that the power will go off and they won’t 
have heat and they won’t have light and all those type of things. 
And I want the same. I know what they’re saying and they want 
it. 
 
A lot of the people, you’ve heard the member from North 
Battleford say that they believe that the settlement that was on 
the table that was very nearly settled by the union and by 
SaskPower was a fair one, and I believe it was as well. And I do 
believe that the two sides could have come to agreement and 
would have come to agreement that would have been much the 
same as what we're seeing in today’s legislation. 
 
The perception is out there as well — and it’s one that the 
Premier has never tried to rectify — is that . . . the perception is 
that, by the people in my constituency and I’m sure all across 
the province, that the union is on strike and don’t understand 
that they were locked out not by SaskPower, but by this 
government across the floor. And that’s a perception that has to 
be rectified and one that I’m working very hard to do and I hope 
the Premier will be forthcoming in making that known as well. 
 
I talked about . . . we’ve talked about the wage settlement. 
Certainly our farmers in Saskatchewan are suffering. In some 
areas we’ve had poor crops. Two dollar and fifty cent wheat 
doesn’t pay the bills. We’ve got massive waiting lists in health 
care; we’ve got people suffering and dying because of this 
government’s health care reform. But we shouldn’t blame the 
workers for that. It’s not their problem. It’s the government’s 
fault, Mr. Speaker, that we’re in that position we are today. 
 
I recall back several weeks ago when there was a new gambling 
minister appointed in this House, Mr. Speaker. And one of her 
first words of wisdom were, from the member from Wascana 
Plains was that when asked about VLTs (video lottery terminal) 
in this province, whether it should be a vote or not, she replied 
well no, we’re not going to allow a vote because people just 
don’t understand. The public just doesn’t understand, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well I think some of our workers — SaskPower workers — just 
don’t understand why they were locked out. Why were the folks 
at Gardiner dam locked out and couldn’t go to work? Why do 
they have to be legislated back to work when they weren’t on 
strike and they were locked out? 
 
And they want to know that why, when they were very close to 
a settlement, that cabinet said no, we don’t want a settlement; 
we want to have the opportunity to legislate them back to work. 
I think those are the things that people don’t understand. 



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very brief and just a couple more comments 
but I would like to as well ask another new member of this 
House and a member of the cabinet, the Associate Minister of 
Health, what does she think about this settlement? We haven’t 
heard her speak today and I’m wondering why we haven’t. 
 
And I’m wondering what she would have to say to her health 
care workers when their name appears on the next piece of 
legislation legislating them back to work. Maybe the 
government was thinking about legislating hours that health 
care workers work. They should maybe be a little longer. A 
little less pay, a little longer hours. 
 
Health care workers, Mr. Speaker, in this province have been 
knocked down, they’ve been kicked, they’ve been stomped on 
since . . . in the last seven years since this government took over 
power. And the final insult to them will be when that minister, 
the former SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) president, 
will come forward and say, yes, we’re going to legislate you 
back to work, you folks, because we need you to work longer 
hours because we don’t have any nurses in this province. 
 
The alarming thing that I see again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
closing today, is the trend that’s been set by this government 
since they came to power in 1991. We go back and we can look 
at the retroactive legislation of the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) contract. We have seen this government 
totally ignore the wishes of some hundred thousand people in 
the Plains debate and say, no, government knows best. And now 
today we’ve come to this, where the government is legislating 
some workers back to work who were never on strike, who 
were locked out by this government, and who the government 
has turned their backs on. 
 
And that’s one of the problems, Mr. Speaker, with this 
legislation, and one of the reasons why I will have a hard time 
supporting it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With 
leave, to introduce a motion to substitute names on Crown 
Corporations Committee. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Names on Crown Corporations Committee 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move, seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly: 
 

That the names of Mr. Boyd and Mr. Toth be substituted 
for those of Mr. Bjornerud and Mr. Heppner on the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 65  The Maintenance of Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation’s Operations Act, 1998 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I would like the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. I’m pleased to have with me today 
Darryl Bogdasavich, who’s the executive director of civil law 
for the Department of Justice; Darcy McGovern from 
legislative services; and Mike Shaw who is the vice-president of 
Crown Investments Corporation; and Ted Boyle who’s the 
director of communications for the Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I guess it would be. 
Mr. Minister, welcome and welcome to your officials. I’m 
hoping, Mr. Minister, that the fact that you are the one that’s 
answering questions on behalf of the government does not 
indicate that you are not going to be prepared to answer 
questions about SaskPower’s . . . the operations of SaskPower. 
Can we clear that little bit up here first? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, the plan today — if it’s okay with 
the members and the Chair — is that questions like that will be 
handled by the minister for the Crown Investments Corporation, 
and that’s why he’s here with me. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, thank you. So 
you might as well sit back and relax because I don’t think 
there’s much we want to talk to you about. 
 
Mr. Minister, we understand the first issue . . . there’s a number 
of issues that we raised in question period that we want to 
discuss with you, about SaskPower’s management ability and 
the direction that the company is headed in terms of the ability 
to manage the electrical output that is so necessary as we move 
into the winter months. We want to talk about that. We want to 
talk about management wage increases and a whole host of 
other things. 
 
Mr. Minister, the importance of maintaining electrical supply to 
the people of Saskatchewan certainly can’t be understated and 
is extremely important. Business has to be maintained. Our 
homes have to be maintained. Hospitals have to be maintained. 
All of those kinds of institutions that we have, schools — you 
name it — all have to be maintained. 
 
We understand that the current capacity of SaskPower is about 
2,835 megawatts. I would wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would 
care to confirm that for us. And we also understand that the 
peak demand is currently estimated at 2,830 — very, very tight 
margins, as you know. 
 
And you alluded to that fact in question period that as a result of 
low water levels in Manitoba that they may not have the 
capacity in terms of hydroelectric generation capacity to be in a 
position to export much in terms of electrical supply to 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly it’s pretty well-known that in Alberta the situation . . . 
the government’s already announced that they may be looking 
at rotating planned power outages — brownouts I guess they’d 
be known as. They’re already looking at that. We hear that 
coming out of the United States, the Basin, I believe it’s called, 
that they may have some difficulty in supplying to 
Saskatchewan. So in spite of all of the reciprocating agreements 
that your government has with other administrations, we may 
be in a position where SaskPower does not have the generation 
capacity and may not be able to bring in power from outside 
sources. I would wonder if you would care to comment at this 
point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite to . . . I think in question period — and I 
understand how question period goes, but the high degree of . . . 
no, no, the high degree of rhetoric and the attack on the people 
who do the planning in Power — I really don’t expect that if we 
search the record that the member meant some of the things that 
he said about the engineers and people who do the planning in 
SaskPower. Obviously the recommendations that come forward 
in the Power Corporation based on the needs and the supply 
side are not made by the CEO or by the chairman of the board. 
They are based on recommendations that come from the 
engineers and plant managers who see the power supply going 
out and therefore are required to produce the power. 
 
When we came to government in 1991, you are right, the 
recommendations at that time of the Devine administration — 
based on their engineers, of course, not decided by Mr. Devine 
or George Hill, but the same engineers, many of them who are 
in place today as were in place in 1991 — were that the growth 
rate in our Power Corporation would be 1 per cent. Why is that? 
Because the growth of the economy in 1991 and 1990, 1989, 
was about 1 per cent growth in the economy and therefore the 
power supply was growing by about 1 per cent. And the 
projections in all power companies in western Canada was that 
that would continue on into the next millennium or to the year 
2000. So the supply management people were recommending, 
whether it was in TransAlta or the Manitoba Hydro or Basin 
Electric, that based on the growth of the economy in the 
western part of Canada and even the western states, would be 
about 1 per cent. 
 
Well as the resource economy took off in the mid-1990s . . . 
And I’m not saying that that was because you had Conservative 
governments in Alberta or NDP in Saskatchewan. The fact of 
the matter was at the world economy resources became king 
and there was a great demand for resources. There was record 
oil drilling, therefore the need for more power than what an 
analyst had predicted. And we had record numbers of oil wells 
being drilled. Of course then you need motors on those pump 
jacks, and the growth wasn’t 1 per cent, but power supply in 
Alberta and Saskatchewan grew from about 1 per cent per 
annum to, in 1995 and ’96 and ’97, a growth in the power needs 
of about three and a half per cent. And that has sent power 
corporations in western Canada scrambling to keep up with the 
demand. 
 
I would argue quite vehemently with you that this isn’t a private 
sector versus public sector issue as to why the economy is 

growing fast in western Canada. It’s growing because of the 
demand for resources in large part, therefore more jobs, more 
houses being built. And the supply of power in Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, and Manitoba is growing much faster than what 
the analysts and the engineers were predicting based on world 
growth in the economy. 
 
So we now find ourselves that whether you’re TransAlta, a 
privately owned company, or whether you’re Basin Electric, 
which is a combination of the two south of the border, or 
Manitoba Hydro or SaskPower, the growth rates in the 
corporation are larger than what we had expected. 
 
Just so you know that in our corporation we have a production 
side of about 2,870 kilowatts, 2,870 kilowatts . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . megawatts, pardon me; of course. We have 
import capacity of 375 megawatts and interruptible of about 
200 megawatts. We have a demand side, a peak demand side of 
2,865. 
 
So if you combined all of those options of interruptible, import, 
and our own production, we have a margin of about 20 per cent 
in the corporation. The industry standard is about 12 per cent. 
And so we feel, based on not my opinion or the CEO’s opinion, 
but the people who manage the plants and produce the power 
and export the power around the province, that we have a 
margin that will allow us to maintain our operation of providing 
a non-interruptible power supply to our communities that will 
keep us in good stead this winter. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So you can provide the 
people of Saskatchewan with the view and the position and the 
guarantee that we will not, as a result of mismanagement of 
SaskPower, see interruptions in power — not as a result of lines 
going down or anything like that, acts of God, we all understand 
that those kinds of things can happen — but in terms of 
planning capacity? You can provide the people of 
Saskatchewan with the complete assurance and guarantee that 
we will not see any kind of rotating brownouts that the 
Government of Alberta is talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Of course there’s no way of 
predicting disasters or ice storms and that kind of thing, and the 
member is I think accurate in saying that if that kind of a 
situation were to develop, then all bets are off. I mean there’s 
no way of knowing in a natural disaster that you can provide 
power to all parts of the province. But based on what we now 
know as a normal winter and even a tougher than normal 
winter, that we will have the power supply that we need. 
 
The other thing that I would mention to the member opposite 
that we also have contracted in the Meridian project 215 
megawatts of power which will come on stream in the fall of 
1999. And so even though the growth in the corporation this 
year is expected to be about 3 per cent, you do rough numbers, 
3 per cent on 3,000 megawatts of power, take or give a few 
megawatts, the demand next year will . . . 3 per cent on that 
number would be about 180 megawatts that we will need. With 
215 coming on we think we’re going to be in good shape going 
out into the year 2000. 
 
(1630) 
 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

Now if the economy continues to grow, which obviously we 
hope it does, at a rate of 3 or 4 per cent and the power demand 
at 3 or 4 per cent, other projects will have to be brought on. But 
as the member opposite knows, having a lot of sunk costs in 
capacity that are not being used simply only adds to the cost of 
your rate per kilowatt hour for your consumer. 
 
So it’s a neat balance to try to keep in place a situation where 
you have enough for the needs of the public but not so much 
that you have borrowed money to build plants or to build 
capacity that isn’t being used to the proper degree. So based on 
what we know at the present time, we will in fact be able to 
ensure a proper power supply this winter. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Could you provide us with detail as to where the 
importable power that you are talking about, the 375 
megawatts, is going to be coming from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Could you ask . . . (inaudible) . . . 
What was the question? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Could you provide us with detail as to where the 
importable power that you mentioned is going to be coming 
from? The 375 megawatts of power, a breakdown between the 
different suppliers that we may be looking at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — These are contracted power 
supplies. So when you talk about where that power is going to 
be coming from, the 375 megawatts, this isn’t power that we’re 
going out and looking for, for this winter; this is contracted 
power and it would break down in some configuration. I’ll get 
you a closer number on this. But this would come from Alberta, 
Manitoba, and south of us in Basin Electric where we have 
interconnects. 
 
So it would be a combination of the three. But I want to make it 
clear again, for you and for the public, this is not power that we 
need and are going out shopping for, this is power that has 
already been contracted for this winter. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — So you have solid contracts with companies in 
terms of reciprocating agreements, other utilities to provide 
power to Saskatchewan. We just want the names of those 
companies and I think we’ll substantiate them on our own, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
The 200 megawatts of interruptible power, who and what is 
interrupted first? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just so you know the way the plan 
of interruptible power works, we have special arrangements 
with several of our large customers to . . . in return for a lower 
rate that they pay for their power, they have in the portion of the 
contracts that they can be interrupted. And so these are known 
as companies that have interruptible power. 
 
And for signing a contract which is in place for a number of 
years and was a practice under your administration, they buy 
their power based on an interruptible clause which means they 
pay less than you would if you had a non-interruptible 
agreement. And that amounts to 200 megawatts. And I don’t 
have the list of the companies. I’m just checking with my staff 
to see whether it’s proper and appropriate for me to release that. 

Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think the people of 
Saskatchewan would think it is important to know that you 
indeed have a plan to deal with power shortages should they 
come into place. 
 
I’m not quite certain we can just accept your word here in the 
legislature that you have those kinds of agreements without 
knowing some detail on them. As well as the 375 megawatts of 
power that you claim is available to Saskatchewan from other 
sources, I think we need some detail as to that. 
 
Because we’re not talking about whether or not there’s enough 
of some sort of service that isn’t important to the people of 
Saskatchewan; we’re talking about electricity for their homes, 
for people’s businesses, for their farms, for hospitals, for 
schools, all of those kinds of things. It’s a very, very important 
question and a very important decision to make sure that we 
have all of those kinds of concerns covered off for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, does your projection match with the corporation’s 
current ability . . . your projections meet with the government’s 
current ability to provide to the people of Saskatchewan? What 
I’m saying is, if there is not available power from these other 
sources with respect to the question that we asked you in 
question period, if the 375 megawatts is not available from 
these other sources, what contingency plans do you have? 
 
Now what I’m saying is, if there isn’t power available from 
Alberta, if there isn’t power available from Manitoba, if there 
isn’t power available from the basin, what are we going to do 
then? We don’t have the generation capacity here in 
Saskatchewan. And you know yourself, Mr. Minister, that that 
could easily happen, I think. We could see a . . . typically 
speaking, when we see a very, very extended cold period in 
Saskatchewan, it’s the result of a large, high-pressure zone 
that’s invaded basically all of western Canada and the northern 
U.S. And those can happen in Saskatchewan and regularly do 
happen in Saskatchewan, and we could be looking at an 
extended period of time where that could happen, where other 
utilities do not have extra power to send to Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think those reciprocal agreements, if I’m correct . . . 
that’s how they operate. They will sell if they have additional 
capacity, but if they don’t have additional capacity . . . The 
minister is shaking his head, no. I would ask then, if you would 
care to explain to the people of Saskatchewan how those 
reciprocating agreements work if the other utilities do not have 
excess generation capacity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The fact of the matter is, as the 
deregulation process takes place in Canada — and you’ll know 
the history under the Mulroney government and governments in 
the United States, and then the interprovincial barriers being 
removed — the fact of the matter is, more and more companies 
are going to be allowed to sell their power to whom they 
choose. And so the words “reciprocating agreement” are 
beginning to fade, and what we have now is contracted power. 
 
And so when we talk about having 375 megawatts of power 
imported and contracted, this is power that we have already 
purchased and committed to buying and has been committed to 
delivering to us. This isn’t a matter of them having some extra 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

power and finding a place to put it. We have actual contracts for 
this power. So it’s very important. It’s a very important 
question for all of us to try to deal with the issue because it’s 
fundamentally different than it used to be 10 years ago where 
we had reciprocating agreements and that meant that if you had 
some extra power you would try to go out and get rid of it. 
 
More and more, as it is with natural gas, we are much, much 
more dependent on imported gas as a percentage of our gas we 
use in our homes and factories than we are power. And so the 
reason we can have confidence that we’re going to have gas in 
our furnaces and electricity in our switches when we flip them 
is because contracts are signed for the power and for the gas 
that we need. 
 
And the member says, well what if there’s a catastrophe in the 
area where the power is coming from, then you’re into a 
different issue where we’re talking about a natural disaster, and 
then we would have to have contingency plans. 
 
But as far as options for this 375, there is no option under 
present situations on other than a disaster where these 
companies would have the option of turning off the power, 
because this is contracted power. 
 
And it’s much the same as what we’re doing with TransAlta, 
with Husky in terms of buying 215 megawatts of power from 
them for 25 years. This is not an issue of whether that power 
will be available to us or to somebody else. We have a signed 
deal that will deliver that 215 megawatts for that period of time. 
And it’s not an option for TransAlta or Husky to take that 
power even if they could get more money for it and deliver it to 
someone else. 
 
And so these are contracts. And I want to make it very clear, 
and I know that you understand, but for those who may not be 
here in this legislature, people who may be paying attention 
although there may be few, but the fact of the matter is that 
these are contracted power agreements, and so that 375, unless 
there’s some sort of a disaster, will be available to us. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — So we understand you clearly, Mr. Minister, 
these are signed, guaranteed supply agreements with no caveats 
whatsoever. Is that correct? There are no caveats on the 
contracts whatsoever. They’re guaranteed supply agreements, 
supply contracts with no caveats. 
 
So if Alberta for some reason is experiencing some difficulties 
in terms of capacity there, even though they are experiencing 
difficulty, TransAlta would have to live up to their agreements 
that they may have made here in Saskatchewan. Or the same 
with Manitoba Hydro. If Manitoba has some difficulties with 
supplying to their subscribers first, they still have an obligation 
to meet with the supply contracts that are signed here in this 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — My understanding of the contracted 
power supply is that we are one of their customers. And if we 
contract with them either for gas or electricity, and we have a 
contract with them, we have the right to receive the energy 
source. And as we get more and more into deregulation, and 
this is what we’ve been trying to bring home to people, the 
importance of . . . Just saying deregulation, we really have to 

understand what that means. In a fully deregulated system, the 
companies will sell their gas or their power to who will pay 
them the most. And this is why it then becomes a fully 
competitive, integrated transmission system, over time, where 
people will contract the power from where they can get it the 
cheapest. 
 
And this comes to the basis of what we’re talking about in 
terms of power and why we have been opposed to deregulation 
in our caucus, because at some point in time, if the customer 
can buy their power cheaper from Manitoba Hydro than they 
can from our coal-generated power at Estevan, the customers 
will be able to do that. And so we have said we want to keep the 
regulated system as long as we can so we keep our power 
production going at Estevan and Coronach and our other power 
supplies. 
 
But as you know, federal and other provinces want 
deregulation. This will change the whole face of how power is 
purchased, and IPSCO will be able to go into the market and if 
they can buy it cheaper from Manitoba or Basin Electric, they 
will be able to do that. And we can say all we want about how 
they should have to buy it from Estevan or Coronach. In a 
deregulated system this will change, and it will change 
fundamentally. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, we’ll approach this from another 
direction because we’re not getting the answer that I think the 
people of Saskatchewan want. You’re skirting the issue here. 
Are we on the other utilities’ interruptible list? Maybe that’s a 
better way of putting the question to you. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have interruptible power agreements with 
subscribers. Are we on an interruptible power agreement with 
other utilities? That is to say, if they don’t have generation 
capacity or they’ve got peak load demands in their jurisdiction, 
are we first off, even though we have agreements with them for 
supply — supply agreement contracts? Are we going to be 
putting at risk people in Saskatchewan because those contracts 
are not ironclad that they are guaranteed to supply, no matter 
what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I can only . . . I mean, I can’t 
give you a guarantee that if there’s a disaster that the power is 
not interruptible, as the member says from his seat. But nor can 
I guarantee that if there’s a disaster at Coronach or Estevan, and 
I said that in my opening statement. But as far as contracted 
power, we have 375 megawatts of contracted power from 
outside of the province. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — So it’s interruptible power from out of the 
province. Is that what you’re saying, that if there’s difficulties 
in other jurisdictions that the power here that we have 
contracted is not guaranteed but it is interruptible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It’s my understanding, and to the 
member opposite, that this is power that we have purchased. 
And I want to make it very clear to you that this is no different 
than any other customer, whether it’s gas or whether you’re 
buying other commodities. The fact of the matter is that if some 
disaster would happen in that area that stopped it from 
happening . . . but these are contracts that we have with these 
companies to deliver the power. 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

And I might add to the member opposite that we have 
production in the province that is equal to the demand. It is 
equal to the demand. I gave you the number . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, I gave the member the numbers earlier. 
And we have 200 megawatts of interruptible and 375 of 
imported power, which means we have 20 per cent — 20 per 
cent — over and above what we think we will need. 
 
Now the members are concerned about that. But if it isn’t 20 
per cent over, how much money, if you were running the Power 
Corporation, would you spend on? Would you have 25 per 
cent? Would you have 50 per cent? Obviously the industry 
standard is 12 per cent. So we’re 8 per cent above the industry 
standard. 
 
Now you’re saying we should have more. But maybe you 
should tell us, if it’s not 8 per cent over industry standards, what 
would you invest in excess power? 
 
(1645) 
 
I know you wanted to build a nuclear power plant when you 
were in government. And you know where we’d be at with that 
nuclear power plant today if we had followed your advice in 
1991 and gone ahead with it? We would be about three years 
from completion. We would have overruns of about a billion 
dollars, going by other nuclear power plants being built in this 
same time frame. And we would have shortages of power for 
sure because we’d be waiting for 10 years to get the power 
plant built. 
 
Now I know what your plan was when you came into . . . If you 
would have been elected in 1991, you would have gone ahead 
with a nuclear power plant. That was the commitment of your 
government at the time. But I’m saying that . . . and that was 
being driven from the top. That was not coming from the people 
within the organization. 
 
When you talk about political involvement, we all know where 
that deal was coming from. It was coming from the political 
side, and one guy by the name of Eric Berntson, who was 
driving that nuclear power plant concept. You know that. And 
you know where we would be if you had continued to manage 
the Power Corporation. 
 
But I want to ask you, if 20 per cent margin isn’t enough when 
the industry standard is 12, could you tell us what is then that 
we should be shooting for . . . for the amount that we have in 
excess power? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that review of 
history that you always like to present to the legislature. A very 
one-sided view of history, but nevertheless a view of history. 
And you are probably right that there would have been cost 
overruns, judging by the way you guys manage everything else 
and the fact that we have a Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement here in Saskatchewan. Undoubtedly there would 
have been huge cost overruns had you been operating the 
development of the nuclear industry here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to get back to what our point is, Mr. Minister, on the 
supply agreements from other provinces and other jurisdictions. 
And I’d ask you to try — I know it’s difficult for you to do — 

but try and confine your thoughts to this area for a moment, Mr. 
Minister. We have these supply agreements, and you say 
they’re ironclad, but of course we haven’t taken delivery of that 
power. We have no way of storing that stuff up. We haven’t 
taken delivery of it. 
 
So are you saying to the people of Saskatchewan, even though 
we have these agreements and they’re ironclad, there is no . . . 
we are not on an interruptible basis with the TransAlta or the 
Manitoba Hydro or the Basin Power Company. We’re not on 
any kind of interruptible, and there’s no delivery problems or 
anything like that. You can guarantee the supply of electricity to 
the people of Saskatchewan because we have ironclad 
guarantees with the other jurisdictions and other power 
companies that are not interruptible in any way in terms of 
delivery or in generation capacity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I can only reiterate the numbers that 
I’ve given you, that we have equal amount of capacity in the 
province to the demand. They’re in neat balance, and I think 
that is the most efficient kind of power corporation you can run: 
where your sunk costs and investments in generation of power 
are used to the peak degree. 
 
Some would argue that you should have a few extra power 
plants sitting around, which is the case in Ontario where under 
Conservative and other governments they built nuclear power 
plants all over the place, and they ended up with a mess that is 
unbelievable in terms of the amount of power that they could 
produce through nuclear and others, and then they find out at 
the end of the day they have to redo the whole scheme. 
 
The fact of the matter is I would argue that the management 
team in Power in the 1980s and ’90s have done an excellent job 
of keeping that power supply in neat context with the demand. 
And I would say that during the 1980s as well as during the 
1990s. And what you have to know is many of the managers 
who run the plants and do the work and the workers who do the 
work are the same people. And they have done a good job of 
matching the amount of production with the amount of needs in 
the community and its match. And they supplement that with 
imported power and interrupted power. 
 
Now what could be a better business plan than that, whether it 
was in the 1980s or in the 1990s, because the problem is, is if 
you build 400 or 500 megawatts of power extra, you have to 
borrow the money. It sits idle. 
 
If you can get contracted power to fill in the gaps from other 
jurisdictions or if you can have companies that are willing to 
take interruptible power at a lower rate for their power . . . I 
think that theory worked in the 1980s, is working in the 1990s, 
and I think it’s one of the reasons that our power company, 
when analyzed by many experts from all across Canada, say 
that in terms of the generation and supply of power it is in fact a 
well-run company. And those documents are available. 
 
This is not a company that is in shoddy terms as to the work of 
the employees or to the work of the management. And for you 
to try to say that, I think only leads us to the conclusion that 
you’re trying to implement and sway the public to sell these 
darn things. That’s really what the agenda is. 
 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

You’ve said it publicly; it’s in your policy. I’m not going to 
bore you with reading back what you gave to us in the 1996 
review, but you said at that time you should privatize SaskTel 
and then use that information you gain from privatizing SaskTel 
to privatize SaskPower, SaskEnergy and SGI. So we know what 
your agenda is. 
 
But don’t go about it by trying to destroy the men and women 
who run our power corporation. Just have the bravery of heart 
to stand up and say, they’re good people but philosophically I 
believe in privatization and that’s what I want to do. 
 
Don’t try to rip apart the people who are doing the planning in 
the corporation or the people who are burning the coal in the 
plants when really what your strategy is to privatize the 
corporation and destroy its image in the process in order to 
achieve your philosophical goals — because that isn’t fair. 
 
The fact of the matter is SaskPower is a well-run corporation. I 
say again the amount of power we generate is equal to the 
demand, and we supplement that with 20 per cent over that with 
interruptible and imported power. 
 
Now if you’ve got a better strategy than that, tell us how much 
extra power we should have on the drawing board. It’s costly 
because you have to pay for it. Once you contract it, it’s take or 
pay. You have to . . . you can’t contract for it and by the same 
token if you don’t need it, say well too bad, we thought we 
needed it and we don’t. You have to take it and shut down some 
of your plants which is not very efficient. 
 
So if it's not 20 per cent, tell us how much in excess we should 
have. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we hope 
you are right — and I think the people of Saskatchewan hope 
you are right — about your ability to manage the affairs over at 
SaskPower. 
 
But given your track record in terms of contracts, we’re not so 
certain that the people of Saskatchewan have that confidence 
any longer. We have the same, largely the same geniuses over 
there that brought us Channel Lake and Guyana — Carole 
Bryant and Bill Hyde, and people like that over there — that are 
still making some of the decisions over there, even though 
they’ve messed up big time in terms of other areas of 
management. And their management expertise has certainly 
been called into question around the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re just finished getting over the completion of hearings 
about Channel Lake. And you get up and say to us, oh, we got 
these contracts, and they’re all okay, and don’t worry about it. 
Well the last contracts that SaskPower had to handle in terms of 
Channel Lake, you got duped out of millions of dollars by some 
pretty sharp operators that took you guys deep and the 
taxpayers of this province — took them deep. And you seem to 
get up and you slough that all off by saying, oh well, we’ve got 
good people over there, and don’t worry about it. 
 
Well, I think there’s lots to worry about, Mr. Minister, because 
the last time you said we got good contracts and don’t worry 
about it, it cost us five million and change — the people of 
Saskatchewan. So why would we take any more assurance 

today from the fact that you have contracts with outside 
utilities? 
 
Even though you’re hedging as much as you possibly can, you 
won’t say whether they’re interruptible or non-interruptible. 
You won’t say whether they’re guaranteed in terms of delivery 
or not guaranteed in terms of delivery. All of those kinds of 
things enter the picture, Mr. Minister, but yet you don’t want to 
discuss them. 
 
You want to go on some sort of a political tirade that the 
opposition will do untold things to the people of Saskatchewan 
if they’re given the opportunity to govern. Well, Mr. Minister, 
we’re not in a position of being in government right now. You 
guys are the ones that are in government. You’re the ones that 
have to answer the questions about the future of Saskatchewan 
right now, and what you would have the people of 
Saskatchewan do. So don’t get into this long-winded speech 
that you always want to get into about questioning other 
people’s motives. It’s your motives right now that are at 
question, sir. It’s your motives and the motives of the Premier 
of this province; it’s your political appointees that are the 
question mark in people’s minds. 
 
Are the same people that are running these supply contracts that 
you claim are guaranteed and ironclad, the same bright bunch 
that brought us Guyana and Channel Lake? The same bright 
bunch that just got paid off to the tune of about a million dollars 
roughly in terms of severance payment? Have we got the same 
kind of people running things? 
 
At least, you know, at the end of the day you could always 
count on in terms of one thing with Jack Messer. I have to give 
him credit for that. At least at the end of the day you could 
count on him to ram things through if it was necessary. He was 
great at that. And in conversations that I’ve had with you and 
other members of cabinet, you acknowledge that. Jack may 
have had a style that you didn’t agree with, but he got the job 
done in a lot of ways. We didn’t agree with his style in a lot of 
ways either, but it certainly didn’t result in the kinds of 
problems that we have currently in terms of power agreements 
that you claim are ironclad and guaranteed here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So even though you claim that we have lots of power, even 
though you claim that we have 375 megawatts of power that 
can come from other provinces, 200 megawatts that is 
interruptible power here in Saskatchewan, you won’t provide 
any detail as to that even though you had to, you absolutely had 
to have anticipated that we were going to be asking these kinds 
of questions when we got to the legislature about SaskPower’s 
ability to manage. 
 
You always come in here and slough it off by saying, well we 
didn’t know that you’d be asking this kind of question. What 
kind of questions did you think we were going to be asking? 
Get up here and ask the Minister of Justice whether the 
legislation’s been formulated properly? We certainly take the 
Minister of Justice at his word that this thing has been put 
together, and it’s going to stand up in court if it was ever 
challenged. We accept that. I kind of think that he knows what 
he’s doing with respect to that — not always but on this case 
probably. 



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

When it comes to your ability and the Premier’s ability and 
your hand-picked bunch there running things over at 
SaskPower, I don’t share that same kind of enthusiasm, Mr. 
Minister. I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan share that 
same kind of enthusiasm because we’ve seen too many things 
go wrong over there. 
 
We’ve seen you getting rid of Jack Messer to the tune of a 
bunch of heavy cash to the people of Saskatchewan. We’ve 
seen a whole bunch of other people be run off over there 
recently, every one of them at the same time pick up a big, fat, 
severance cheque. We’ve seen all kinds of difficulties. We’ve 
just gone through hearings with respect to Channel Lake that 
has exposed NDP management, mismanagement, to a large 
degree that has come directly out of cabinet. 
 
You were the ones that got up in the legislature and said, we 
have to become more competitive, globally competitive, and 
went running off halfway around the world down to Guyana, 
and come back and said, man, have we got a deal for you, the 
people of Saskatchewan. And what happened? The thing blew 
up in your face. The thing blew up in your face, a bunch of 
taxpayers’ money down the drain — but oh well, so what? We 
wanted to be globally competitive. Well, did you get taken to 
the cleaners over there. 
 
Went down to Guyana, some third-world country most people 
don’t even know where it is, and then come back with nothing 
but a big, fat tab for the people of Saskatchewan. And you now 
want to get up and say you know what you’re doing. 
 
Well I’m not so sure that you do know what you’re doing over 
there when it comes to managing the affairs of SaskPower, in 
terms of looking after supply agreements, looking after 
arbitrage. It’s that kind of stuff that the SaskPower people were 
involved in . . . had no idea what they were doing in it, came to 
you people for big, fat OCs (order in council) to okay it, 
hundreds of millions of dollars put at risk and still you say, 
okay don’t worry. We know what we’re doing. 
 
Well I’m not certain you do. And that’s why I’ve said to the 
people of Saskatchewan I’m making sure my generator’s 
hooked up out at the farm, and I’d advise everyone else . . . It 
would be interesting to know how many of you people are 
making those kinds of contingency plans in your own 
household . . . and SaskPower management. It would also be 
interesting to know how many of them are making contingency 
plans because we’re hearing that there’s a few of them over 
there. They’re a little bit nervous themselves. That’s what we’re 
hearing. We’re hearing that they’ve just maybe got a little 
Coleman sitting in the back corner ready to go just in case. 
 
And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, you have to be able to 
provide the people of Saskatchewan with some degree of 
assurance more than what you have currently than just saying 
we got these agreements in place, not telling the people of 
Saskatchewan that the agreements are not ironclad and 
guaranteed for the people of this province. 
 
I will conclude my remarks at this point, Mr. Minister, and ask 
for your response. 
 
(1700) 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to introduce another 
official who’s come. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Minister of Justice has a further 
official to introduce. I’m not sure that leave is required but is 
that all right? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. I’m pleased to say that we have with 
us now, Tony Harras, who’s the vice-president of system 
operations at SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I have now as my 
colleague has mentioned, Mr. Tony Harras, who has been 
involved in the corporation for 30 years and in large part in 
terms of systems operation has given me the information as to 
the breakdown of the 375. So I’m going to relay that to you 
because I think this will be helpful. 
 
The other thing that I want to add for the member, because I 
think it’s important to know that when we say that we need 
2,865 megawatts, that’s at a peak load that would be in a 
circumstance in the middle of January when the shortest day, 
longest night, coldest predictable weather. So this is not a 
normal day. This is peak demand. It’s not sort of an average. 
And I wanted to make that clear. 
 
Now you had asked where the power would come from and 
Tony’s been good enough to jot down for me a few statistics. 
And he says, first of all 100 megawatts of power come from 
Basin Electric and this portion is based on we delivering 100 
megawatts in the summertime to Basin Electric, which we have 
done for this year, in return for 100 megawatts in the winter. So 
this is money we’ve already delivered which is uninterruptible 
and will automatically come back to us because we’ve already 
delivered our share to them. 
 
We have 150 megawatts interchange which is power contracted 
from Manitoba Hydro. That is a contracted deal which is in 
place with Manitoba Hydro. The 125 balance is generation that 
comes from a reserved sharing program with Alberta which we 
have used only on occasion, but whenever we have needed has 
been there in the past. 
 
So those are the three areas and I’m thankful that Tony has 
come so that we can get the definitive answer on how that is 
broken down. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I’d 
like to welcome the ministers and their officials here this 
evening. 
 
I was very interested in the discussion that was going on earlier 
about the power supply and its availability and what we have in 
Saskatchewan and what we may access outside of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister was talking about . . . that we had an importable of 
375 megawatts. I would be very interested to find out — and I 
listened carefully and I didn’t hear the answer to this — exactly 
where we were going to get this importable from. How much 
was coming from Manitoba? How much was coming from 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

Alberta? How much was coming from Basin Electric or 
Montana Dakota Utilities? 
 
It would be very interesting, Mr. Minister, to find out exactly 
how much that is from each one of those because news reports 
out of Manitoba are saying they have enough power this winter 
to supply Winnipeg. There will be no brownouts in Manitoba. 
But they were also indicating that they did not have an excess 
supply of power because of the water conditions along the 
rivers, particularly at the Limestone dam. 
 
In Alberta they’re saying there is a shortage in Alberta, we may 
very well have to interrupt power supply to some of our 
customers in Alberta. If that happens it’s going to be difficult 
for them to ship power to us. So it’ll be interesting, Mr. 
Minister, to find out from you how much are you expecting to 
get from Manitoba, how much are you expecting to get from 
Alberta. 
 
It’s also the question of how much can those lines, those ties 
between Alberta and Manitoba, carry in capacity? What kind of 
a capacity can those lines carry? I phoned North Dakota this 
morning and talked to both Basin Electric and Montana Dakota 
Utilities, and they informed me that on a regular basis every 
winter we get 100 megawatts from them. We supply them 100 
in the summertime, they give us 100. 
 
They also said that they had the capacity and had entered into 
discussions with SaskPower to supply an extra 50 megawatts 
this winter, but that the ties between North Dakota and 
Saskatchewan basically could only handle that 150. Even if 
they had more available there would be a great deal of difficulty 
getting that into Saskatchewan. If everything worked perfectly, 
if the temperature was nice and warm and the wind wasn’t 
blowing and the clouds were in place, they could maybe supply 
through the ties a maximum of 200 megawatts — maybe. 
Everything would have to be perfect. If everything was perfect, 
I don’t know why we would want the power because we 
wouldn’t be using that much electricity here. So it’s only when 
conditions are at their worst that we need that power. 
 
Montana Dakota Utility said it wouldn’t matter if they had 200 
additional megawatts of electricity available to us; there was no 
way they could supply it because the ties are with Basin Electric 
and if Basin Electric is already supplying us with 150 
megawatts, they simply could not supply any more. 
 
So Mr. Minister, you haven’t answered the question when my 
colleague asked it. Exactly where is this importable power 
coming from? How much is coming from Manitoba? How 
much is coming from Alberta, and through those ties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to . . . well for the member 
opposite, I just gave these exact answers to your previous 
question, but I understand that you were possibly otherwise 
occupied. And I want to give them back to you because I think 
repetition is probably not a bad thing in this case. 
 
But we have, as you indicated, an agreement with Basin 
Electric which is a seasonal diversity agreement where we 
provide to them 100 megawatts in the summertime, and they 
provide to us 100 megawatts in the winter. We have provided to 
them in the past summer 100 megawatts, and that power will be 

coming back. 
 
And you’re right about the tie-line between Basin Electric and 
Saskatchewan. It’s roughly 150 megawatts. So our hundred that 
we need will come through because we won’t be approaching 
the 150 limit. With Manitoba Hydro, we have contracted power 
of 150 megawatts. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, when we are looking at the 
power coming from Manitoba and the potential problems that 
they may have with their system, the 150 megawatts is already 
factored in to their business arrangement. This is power that is 
contracted with Saskatchewan Power, and that power comes 
through tie-lines where we have a capacity of 200 megawatts. 
So we have contracted power with Manitoba Hydro of 150, and 
we have tie-lines that will allow us to bring in 200, so we’re 
okay on that side. 
 
The Alberta situation is that we have 125 megawatts of what we 
know as reserve sharing . . . of reserve sharing, 125 megawatts, 
and we have capacity on that side of the province of 150 
megawatts. 
 
So we think we’re in good shape to allow us to import up to 
what we believe would be . . . puts us to 20 per cent over 
capacity of 375 megawatts, and if you add that to the 
interruptible which I mentioned is 200 megawatts, for the 
member opposite, we have an access potential of 20 per cent 
capacity, industry standard is 12 per cent. So we think we are 
well protected and people like Mr. Harras and others who do 
these predictions and have during the 1980s and 1990s, these 
people have just done an excellent job of predicting and 
keeping us in good position of balancing out our requirements 
with our production, and topping that up using our system to 
100 per cent as much as possible because that’s the most 
efficient way of running an operation, whether it’s on your farm 
or my farm or the Power Corporation, and then topping that up 
with interruptible power and imported power. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, yes I was walking 
between the office and here when you gave that answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much of that power was utilized last year? 
What were our imports last year for the winter season — did we 
import 375, did we import 200 — what was the amount of 
imports that we were buying last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If I could for the member answer a 
question that . . . I was just waiting for an answer as we get the 
answer to the next question. But we had a question from the 
member from Kindersley about the interruptible agreements and 
I just want to say that while the interruptible agreements are 200 
megawatts, these are commercially sensitive agreements and 
my staff are saying that it’s not information that should be made 
public, and I’d ask the members opposite to appreciate and 
respect that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. While your 
official is looking up the last question perhaps you can indicate 
whether or not our power agreements with the Manitoba Hydro, 
Basin Electric, and the revenue sharing with Alberta, are those 
interruptible supplies also? 
 



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — We are dealing with clause 1 of the 
Bill. I am sure that all members will be interested in where we 
always do wide-ranging debate that these are exactly the kind of 
questions that the public are more than a little interested in, 
given the debate going on. I want to say to the member opposite 
that, as it would relate to Manitoba Hydro, these are signed, 
sealed contracts which are not interruptible under any normal 
definitions of interruptible as it would relate to power supply. 
 
As it would relate to the Basin Electric, the 100 megawatts of 
exchange we have summer and winter, we have had this 
exchange in place for many years during the 1980s and ’90s and 
it has always been there. The portion that is less guaranteed 
would be the interchange we have with Alberta and this has 
been an interchange that has occurred on a number of occasions 
and the power has always been there. But if you want the 
correct terminology, that we’re being advised it is not 
interruptible but is an agreement of exchange, whereby it’s a 
looser agreement than iron clad with Alberta. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So the 
situation with Alberta, if it arose that they were having 
brownouts in their province, they may very well limit the 
amount of electricity that comes to Saskatchewan. I see you’re 
conferring with your official so hopefully he can give you the 
answers to how much imported electricity we used last year. 
 
(1715) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, for the member 
opposite who was asking what the historic number would be as 
it would relate to last year. The issue with Basin Electric, we 
had an agreement of 100 megawatts and we used 10 per cent of 
that. With Manitoba Hydro we had an agreement for 100 
megawatts and we used about 10 per cent of that. And with 
Alberta because of the agreement — we purchased and sold 
between Alberta many times under the agreement of 150 
megawatts — but in total probably accessing about 30 per cent 
of what was available. 
 
So if you can look at the whole picture, while we have these 
agreements in place, historically we haven’t used very much of 
them and that’s what gives our staff the confidence that while 
we have to be ready we think having available to us in access of 
20 per cent when the industry standard is 12, it probably will 
keep us in good stead this winter. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Now, Mr. Minister, your numbers 
indicate then roughly about 65 megawatts were purchased last 
year. And you have to remember that last year was a very warm 
winter. We didn’t have the three weeks of 40 below that’s 
normal in Saskatchewan. If you look at the year prior to that, I 
believe, from the SaskPower report, that we purchased, I think 
it was 185 megawatts in that year. Either the year before or the 
year previous to that it was . . . we purchased about 185 
megawatts. I remember that number because that's almost what 
the Husky cogeneration is going to produce, is just enough to 
replace that purchase that we’re normally doing. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, in a normal year we’re probably closer to the 
200 megawatts of purchase rather than the 65 that we used last 
year. So if we’ve had roughly 3 per cent growth per year that 
you were talking about from three years ago — if that’s when 

we used that 185 megawatts, what we imported — you’re 
looking there, Mr. Minister, at using up basically your entire 
375 megawatts of capacity. If we have a generator go down 
some place around the province — and that happens on a fairly 
regular basis, Mr. Minister, with SaskPower — I would suggest 
to you that we’re going to be in some trouble this winter in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what kind of plans do you have in place to 
rectify the situation that we’re in a continual situation of buying 
power from outside of Saskatchewan? Do you have any plans in 
place? I know that since 1991, since the time you formed 
government, there was a number of people within SaskPower 
Corporation have been calling for plans to come forward to do 
some additional construction. That has always been stopped by 
the time it comes down to the cabinet. That’s where it has 
ended. So, Mr. Minister, what plans do you have in place to 
make sure that in the long term Saskatchewan will have security 
of supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Again I say to the members 
opposite that we traditionally have had an excess amount of 
power available to us in the same range as what we have this 
year, that is, in the area of 20 per cent. When it comes to the 
arrangement made with Husky and the Meridian project, I think 
you will well remember the announcement where it was done 
jointly between SaskPower and TransAlta as well as Husky, 
where joint use for this power production is that the steam is 
being used at the plant, the upgrader, and the power is being 
purchased by SaskPower, 215 megawatts of power over the 
next 25 years. And, as my colleague was reminding me, that 
over the next two years our increased demand would be about a 
180 megawatts. So we have in that new arrangement probably 
taken care of the next couple of years. 
 
But obviously at a growth rate of our economy of three or three 
and a half per cent, it will be relatively soon that we will have to 
be, as a board, reviewing and making a decision on the next 
tranche or the next grouping of power that we bring into the 
system. And that’s where you stack up all of the areas of 
potential power production including importation of more 
power, to make sure that the customers and shareholders are 
getting the best deal. 
 
And obviously these are not decisions that are made without 
recommendations coming from the people who know the 
numbers and do the numbers. And I say again many of these 
people are the same good people both in terms of the production 
of power and the management of our corporation who have 
been there for many, many years. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I 
agree with you on one thing, that the people who are the 
long-time employees of SaskPower, be it within the 
management or at the salary level, the hourly wages, are 
generally good people, Mr. Minister. 
 
The problem falls apart though when you start getting the 
political hacks in there. And that’s where it has fallen apart in 
the last seven years, is the people that you appointed to that 
position, Mr. Minister, haven’t been following the advice of the 
professionals in SaskPower. 
 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

There were recommendations that have gone back to 1991 that 
there was a need for increased generation capacity. You finally 
agreed to do that with the cogeneration project up at 
Lloydminster but that simply provides the power for what you 
were buying already. That doesn’t mean that we have power in 
place to carry on this year or next year or the year after and 
generating it at home here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, when we import power from Manitoba, when 
we import it from Alberta, when we import it from North 
Dakota — and in the case of North Dakota and Alberta, we 
export some to them in response to their demands also — is that 
always at the same price that we bought it or is there a 
differential in place there and to whose credit does that 
differential accrue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say to the members 
opposite that I want to make really clear on this Meridian 
project how that affects our consumption needs. When it comes 
on stream next November the amount of power coming into the 
system will be about 215 megawatts; at a 3 per cent growth rate 
in demand we will need over the next 12 months about 85 
megawatts, so this will up our access capacity for this time next 
year by about 130 megawatts. So while we see our way clearly 
through this winter we will actually have more of our own 
production or more contracted power in excess of what we have 
now by about 130 megawatts. 
 
As to whether or not we make money on the power we’re 
receiving from Meridian, obviously the portion that we would 
use, the 85 megawatts, goes into the system. If there’s a profit 
in the corporation some shaving of that would obviously be 
attributed to the Meridian project. We expect 130 megawatts 
extra that . . . we have with the shortage that there is in Alberta 
that we would ship it into that market and obviously make as 
much money on it as we can. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, when you talk about 
the 215 megawatts coming on at Lloydminster and then you 
talk about excess capacity, there is no excess capacity. Last year 
you admitted that we bought 65 megawatts in the winter, that 
was what we were short when we bought 65. The year previous 
to that we bought a lot more than that, Mr. Minister, which 
more than absorbs the 130 excess capacity that you were talking 
about. There is no real excess capacity in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister. It just means we may have to import less but it’s 
certainly not that we have excess capacity to sell to other 
people, Mr. Minister. And I believe that we need to take a 
serious look at what is happening in Saskatchewan to generate 
electricity here. 
 
I know that there’s a number of people, and including some of 
the people that were sitting in the galleries today, that are 
interested in the Shand 2 project which your government killed. 
A lot of that equipment is still sitting in Estevan with the 
preparations there to go ahead and build Shand 2 which I 
believe is about a 300 megawatt unit. There’s no reason, Mr. 
Minister, why you shouldn’t be looking at that. It may not be 
the appropriate time to go ahead with it but are you at least even 
looking at that, Mr. Minister, to determine whether or not that 
project is viable to us. 
 
If we’re going to be buying 375 megawatts, imported into 

Saskatchewan from people like Manitoba and Alberta that don’t 
have the power right now, or from North Dakota which says 
they can only ship us 150 maximum, we need to take a look at 
some of the other things around the province, Mr. Minister, that 
would meet Saskatchewan’s needs and would meet the needs 
that we’re going to have in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I indicated earlier, obviously 
once Meridian is up and operating, within a short period of time 
other projects will have to be reviewed, and if the economy 
hopefully continues to grow at the excellent rate it is at the 
present time, we will need more power production. 
 
And Shand is one of the options that will be stacked up when 
we look at the option of gas co-generation from other options 
that are in front of us or from importing power from other areas 
of the western electrical basin . . . obviously Shand will be one 
of the options that’s looked at. 
 
But what I can tell you that when the people who do our power 
planning looked at all of the options open to us when we chose 
Meridian, it was the best economic option open to the consumer 
and the shareholders as to the best price. 
 
The other thing I think it’s important to remember is that our 
federal government, who has signed on to the Kyoto agreement 
which talks about reducing carbon dioxide and carbon 
emissions into the air, obviously this is a new factor that we 
have to consider when we look at projects that we do when in 
fact 70 per cent of our power is generated from coal burning in 
the province of Saskatchewan. That is an issue as it would 
relate to new power production. 
 
So all of these things will be considered and the needs and 
interests of our industries and homes and hospitals will be 
considered as number one in terms of keeping us economical 
and keeping power rates reasonable — power rates that are 
presently frozen until the Year 2000. 
 
And so I’m sure the member opposite is not asking us to do 
projects that aren’t economically the best ones to do but I can 
guarantee you that Shand 2 is one of the options that obviously 
quite naturally is considered when you look at future 
generation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. When 
you mention CO2 and the generation of CO2 in the Kyoto 
agreement, we also have a project in Midale that will inject CO2 
into the ground for oil extraction which is a good program, Mr. 
Minister, and one that should be pursued. 
 
The fact is, if Shand 2 was in place and if scrubbers were put 
onto Boundary, that CO2 could be disposed of and we could still 
meet the federal commitments for CO2 emissions, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1730) 
 
So I think this is an area where some other economic generation 
capacity in the system that should be part of the Shand process. 
There’s no reason why we can’t extract that CO2 from those 
scrubbers. Yes it may cost them money to put the scrubbers in 
place. But if we’re going to meet those federal commitments 
that were put in place by the federal Liberals, then we have to 



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

be prepared to spend the money to make it happen. And we 
need the electricity, we need the jobs, and we can also use the 
oil generation. 
 
Talking about jobs though, Mr. Minister, I find it interesting 
when I look over your benches, and your backbenches, when 
we talk about back-to-work legislation for unions, and I find it 
very interesting that your membership is supporting this. 
 
Now I look at the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy who 
belonged to the teachers’ union and she is going to stand in her 
place and vote for back-to-work legislation. I look at the new 
Minister for Social Services, the member from Regina Victoria 
who I believe was a member of the SGEU (Saskatchewan 
Government Employees' Union), and very outspoken. And he’s 
going to stand in his place and vote for back-to-work 
legislation. 
 
I look at the member from Cut Knife-Battleford who was a 
school teacher, a member of their union; the member from 
Swift Current who was a principal and a school teacher at the 
Swift Current Comprehensive High School, and is going to 
stand in his place and vote for back-to-work legislation. I look 
at the member for Saskatoon Nutana, the Minister of Health, the 
A team Minister of Health, who is also a school teacher and a 
member of the teachers’ union. 
 
Look at the member from Saskatoon Fairview, past minister of 
Labour. He was in the Allan Blakeney government as a deputy 
minister of Labour, served as the minister of Labour in this 
House, has been a Labour lawyer, and he is going to stand in his 
place, he says, and vote for back-to-work legislation. 
 
The member from Lloydminster has been very outspoken about 
union issues — not on the floor of the House — not on the floor 
of the House but certainly in private she has been very 
outspoken, member of the teachers’ union, and she is going to 
stand in her place and vote. 
 
The new member from Saskatoon Eastview, president of SUN, 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, the B team in Health, the B 
team — you know she’s a new person in the House, I certainly 
understand why the Premier would only put her on the B team 
— but you know you got to get a little seasoning down in the 
minors and so today when there was a health question, she 
couldn’t even get up and answer it. But she’s going to stand in 
her place and answer — well hopefully she’ll answer the 
questions — but she’s going to stand in her place and vote for 
back-to-work legislation. 
 
The member from Regina Lumsden, a school teacher, is sitting 
in the back there and she’s going to vote for back-to-work 
legislation. 
 
The member from Cumberland, the Minister of Northern 
Affairs, was also a school teacher, a member of the teachers’ 
union, and will be voting for back-to-work legislation. 
 
The member for Regina Dewdney, who was the past Deputy 
Premier, has held numerous portfolios in the Premier’s 
government, a member of the teachers’ union, and he’ll be 
voting for back-to-work legislation. 
 

The member for Regina Sherwood I believe in the past has been 
a member of the SGEU. And he’ll be voting for back-to-work 
legislation. 
 
The member for Regina Albert South, he of fame of going to 
Holland to do various investigations, was a member of SGEU 
and he’ll be voting for back-to-work legislation. 
 
The Minister of Economic Development, the Government 
House Leader, who was a professor in university . . . I believe 
they have some sort of a labour association. And she’ll be 
voting for back-to-work legislation. 
 
The member for Regina Albert North was employed by the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and was involved with their 
employee associations and will be voting for back-to-work 
legislation. 
 
The member for Regina Wascana Plains, the current minister I 
believe of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) was also a school teacher. And she’ll be voting for 
back-to-work legislation. 
 
The member from Estevan, who was a member of the SaskTel 
union, and he stood in his place already today and spoke out. 
And I was glad to see that. I don’t know why the other members 
that I’ve mentioned haven’t spoke up and stated their positions. 
Are they ashamed of the fact that they are, or were, union 
members and are voting for back-to-work legislation? That’s 
certainly not the way they talked in the past, that they were 
ashamed of their union affiliations. But it seems when it comes 
time to vote on this particular Bill, none of them want to admit 
that they were ever a union member. 
 
And I would hate to forget the member from Regina Centre, 
who was a member of the SGEU, current minister of Gaming 
— gambling — and she’s going to be voting for back-to-work 
legislation. 
 
The member for P.A. (Prince Albert) Carlton was a school 
teacher, a member of their union, and will be voting for 
back-to-work legislation. 
 
I find it very ironic that all of these members are sitting in the 
Saskatchewan legislature . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well if 
the Deputy Premier was a member of a union, I missed it. 
Public Service Alliance. Okay, we have another one. 
 
Well perhaps the Premier, were you a member of a union . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, we’ve got two more on the 
list. Anybody else that I missed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
got you, I got you. Well we got more than half of the caucus 
then were members of unions and they’re voting for 
back-to-work legislation. 
 
Now when you listen and look back to 1983 when there was a 
similar situation in the province, every one of those people that 
were in the House at that time vilified the government for 
back-to-work legislation. My how the worm turns; how the 
worm turns. And now they’re the ones doing back-to-work 
legislation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, and you did it in 
1982 and it cost you an election. 
 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

And I thought perhaps that this time we wouldn’t see that 
happen. But I’m pleased to see that when it came to the crunch 
that this government recognized that it had a responsibility to 
the people of Saskatchewan and not just to their union 
affiliations. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well if the minister isn’t going to respond we 
will continue with some questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have a number of further questions that we 
wanted to ask you about, emergency-type situations. And we’re 
not talking about, you know, things that wouldn’t be considered 
an emergency, but very dire strait, emergency type of situations. 
In the event of a worst-case scenario this winter, and planned 
outages must take place, power plants going down, that sort of 
thing, can you tell us what the priorities of SaskPower and the 
government would be? What customers definitely would not 
lose their power services? Can you provide the people of 
Saskatchewan as to what the emergency situations are in terms 
of those kinds of events? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I said to the member opposite, 
the sequence is if we get to the coldest day of the year, or the 
longest day of the year, and we outstrip our capacity to generate 
power which right now is balanced — let me remind you that 
the policy of the SaskPower Corporation for as long as I’ve 
been around and for as long as you’ve been around, no matter 
who’s in government, has been to keep a fairly close balance 
between our production and our usage. 
 
And so you see today that it’s virtually in lockstep. And the 
reason for that is, is that our power production here is expensive 
power because most of it comes from burning coal. So the idea 
of having a lot of generation sitting idle does not make sense 
when you can import relatively inexpensive power from 
Manitoba. This is why the people who manage the corporation, 
whether it’s under your administration or ours or under the 
Liberals in the 1960s . . . that was the policy, and that is the 
policy of the Power Corporation, is to keep it relatively 
balanced. 
 
Now if there is a shortage of that, first of all we go to the 
market to get more power, and I’ve explained the 375 
megawatts of power. The next would be, if that’s not available 
and the 375 megawatts isn’t enough to keep it going, then we 
go to our customers to look at the 200 megawatts of 
interruptible power. So that would be the order that it would 
come on. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The saying, Mr. Minister, though is . . . 
sometimes I wonder whether you are deliberately obtuse or 
whether you just don’t understand the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the event that we have grid problems or 
generation capacity problems . . . Supposing one of the power 
plants goes down, and even though we are bringing in power 
from other jurisdictions and that sort of thing we still do not 
have the ability to meet all the requirements in the province. 
What is SaskPower’s contingency plan in event of those 
situations? Who’s off first? What proceeds after that? I assume 
that SaskPower has some contingency plans in those events. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Let’s say that a power corporation 

. . . for example in Quebec, there’s an ice storm, and I think this 
is what you’re getting around to in a very convoluted way 
because you’re not talking about generally normal 
circumstances because we’ve never had to do this in the history 
of the province. So let me make it clear we’re now talking in a 
hypothetical circumstance that has never occurred before in the 
province’s history. 
 
You’re talking about something that’s never happened since 
1929 when the power Act came into this House and was long 
before even you or I were here. It’s never happened before so I 
just want . . . I know what you’re trying to do. It’s called 
scaremongering, and you’re very good at it. It’s never happened 
before, but you want us to speculate how we would handle it, 
right? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Okay. Now just so we know this 
has never happened before, but what would you do if you 
imported as much power as you could — that’s 375 megawatts 
— and then you interrupt your interruptible 200 megawatts. 
Then you would ask your corporation structure — because there 
will be major TV reports about an ice storm or some 
catastrophe — then you would phone up your business people 
who obviously would be good enough at that point because it’s 
a catastrophe worse than anything that’s ever happened before; 
it would be worse than ever before, we would then . . . What 
would we do then? We would ask our corporate friends to . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Why is the member for 
Wood River on his feet? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I rise on a point of order, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — What is your point of order? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Chair, we have listened for an 
extremely lengthy period of time to questions and answers that 
are in no way relevant to the Bill before the House here. And I 
would ask you, Mr. Chair, to direct these individuals to get back 
on topic. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you for the point of order, and 
we’ll just pause for a moment of reflection before I make a 
ruling. 
 
Order. The hon. member for Wood River has raised a question 
of relevance of the line of questioning. I listened carefully to 
your point of order and appreciate the manner in which it was 
put. I’ve been listening to this debate very carefully and I 
believe that the questions have been dealing with the necessity 
of this particular piece of legislation. Having stated the 
relevancy of the line of questioning, I do urge all hon. members 
to, as far as possible, keep the questioning tied into this 
particular piece of legislation. 
 
I recognize the hon. minister to continue your answer. The 
minister has indicated that the answer is complete for now. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr. Minister. I think 
the questions are indeed relevant to SaskPower’s ability . . . 
 



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. We . . . Order, order, 
order. Now, there was a point of order raised and the Chair just 
made a ruling on it and hon. members will know that comments 
are not in order on rulings. 
 
(1745) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Chair, part of the discussions that surround 
this whole issue of a labour dispute that have been brought 
forward to us by the IBEW surround the issue of certainly the 
back-to-work legislation, certainly the issues about 2 per cent 
increases on a yearly basis, the cost of those kinds of things. 
The management of the IBEW and certainly folks within the 
union have expressed concerns to us about, while on one hand 
SaskPower is asking the union to accept 2 per cent increases, 
they’ve been accepting considerably higher increases than the 
union is being asked to accept. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you provide us with details as to all 
management contracts that have exceeded 2 per cent in the last, 
we’ll say, 18 months, and if you are contemplating providing 
any management with increases in the next 18 months. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well first I want to say to the 
member opposite that when we look at the whole budget of the 
province, obviously the payment that we make to our 
employees, whether it’s in Crown corporations or whether it’s 
in the public service, whether they’re managers or hourly wage 
earners — all of which are hugely important — it’s a big 
component of our budget. In fact, I’m just . . . not the exact 
number but I think close to 50 per cent of all of the taxes that 
we collect, a little less than half would go towards salary. In 
fact, I think our total salary that we pay in the province is about 
$2.5 billion — 2.5 billion. 
 
So when you talk about the potential of a 10 per cent increase 
for the public service or the civil service or our workers who are 
hugely important to the management of government — you 
can't possibly work without it — you're talking about an 
increase of about $250 million. To relate that to the sales tax at 
$90 million a point on the sales tax, you’re talking about 2.5 to 
3 per cent sales tax increase to sustain a 10 per cent increase in 
salary. 
 
Now having said that, I think the members opposite and the 
member who’s asking the question is quite legitimate. And I 
think in many ways when he talks about his position, that if he 
were the leader in 1995, said he would roll back salary. He’s 
making a choice to cut salaries of employees in order to give 
more tax cuts. Our position is that a fair position is to try to treat 
all employees fairly at 2, 2, and 2 over the next three years. And 
we have a list of people who have already settled: teachers, 
SGEU, CUPE 600, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology), SGEU, SGI and OPEIU (Office and 
Professional Employees International Union), SPMC and their 
CUPE affiliate. And we believe that’s fair. 
 
I think the more despicable position in my mind is the argument 
that the Liberals make that say, just take the lid off. Let the 
chips fall where they may. Roll the dice, and we’ll see what 
happens. And if an arbitrator rules 10 per cent . . . 250 million. 
 
But let me tell you this. The question that needs to be asked of 

Mr. Melenchuk and those who would say arbitration with no 
concern is: tell us, if it is 10 per cent, that you would be willing 
to increase the taxes to keep the books balanced. You have to 
do that. You have to do that in today's day and age, in the year 
1998. The old style of politics, the Grant Devine style of 
politics that got him elected in ’82, that you can say whatever 
you want to get elected — removal of the sales tax. You 
remember in 1982 he promised to get rid of the sales tax. He 
said that. He said that and then he ran up the deficit to $15 
billion today which is costing us, this year, in the budget, in the 
blue book — I have it here — $750 million, 750. 
 
Now I just said that a 10 per cent increase is 250 million. If we 
had not wasted and squandered money in the 1980s and could 
take one-third of that interest, one-third, and give it to our 
employees today, they would all be able to get a 10 per cent 
increase and we’d still have $500 million to cut the sales tax 5 
per cent. 
 
Now look this game that you’re playing here tonight is a sham. 
It’s unfair for you to come here and say increase everybody’s 
salary but not explain — but not explain — where the money’s 
going to come from. You can’t complain about power rates on 
one hand and say, but just give a 10 per cent increase . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well then tell us where you would 
get the money from. You’re saying pay more salary to people 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, you’re saying that across 
the piece. 
 
I heard the member from Melfort, the member from Melfort — 
and I’ll get the information if he wants me to embarrass him, to 
quote him to what he said on day one — he said, pay them more 
money than what is allowed under the mandate. That’s what he 
said. You said it. 
 
And the Liberals say, just open the bank book. You’re trying 
the Grant Devine trick and I know who that’s coming from. I 
know where it’s coming from. It’s coming from the member 
who’s vocalizing from his seat to play cheap, old politics to try 
to save his political skin. It’s not going to work. It won’t work. 
 
And if I could afford it, if we could afford it, if the Premier 
could afford it, to pay a 10 per cent increase for our employees 
and balance the books, we would love to do it. If we had the 
750 million in interest that’s in this year’s budget, I would 
gladly take a third of it, 250 million, and give a 10 per cent 
increase across the board. We’d love to be able to do that. That 
option isn’t here. It’s not here. 
 
And I want to say to members opposite, consider what you’re 
doing here. It’s great to have a political debate but the fact of 
the matter is at the end of the day, somebody’s got to run the 
government and has to look at the wide vision and view. And 
I’ll tell you that I am the most proud person in the world to have 
worked with two premiers from this legislature: Allan Blakeney 
who balanced the books of this province for 11 years running 
up to Grant Devine; and the Premier today who has balanced 
the books after Grant Devine, and it’s a privilege to work here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. What gets into you every once in a 
while that makes you want to go on these tirades? We try and 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

ask you some legitimate questions about the contract 
negotiations and then you launch into this litany of whatever 
happens to be under your saddle at the moment. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question that I asked you was the cost of the 
two, two, and two package as we have heard is about $6 
million. Can you confirm that that is the figure? And can you 
also provide us with the detail of the raises that SaskPower 
management has been receiving in the last say 18 months? 
What was the total cost to the corporation of those raises that 
you doled out over the last 18 months, and let’s compare them 
against what the people, the IBEW workers, are being asked to 
accept now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite, as we 
look at our . . . and did our Crown review in 1996, and they 
were involved in that because I have a document there, the 
paper they presented at the time, which states their position 
pretty clearly about how they would manage the Crowns, and 
it’s to privatize the Crowns, and they would do them in this 
order. It says right here, in their document on page 8, “the 
government should take steps immediately to privatize SaskTel 
through a public share offering.” 
 
And then it goes on to say the experience gained from the 
privatization of SaskTel would enable the province to undertake 
successful privatization of SaskPower — that’s the corporation 
we’re debating today — SaskEnergy, and SGI. 
 
Well it’s important. It’s important because you’re talking about 
and making us believe that you are in favour of crunching the 
gap between hourly wage earners and management. That’s what 
you’re trying to relay to us . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well 
we’ll get to that. We’ll get to that. 
 
Well the gap between the CEO of SaskPower and the average 
wage earner in IBEW is two and a half times. If you take the 
average of 58,000 for the average wage earner and multiply it 
by three, you get Mr. Staudt’s approximate salary. So it’s about 
two and a half times. 
 
Now you’re saying that’s too much. You’re saying that’s too 
much. Well tell me what it was when Mr. George Hill was 
there. Tell me what it was when Mr. George Hill was there, 
your guy. Yes, your guy. Oh yes, they deny, deny, deny, but we 
know that was your guy. 
 
The spread wasn’t two and a half times; the spread was between 
three and a half and four times. So don’t play games about what 
you would do if you were in government. 
 
Now that was in a publicly owned corporation where the spread 
was four times when you were in government. But you want to 
privatize, so let’s use one of your privatized corporations, the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. At the time of 
privatization, the spread between the average hourly worker and 
the CEO of the publicly-owned company was about three and a 
half times. Well tell me what it is between Chuck Childers at 10 
or 15 million and the hourly wage earner in the Potash 
Corporation today. Tell me what that spread is. 
 
So I want the member opposite — and I’ll get you the numbers 
— but tell me do you believe that the spread between hourly 

wage earners in SaskPower and the CEO is too great. Is that the 
point you’re trying to make? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, the question that we asked you 
was, what was the cost . . . what is the anticipated cost of two, 
two, and two. Is it $6 million? And what was the cost of the 
raises, somewhere in the neighbourhood of 12 per cent, that you 
doled out to SaskPower management over the course of last 
year? That was the question, Mr. Minister, and we expect that 
you would answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just say, I just had one of our staff 
go to get the actual numbers. You asked for the overall amount 
that it would be for the Crown for the increase. I don’t have that 
with me but I’ll get it to you as quickly as I can. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, we also . . . the IBEW raised with 
us a concern that you mentioned about . . . the number that you 
mentioned, $58,000 being the average. I wonder if you can 
provide detail to support that claim. Many of the IBEW workers 
that we spoke to dispute that. It’s only . . . I’m not sure but I 
believe it’s only after working very, very substantial number of 
overtime hours that they could reach those levels. And if you 
have information that supports your position and the 
management of SaskPower’s position, I wonder if you could 
detail it and provide it to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Here I’m depending on my staff 
who we depended on during this whole process is to relay the 
average annual salary of IBEW workers, and this is arrived at 
by including all of the overtime they work. So let’s be clear 
about that. It includes all the overtime they work, their annual 
salary — adding it all up and dividing it by the number of 
employees — and does not include benefits which amounts to 
something in the area of 20 per cent. 
 
So let me be clear about this. It includes their salary, all of their 
overtime, and is the average median of what it would be if you 
included all the regular salary overtime and divided that total 
amount by the number of employees, and does not include 
benefits which amount to about 20 per cent, roughly, of what 
their salary would be. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We expect, Mr. Minister, that you would be 
prepared to commit to the legislature to provide the information 
to support that claim; because the IBEW workers tell us that 
they don’t believe that to be the case and if that is, we want that 
information. I think that certainly the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan are owed that in terms of information to support 
your government’s position. 
 
Before the raises were granted to anybody from management in 
SaskPower over the last year and as a result of management 
receiving substantial increases, did anyone on the SaskPower 
board or management make it known or express an opinion to 
you and to the government that that might make it difficult in 
the negotiations that were upcoming? 
 
(1800) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I would like to say to the 
members opposite as it would relate to the general increase of 
managers, the guidelines were set consistent with the IBEW or 



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

. . . our hourly workers and the members of the IBEW. And I 
just give you by comparison: 1992 to ’94, it was zero, zero, and 
two and a half; 1995 to ’97, zero for 18 months, then one and 
one; and ’98 to the year 2000, two, two, and two. 
 
Now within that range as it would apply to our IBEW members 
and to our managers, there are different levels within their 
structures. For IBEW workers, it’s called incremental increases, 
each year moving up, in addition to your 2 per cent. Or if you’re 
promoted you obviously would move to a higher salary. In 
management as you move through what are not known as 
incremental increases, in addition to your zero or 2 per cent or 
whatever it would be, we have what are called performance 
bonuses. And so what I want to make clear is that the guidelines 
in principle we believe to be fair and equitable. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Am I understanding you correct, Mr. Minister, 
when you’re saying that SaskPower management people did not 
receive raises in excess of 2 per cent in the last year or 18 
months? Because we’ve been certainly led to believe different. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to make it clear that 
what we’re talking about is the overall general increases that 
apply both to our union members and to our managers. 
 
And then of course many of you have worked in hourly 
positions. There are also incremental salaries. You get . . . if 
you have secretaries in your office you may hire them at one 
level and then each year they would get their increase. But there 
are also incremental levels that they would go through. And I 
think you understand what I’m talking about. 
 
A teacher, for example, who works in the system . . . And I 
know some members who are in the teaching profession will 
know you get your increase, but you also get an incremental 
increase until you get to the top of your range. And then of 
course you bump up against that — some will know that better 
than others — and then you get only your annual increase. 
That’s how it works in the IBEW. And then there would be 
some who would get promotions. And of course they would go 
up quicker than that. 
 
But there is an incremental level within the hourly wage as well 
as the regular wage that we’re talking about, so people will 
move up by increments as well as the 2, 2, and 2 over the next 
three years, until they get to the top of their range. 
 
In management it’s similar. They would automatically get their 
2 per cent and then if they’re not at the top of their range they 
would get, or be eligible to get, a performance bonus that would 
— based on their performance — which I’m sure that many of 
you, in terms of managers, if you were running a corporation, 
would agree with. And at the end of the day, if the manager 
may have four or five different levels to get to the top of his 
salary, once they get to the top of their range then performance 
bonuses cut out. 
 
So in my mind it’s a very fair system. Others say look, when 
you look at your managers, you’re not paying them nearly 
enough. And the argument is made in the press and by many 
other people that our managers, the reason we are in need of 
increasing the levels of salary for upper management is because 
also they don’t have share options that they might have in the 

private sector. 
 
But having said that, I think if you look at the spread . . . the 
thing that I keep in mind is the spread between the hourly wage 
earner average and the CEO. I would challenge anyone to 
compare that spread, where our CEO is making about $150,000 
a year and the average hourly salary is 58, they have a factor of 
about 2.5 difference between the top paid person in the 
corporation and the average, and tell me which private sector 
corporation would have that narrow a band between the most 
highly paid individual in the corporation and the average hourly 
wage, and I think it’s a very, very fair regime. 
 
That’s not to say that I don’t believe that working people should 
earn more. I mean that’s what we spend our whole lives in — 
trying to balance out the needs of people on minimum wage, the 
people on welfare, to try to inject social programs to help out 
people who are the working poor. But at the end of the day you 
need a policy and we believe a policy that has a discrepancy of 
. . . a factor of 2.5 between the hourly wage of the average 
employee and the CEO is fair. 
 
Now others will say differently. Others will say it should only 
be 2. If your wage earners are earning an average of 58, then 
your CEO should earn 100,000. That’s fair comment, but on the 
other hand I think there are many people and probably more 
who say if your average hourly salary is 58 plus overtime, your 
CEO should be earning 300,000. So this is a system that we try 
to balance out but it’s not an easy one because you will hear 
both arguments being put. 
 
But all that I can say at the end of the day when we balance the 
budget and look at all the things that we need in front of us, our 
teachers, the people who work in SGI, I think 2, 2, and 2 and 1 
point discretionary for our employees of SaskPower is a deal 
that is fair. 
 
Is it as much as people want? No it isn’t and I readily agree that 
they have the right to put that point. But in my mind, is it fair in 
light of what we are doing for low-income people, people on 
welfare, people on minimum wage, for teachers and everyone 
else? I think it’s fair. 
 
Now is it as much as somebody’s earning in downtown Toronto 
or Vancouver? Compare people who work in the press or other 
places. I mean this is a matter of trying to balance and meet the 
needs and aspirations of our employees and managers in the 
circumstance that we live. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, we have been told and there are 
some media reports to this effect that the union had been, the 
IBEW union had been asking for 12 per cent in the 
negotiations. Union people I’ve talked to say that that’s 
complete nonsense. Can you tell us what was the negotiating 
position of the IBEW going into these discussions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of 12.4 that 
was reported, I think, rather widely in the press, it’s my 
understanding, came from a press conference where Mr. Gunoff 
was explaining about the inadequacy, which is his prerogative 
obviously, of the inadequacy of the mandated position of the 
government — I might say which all of us dealt with as part of 
the budgeting process around here because the budget was very 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

much based on having a mandate. And when we balanced the 
books, that’s what we based it on, and I think it was pretty clear 
that we said publicly to everyone that in order to keep the books 
of the province balanced that the mandate was needed. We 
made no secret about that. And if we’re breaking mandate, we’d 
better realize that then the budget position we have in this 
province isn’t on either. 
 
Having said that, at the press conference, and where this 
number came from and where it got reported in the press, Mr. 
Gunoff was asked what he needed in order to make the system 
work. And he said he needed parity with other similar 
corporations — I’m paraphrasing — but other similar 
corporations. And when pushed on that to ask what would that 
mean in terms of percentage, somebody in the crowd of 
members who were there said 12.4 per cent. And Mr. Gunoff 
said it would be about 12.4 per cent. 
 
This got reported in the press and across the piece. I don’t know 
whether or not officially refuted by Mr. Gunoff after that press 
conference, but it certainly was carried in the press in a very 
vocal way, based on a press conference that he did. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, in our meeting that we had with the 
SaskPower management, we were told that there was actually 
an agreement reached between the negotiating teams of the 
IBEW and SaskPower, and it was contingent, however. 
SaskPower’s management offer was contingent upon a 
affirmative vote from the board of directors of SaskPower. 
 
Is that correct, and could you provide details of what that 
agreement was that was rejected by SaskPower, the board of 
directors of SaskPower but was advanced as a agreeable 
position to the IBEW. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — There was a position put at one 
point where an offer was made to IBEW which was outside of 
the mandate. The position was put to IBEW, it was later 
withdrawn by the board of directors of SaskPower. This offer 
that was put to the leadership of IBEW was said by the 
leadership not to be good enough. But it was said that they 
would take it out but recommend against it. In that interim 
period before it was taken out with a recommendation not to 
support, the board of directors of SaskPower withdrew the 
offer. 
 
So this was the situation as it relates to the position being put. It 
was outside of mandate. The leadership of IBEW didn’t like the 
offer, even though it was outside of mandate — not much 
outside of mandate, but outside of mandate — said they would 
take it out but recommend against it. Before it went to a vote of 
members it was withdrawn by the board of SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — What were the details of that offer that was 
extended and then later withdrawn? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I can say only to you because I 
don’t have the details here and it’s complicated, but it was 
determined to be outside of mandate and therefore it was 
withdrawn by the board. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, can you repeat that? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just wanted to say to the member 
opposite that the determination by the board was that it was 
outside of mandate. I don’t know all of the details or how much 
it was outside, but it was determined to be outside of mandate 
and was withdrawn by the board. 
 
I want to make it clear that it was not rejected by the 
membership. It was said to be not good enough by the 
management of the IBEW and recommended against, but never 
got to the point of being actually voted on by the members. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Will you commit, Mr. Minister, to providing 
detail of that offer that was extended and then withdrawn? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It’s being said that the board of 
directors, because they withdrew and didn’t approve of it, that 
it’s an offer that they never approved so the intent here is not to 
make it available at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, at the . . . we have said our position 
would be to support the back-to-work legislation and we will be 
doing that when we reach the stage in this debate and stage in 
the legislation when we have the votes. 
 
We believe that this situation is one that we have very little 
choice about. We believe that this is a situation that has resulted 
in severe problems between management and the IBEW 
workers. We believe that there has been a tremendous amount 
of damage to the relations between the two parties. We believe 
that this is certainly a very, very untenable position that you 
people and the management of SaskPower have put the people 
of Saskatchewan in. 
 
We believe that as a result of your mismanagement, your 
patronage to the SaskPower management structure has resulted 
in a management structure over there that is incapable of 
making decisions. We see a management structure over there 
that are all acting in an acting capacity right now. Nobody 
seems to want to make any decisions. Everybody seems to be 
sitting on pins and needles over there hoping that this is going 
to go away and that the legislation is going to address their 
problems that are a result of your severe mismanagement in 
appointing people into the positions that simply are incapable of 
managing a company of that size. 
 
(1815) 
 
Mr. Minister, I think the IBEW had a lot of very, very good 
points that were raised in the discussions leading up to the 
dispute that we have currently before us. They have very, very 
good points in terms of management raises; very, very good 
points in terms of the overall management of the company; 
blowing money in places like Guyana, blowing money in things 
like Channel Lake that they had no part whatsoever in. It’s you 
and your appointees that decided to adventure . . . to take upon 
themselves those kinds of adventures and using the taxpayers’ 
dollars to do it with. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, and Mr. Premier, this has been a result 
directly of your mismanagement. The people of this province 
believe it, the people of the IBEW believe it. We will certainly 
await, I guess, the people’s decision about how they view this 
situation when it comes time to ask the people for what I expect 



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

you will be doing in terms of asking for a mandate again. I 
think you’ve done irreparable harm to the collective bargaining 
process in this province that you trumpet so loudly on every 
occasion you get, except when it comes time to get down to the 
negotiations. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll conclude by saying that we will be supporting 
the legislation although we are very, very disappointed to be put 
in the position of having to intervene into something that we 
believe we have no business intervening — the collective 
bargaining process. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think you will have to, and your government 
will have to, bear responsibility for what’s taken place here, and 
the IBEW workers I’m sure won’t forget. I’m sure the other 
union members in this province won’t forget, and I’m sure the 
people of Saskatchewan won’t forget that you put at risk the 
collective good of this province in terms of electrical supply. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
ministers, your officials, I’ve been listening with a great deal of 
interest to comments and dissertations with respect to the sad, 
sad reason that we had to be called back into this legislature to 
talk about a dictatorial move to force people back to work. 
 
People can’t understand what has happened to a government 
that was said to be caring not only for workers of this province 
but to people in this province who helped build this province 
and who are suffering now all the ill effects of the downturns in 
services, health, highways. The province just seems to be going 
to shambles and everybody keeps pointing blame, pointing 
fingers. It’s their fault or it’s their fault. 
 
Well what are we talking about here? I heard one of the 
members, one of the independent members earlier say that part 
of the problem here, part of the confusion is that people really 
don’t know what is going on because folks that are responsible 
spin things out so they can deflect the blame from the proper 
place. 
 
People are asking questions about how can we trust a 
government who cancels contracts, does things only to serve 
their own purposes. I guess part of the problem, and we keep 
hearing that . . . I’ve heard earlier in some of the dissertations 
that we have to be careful, we have to be fiscally responsible. 
Hey, that’s supported 100 per cent. Nobody’s asking for the lid 
to be blown off of anything. 
 
So what’s brought us to this stage? Once again there’s 
finger-pointing about whose fault it is that we’re in the situation 
we’re in. We forget what happened in the ’80s? Boy are we still 
living that down and how long will we be continuing to live that 
down, the mess that was created. We can’t forgive those people 
that mismanaged. I’ve heard mismanagement used so many, 
many times . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Those are the people 
that are talking mismanagement and yet that crew is the one that 
mismanaged this whole province in 19 . . . during the ’80s that 
we will be paying for forever. 
 
And the reason that we’re here, to talk about employees who are 
asking for consideration of salaries. I won’t make this lengthy. 
This is an important piece of legislation that needs to be dealt 
with. It won’t be lengthy but I do have just a few questions 

relating to the legislation, and I also want to point out that I will 
be proposing an amendment to this legislation at the appropriate 
time, and I’d like to send it over to the minister at this point, 
and a copy for the . . . for our chairperson. 
 
It’s not just a matter of money. It’s people who are . . . and I 
come from an area where people in agriculture are experiencing 
a serious, serious downturn. These very same people that are 
trying to eke out a living in their farming communities are also 
people who are looking to other sectors — other work sectors 
for employment or for some assurances for some comfort in 
their employment — to now find themselves in situations where 
it doesn’t matter where they go. They had the GRIP contracts 
cancelled. Now they can look to perhaps working in an 
organization where the government’s going to dictate. They’re 
going to take away all the collective bargaining rights and it’ll 
be government that dictates. 
 
I guess when I said that nobody really knows what this is all 
about or what might be entailed, I don’t have the facts to 
determine what would be fair in this case. So what is so wrong 
about opening up? I mean we talked about opening the books 
and letting people see. And I do believe and have confidence in 
responsible people, either he or she, who may determine under 
the circumstances and given the fiscal situation of this province 
that there are responsible, reasonable people that could sit down 
and take a look at and say, you know, maybe this is . . . How do 
we know they might just come along and say, after looking at 
both sides, after looking at and taking into consideration our 
situation — we have determined with, let’s see, very little or no 
increase in inflation over recent years and perhaps the outlook 
for recent years to come that the inflation rate will not exceed a 
great deal — maybe the offer is good. Maybe it will be a 
percentage point or two. Somebody keeps throwing this 12 per 
cent around as well, and I’m not sure where that has come from 
either. I think there was some difficulty in determining here in 
the House today where that 12.7 per cent or whatever came. I 
believe at one point there was a graph that showed that the 
workers in the province here were 12.7 below somewhere else. 
But does that necessarily mean that an arbitrator would sit down 
and say, oh yes? I like not to believe that. 
 
So all we’re asking for, what our amendment is going to ask 
for, is that something similar that took place in 1983 — and I 
know the members opposite were probably vehemently opposed 
to it. However, it was passed, as this legislation will be passed. 
There was back-to-work legislation however, with the inclusion 
of an arbitration clause. So I don’t know whether that’s totally 
out of the question. I would hope that you closely look at that 
amendment and deal with it accordingly. That’s all the people 
are asking for, is fairness. 
 
And there’s a great deal of anxiety out there, no question. 
There’s a great deal of anxiety by the public at large about 
what’s going to happen to our power. Right now when you look 
outside and it’s nice, nobody’s as concerned about it until 
something drastic happens. And let me just then ask this 
question. Why has the equipment deteriorated to the extent that 
apparently, or it seems to have, that it needs some urgent repair 
work? Is this something just routine or did it deteriorate to the 
extent that now we’re going to have a shortage of power? 
 
I can’t forget in 1992 when SaskPower said that there was 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

ample power for this province, and despite the fact that the 
government asked for submissions for some investigation for 
proposals for cogeneration operations, and the government took 
deposits and kept them, and then turned down any project and 
just scrapped the whole thing because there was ample power at 
that time. Well I guess in retrospect I would hope that the 
government’s thinking maybe we should have gone that route. 
It was only for a bit of power at the time but that might have 
grown to something that would now not have the people of this 
province faced with a potential disaster as far as power needs 
are concerned. 
 
Having said all that, my first question, Mr. Minister, is how can 
you amiably now force people back to work after you locked 
them out, after you kicked them out? How do you amiably sit 
down with these people and determine that they should go back 
to work and everything would just be great? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say to the 
member opposite that when he . . . first of all when he talks 
about the repair to the boilers which is a big part of what we’re 
talking about in terms of winter maintenance, it’s fair to say that 
this is routine maintenance that happens sometimes annually. 
 
Some of the projects on one of the main boilers is something 
that’s done on several-year rotation. And literally, not being an 
engineer or even having a great concept of how this works, I 
understand they cut the boiler open and go in and replace tonnes 
of tubing in order to make it work. 
 
And my understanding is that some of the product actually 
comes from your plant up in Melville. And so these are very 
integrated economies that would indicate, you know, that this 
work is not only needed to be done, but obviously the parts and 
pieces that go into parts of the boiler would come from your 
constituency. And I’m not saying all of it or even the lion’s 
share, but there are pieces that would be included. 
 
Having said that, when you talk about this piece of legislation, 
what we’re talking about the maintenance and operation of 
SaskPower Corporation, I don’t think one needs to look very far 
to see that the withdrawal of overtime, once the strike notice 
was given, led to problems of getting to the point where the 
ongoing maintenance could be done. The lockout is obviously a 
problem standing in the way. 
 
And so it’s a combination of things that at the end of the day 
you and I and I think members, why we’re here today, said 
because the system isn’t working between management and 
labour. Negotiations were at a loggerhead. They were 
deadlocked. Nobody was moving. Days were ticking by. 
 
And it finally came to the conclusion, based on the best advice 
we could from the engineers and people who run the power 
plants, that we were in growing desperate straits as it would 
come to the number of days that we would need in order to get 
this work order done before those coldest days in peak load that 
we were talking about earlier with the member from Kindersley 
and the member from Souris-Cannington. 
 
The fact of the matter is that there has to be and is great 
disappointment whenever the system of collective bargaining 
that we have come to know in this country and this province 

doesn’t work. And whether that’s federal Liberals legislating 
back post office workers at less than what was on the table last 
year or the year before . . . You can ask those workers what they 
thought of the Liberal government while they were being 
legislated back — as you say, against their will — at a rate in 
the legislation that was lower than what was on the table. It 
created huge difficulties. 
 
And obviously life goes on, but there is disappointment at every 
level. Are we disappointed that management . . . our 
management and our workers couldn’t come to a negotiated 
settlement? Obviously we are extremely disappointed. Do we 
take some responsibility? Obviously we do. Do you take some 
responsibility? Obviously you should because you’re part of the 
governance of the province. 
 
(1830) 
 
This is an issue that is hugely important, and the fact of using a 
legislated settlement remedy is something that no one, no one 
wants to do. I think even when the Devine government was 
doing it . . . although sometimes I wondered about the way they 
handled it. It almost seemed like they were enjoying treating 
workers like that and ripping apart labour legislation. One 
would argue whether this wasn’t being done out of spite or 
some philosophical reason. 
 
But I say to you, there are very, very few governments, whether 
it was Allan Blakeney or whether it was other governments 
across Canada . . . even the federal Liberals, I’d mention the 
member from Wood River, when they legislated the post office 
workers back . . . this is something should only be used when 
all other remedies fail. 
 
Nobody wants to do it, but the fact of the matter is with the 
oncoming winter, predictions of one of the coldest winters 
we’ve had, the fact of the matter is options had run out, and we 
had to come to the point where, if we were to keep the budget 
of the province intact, where if we were going to keep the plants 
in running order, it became obvious that we would need to do 
this. 
 
Now the member from Wood River hollers from his seat, but 
we’ll see how he votes on this Bill. The question is, the 
question is, if he is true to his sentiments, then he will be in his 
seat when the vote comes, not like many times, when he runs 
out the back door. 
 
So I say to the member opposite that this is a challenge for all 
of us, and one we don’t take lightly, and one that we don’t 
enjoy doing. But the fact of the matter is, under the 
circumstance, we believe it to be necessary. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you for that response. I guess it still 
distresses me that these types of heavy-handed tactics just 
poison the climate with collective bargaining situations, and 
that’s something that people are not very happy about. 
 
Do you think that perhaps now that it might have been a 
knee-jerk reaction to lock those people out at the time that you 
did, that SaskPower did? In retrospect was that a knee-jerk 
reaction? Might there have been some solution arrived at 
without going to that extent to lock people out of their work? 



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say to the member opposite first 
of all know that personally I didn’t make the decision to 
lockout. The way it works is the managers at the plant who said 
in the best interest of the maintenance of power decided to do 
the lockout. And so, just so you know, I suppose you might 
argue — although it would be a false argument because you’ve 
told us many times to stay out of the management of the plans 
— but you might say, and maybe that’s what you expected me 
to do as minister, to say when the managers were saying this is 
what we need to do to maintain power, you’re making the 
argument that I should have said to the managers, look I know 
more about the management of the plant than you do; don’t lock 
them out. 
 
But you would understand knowing your history how difficult 
that would be. If your managers and people on the site 
recommend that they lock out to maintain power and the 
politician says to them look, look, you know more than the 
people running the plants . . . can’t do that. 
 
Now would I wish that there had been no withdrawal of 
services, no strike notice, no lockout. Absolutely as deep as I 
can feel, I wish this would have went a different direction. I 
wish it would have gone differently. I wish overtime hadn’t 
been withdrawn. I wished there had been a settlement within 
mandate, and life had marched on the way it did with many of 
our unions, but the fact of the matter is it didn’t. 
 
And when your managers say that this is what we need to do in 
order to maintain power, I don’t think in your heart of hearts 
you really believe the politician should have said in a meeting, 
no you keep the doors open. And where would we be if 
something would have happened to the plant under those 
circumstances with overtime withdrawn where there would 
have been million dollars of damage, and I had made a political 
decision not to follow the managers. What would you have said 
then? Would you have said well you did the right thing because 
you injected yourself politically into your management team? 
Of course you wouldn’t have. 
 
So my only logical hope in these kind of circumstances is to do 
the best you can based on the information you have. The 
decision was made. I wish that overtime hadn’t been 
withdrawn, and lockouts hadn’t occurred. They have. We’re at 
this point, and I think it’s fair to say that none of us are very 
happy about being here having to bring this Bill through the 
House. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Well you’ve just indicated to me that confidence 
in people is a one-way street, that you lack the confidence in 
those people to continue meeting their responsibilities. They 
proved to us, they proved to us during the winter storm here just 
the recent past that they were there when needed. It’s you, sir. 
It’s SaskPower and perhaps you yourself that indicate to me 
now that you would not have had the confidence in those people 
that if something went haywire and you said there was a million 
dollar fiasco that you would get the blame because you stepped 
in. 
 
I guess if we’re talking about hypothetical situations and had 
something, had there been a disaster, who would you have 
blamed for that disaster having happened? Can you answer me 
that? 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think the question here is not who 
is to blame or who isn’t to blame. You just said when you 
started your comments, it’s a lot of blame floating around here, 
and now you say well who would you blame? I mean how can 
you ask a question of who I would blame? I don’t blame 
anyone. The fact of the matter is we’re in a situation where 
there was deadlock between our managers and our employees. 
Power has to continue on, even during that process. We still 
have to rely on our plant managers and people who do the work. 
 
You can’t go down there and manage the plants. I mean it’s just 
absurd to go down that street where you’re saying you should 
go. 
 
And the member from — I keep thinking from Shaunavon but 
— Wood River keeps hollering from his seat. And I wonder, 
sir, with your coaching, you could keep him quiet so you and I 
who are having a reasonable discussion could shut out that 
babbling that . . . I don’t know how you guys stand it. I don’t 
know how you stand it in your caucus because if he carries on 
like this constantly in your caucus, I don’t know how you can 
possibly tolerate it. 
 
But the fact of the matter is this, that the management at 
SaskPower and workers were at a deadlock to the point where 
the power supply for this winter was in jeopardy, and that’s 
why we’re here today. And I think you should think about what 
you said in your opening comments that there’s no sense 
blaming one side or the other or you blaming me or I blaming 
you about the circumstance. 
 
And is there need for healing and repair once we get this done? 
You’re darn right. And that’s got to be the highest priority of 
management, of the government, of the opposition: to heal the 
wounds that there will be after this kind of a circumstance. And 
I say again that’s true whether it’s the post office workers being 
legislated back by a Liberal government federally or the 
situation here. It’s unfortunate, but we’re going to do our very 
best to repair any damage that is done within management or in 
the union as a result of this conflict. 
 
Mr. Osika: — If the potential problems that we might still 
anticipate were as serious and severe as some folks here in this 
House have talked about today, the potential . . . and we all 
know in Saskatchewan there is potential for some horrendous 
weather and some terrible problems in the winter time. Those 
people offered an opportunity to resolve the whole issue, said 
hey listen, just make a commitment; we’ll take your word. You 
make a commitment to send this to arbitration. We’re right back 
on the job as if nothing happened. And that would have 
happened some time ago. We wouldn’t be going through all 
this. 
 
So I guess what I’m saying is that what people can’t quite 
understand that . . . and let’s not get back to this business of 
blowing the lid off. We have responsible people. We have to 
believe in some responsible people that may have been selected, 
okay, with agreement on both sides to sit down and open the 
books. You . . . great for opening the books to take a look at 
really where it’s at, where the province is at fiscally, and select 
responsible people to do the responsible thing in these kind of 
situations. 
 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2023 

Well you know I’m asked, what are you elected to do? Well 
certainly not to run roughshod over the people of this province 
and use heavy-handed tactics to cancel contracts and close 
hospitals and to create all kinds of problems for people. You are 
elected to look after the people of this province. 
 
So I guess we have a dilemma really, and we’ve got a solution 
to that, and that’s the amendment that I’ll be proposing when 
we get to later on in the legislation. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I haven’t 
heard here this afternoon and into the evening just where we’re 
at in terms of workers that may have actions against them at this 
time. I don’t see any protection for them in the legislation that’s 
before us here today. 
 
I can think of a few individuals, a couple of electricians, Rob 
Labensky, Scott Sears; an instrument technician, Wayne Hoste; 
some storekeepers, a couple of storekeepers, Pat Olheiser and 
Kevin Gellner. Are we, Mr. Chair, to take the government’s 
word opposite that there’s not going to be any actions on the 
part of SaskPower against these workers when this legislation 
goes through? 
 
We all know what the Premier’s word is worth on a lot of other 
issues in the past. I certainly am not comfortable with taking his 
word if he was sitting in that chair right now and giving me that 
commitment. So I certainly won’t take the word of some of his 
cabinet colleagues on it either. 
 
I’d like to know what sort of input did your Labour minister 
have into such a piece of legislation as we’ve got before us. 
Let’s see a memo from your Labour minister to cabinet on this 
issue. Let’s see that. 
 
What about the workers on social services, on welfare as a 
result of them being locked out? What does the Social Services 
minister have to say about that? Where is the memo to his 
cabinet colleagues about the impact on workers when they were 
locked out? 
 
Now the Premier doesn’t like hearing about this, but we’ve sat 
and listened to a lot of nonsense from the members next to us 
here all afternoon when they chose to avoid the real issues here. 
And that’s how unfair this particular legislation is to workers in 
this province, not just IBEW workers. We’re talking about 
workers in this province. 
 
And what are you going to do about that? Are you going to 
guarantee that these people have their jobs back when this 
legislation goes through? I’d like to hear what the minister has 
to say about that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, the member talks about the 
workers who were in a position of not going into the plants to 
work, and I think we’ve made it very clear and the Premier has 
been more than clear in saying that these workers would be 
paid. And while that may be an unusual position to take, I think 
it’s extremely fair because under the law and the Act, there 
really is no requirement to pay people who have been locked 
out. That’s management’s prerogative to do that, and the fact of 
the matter is they will be paid. 
 

So your argument that they need to go on welfare and make it 
sound like they didn’t have money during that period, first of all 
is inaccurate, and I think the other thing is inflammatory. But 
that doesn’t surprise me coming from the member opposite. 
 
As it would relate to non-discriminatory clause, we’ve also said 
that we would be dealing with that in the legislation. And I 
think the Minister of Justice made that clear in his comments 
although I had to step out for a moment. He gives me his 
speech, and I want to repeat because maybe the member didn’t 
hear it. But the government will ask SaskPower to agree to a 
non-discrimination clause in the collective agreement and the 
government will ask SaskPower to recall all workers affected 
by the dispute. 
 
So I’m saying to you when it comes to fairness on that issue, I 
think you’re way off base to try to fan flames that these people 
will be hard done by in terms of their ongoing salary while they 
were out of the plants. We’ve already said that they would be 
paid for that period of time. The non-discriminatory clause will 
be included. And we are also going to work with other issues 
where there are disputes with other members of the union 
during this period. And management has said that yes, they will 
sit down at the first opportunity to clear up those matters. 
 
(1845) 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Chair, I ask the minister here tonight if 
we could have assurances . . . and I’ve named some specific 
individuals. Can we have the assurances of your government 
that you will instruct SaskPower management to let these 
workers come back to work, or are you simply going to feed 
them to the lions? Are you going to turn them back over to 
SaskPower management? 
 
You touch the issue of back pay. We’ve heard the Premier, Mr. 
Chair, say that it’s a subject that, again, his government is 
prepared to turn over, I believe, to the SaskPower management 
to talk about. Again, you’re feeding the workers to the lions. 
We want your assurances if this legislation goes through that 
these certain things are going to happen. Your assurances that 
you will instruct SaskPower to pay the back-pay that the 
Premier has indicated he thinks is fair. And what about 
assurances for these workers that they have a job to go back to 
as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I say to the members opposite 
that we have made every attempt to work with this situation to 
be fair to the workers, to be fair to the taxpayers and the 
shareholders of the company, and obviously we will be. I mean, 
I understand your concern about all the workers, as are we. And 
I think to accuse other motives simply isn’t accurate and is 
unfair. 
 
But as it would relate to giving your best effort to deal with 
these in a very fair way, that I can do. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Chair, I’ve heard the minister talk earlier 
about . . . I think he suggested that the Liberals were 
irresponsible in some of our demands. He challenged us to find 
out or to show where the monies could come from to 
compensate these workers. He talks about having to keep the 
power on. He talks about getting the routine maintenance done. 



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

I’d just like to ask the minister, with respect to that . . . and I’ve 
heard a lot too of course before I go on about their so-called 
mandate that you’ve arrived at that everybody has to be living 
with. But I’ve got a little bit of information concerning a 
project. I think SaskPower calls it the Delta Project. And I think 
right now, and my understanding is you might have about two 
floors of the TD (Toronto Dominion) Bank Building on 
Hamilton Street devoted to a project called the Delta Project. 
 
And my understanding is that that might be just nothing more 
than a bunch of glorified computer software, and it might be a 
hundred million dollars plus that might already be devoted to 
the project. I’d like to know what sort of consultants you have 
hired to come in and work on this project. You’re flying people 
in from the United States on a fairly regular basis . . . is my 
understanding. Are you paying those consultants as much as 
this increase to your workers? 
 
And tell me, the Delta Project and the hundreds of millions that 
may eventually be expended on that project, how much power 
is that going to generate for the people of this province? And 
how is that fair to everybody in this province, workers of any 
group? 
 
You asked where we could find some money. I think a hundred 
million dollars is a fairly significant amount, even to 
yourselves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to say to 
the members opposite who take a bit of an unusual position 
when they say that first of all there should be no politics 
involved in the Crowns. 
 
Then the member from Thunder Creek stands in his place . . . 
stands in his place and says he has a novel idea of where to get 
some extra money. He’s got some novel ideas. He said he went 
in and he saw some computers and they’re just glorified — I 
wrote down here — glorified computers. 
 
Now just think of this as a modern-day party. Their idea to get 
some extra money is to go into all of the corporations — maybe 
tell Husky this in the big upgrader. I just went into their panel 
room the other day, and do you know what it’s full of? Do you 
know what it’s full of? A whole bunch of glorified computers 
that run this huge upgrading plant. Do you know what? If they 
got rid of those computers out of the upgrader, they could give 
their workers some extra money. 
 
Now surely the member from Melville could turn to his 
colleague and say, look, lay off of that because you’re just in 
the wrong century to be arguing that . . . to get rid of the 
computers to pay some extra salary to workers. Surely you’re 
not serious. Surely you’re not serious. That you could analyse 
the situation well enough — you who have some expertise in 
farming as I do — but that you have the audacity to say how 
much power are those computers making. Look! What are you 
talking about that the computers produce power? Surely you 
know more than that. Surely you know more than that. You’re 
going to get rid of the computers in the Power Corporation as a 
remedy to the situation. 
 
Let’s get serious about this debate. I mean we’ve been having a 
good debate, part philosophically. Your colleague from 

Melville raised some excellent points. And I’ll tell you the tag 
team, the tag team from Wood River, from Wood River and 
Thunder Creek, that tag team is the whiz kids of the Liberal 
Party. 
 
It’s no wonder that people are leaving your party in scads when 
the solution to an important issue of our Power Corporation is 
to sell the computers. Sell the computers he says. You could get 
some extra money there. But what about the trucks? Maybe we 
could sell the trucks and get some money. That’s even lower 
technology. What about the skid loaders? We could get rid of 
those, or the carriers that carry the coal to the plant. What about 
getting rid of those and getting some money? Look! Be serious. 
Getting rid of computers is not an option. It’s not an option. 
 
And I say if this is your opinion as a leading member of the 
Liberal Party, it’s going to be a long, long time before you ever 
form government because the people of the province will say to 
you and even my — not even, especially my 13-year-old — I’m 
going to take this clip home to him and show him. Because you 
know what will happen in his class tomorrow, they’ll debate 
this: that the power company should sell their computers 
because they don’t make any power you said. 
 
Look, computers don’t make power, we know that. But to try to 
run a power corporation without computers or an upgrader or a 
steel plant, look, give your head a shake. Let’s be serious about 
what we’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well Mr. Chair, the minister said a lot about 
nothing there, didn’t he? Mr. Minister, you can talk like that all 
you want. This isn’t a nonsensical argument here. We’re talking 
about significant monies being invested in computer software 
and there’s not a bit of that that’s going towards generating the 
power that you claim you can’t keep on in the province unless 
you legislate these workers back to work. 
 
You’re talking that we’re not going to have enough power to go 
around. You’re talking about we can’t get the routine 
maintenance done. How many hundreds of workers have you 
pulled off their jobs to go work on this project? How many 
hundreds of workers have you pulled off of their regular jobs to 
work on this project? 
 
If routine maintenance is a key; if we’re needing all of our 
resources put towards the task at hand which is making sure that 
the power system in the province is safe, then why are you 
expending these kinds of monies at this point in time? And how 
much more is going to end up going into this before it’s done? 
And isn’t that the real reason why you can’t afford to go to what 
was the fair approach, to the arbitrator, because you couldn’t 
have afforded to have done it in light of these sorts of projects 
that you have on the go right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I just want to say one thing in 
closing. If you’re saying that the maintenance workers from our 
Boundary dam are working on the computer project, I’m going 
to say, no they are not. So if you’re talking about maintenance 
and how these people have been pulled of maintenance in to 
work on this project, there are no maintenance workers pulled 
off the job to work on computers. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. Osika: — I move an amendment to: 
 

Amend Clause 7 of the printed Bill by deleting the entire 
clause including the title and replacing it with the 
following: 

 
And I could read that into the record. 
 

Extension of last collective agreement, appointment of 
arbitrator, and binding arbitration 

 
“7(1) Notwithstanding any other Act or law or any 
provision of the last collective bargaining agreement to the 
contrary, 

a) the terms of that agreement are extended to include 
the period commencing on January 1, 1998 and ending 
on the day on which a new or amended collective 
bargaining agreement is concluded in accordance with 
this Act; and 
(b) subject to subsection (2), the terms of that agreement 
shall be as agreed upon between the parties; 

 
(2) Where, 15 days after the coming into force of this Act, 
a new or amended collective bargaining agreement has not 
been concluded between the corporation and the union, the 
corporation and the union shall submit to final and binding 
arbitration in accordance with this Act. 

 
(3) Where the corporation and the union are required to 
submit to arbitration pursuant to sub-section (2), An 
independent arbitrator shall be appointed, who shall be, 
either: 

(a) A Judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench agreed upon 
by the corporation and the union, or 
(b) in the event the corporation and the union cannot 
agree on the appointment of the arbitrator, a Judge of the 
Court of Queen’s Bench appointed by the Minister of 
Labour. 

 
(4) The arbitrator appointed in accordance with sub-section 
(3) shall examine into and decide: 

(a) the matters for decision submitted to him in 
accordance with this Act; and 
(b) any other matters that appear to him to be necessary 
to be decided in order to render a decision. 

 
(5) In the event that the person appointed pursuant to 
subsection (3) is for any reason unable to act as arbitrator, 
the Minister of Labour may appoint another person to act 
as arbitrator pursuant to this Act in his (or her) place. 

 
(6) the Minister of Labour shall pay to the arbitrator any 
remuneration for services and allowances for travelling and 
other expenses incurred by him for the purposes of the 
arbitration in the amount that may be specified by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 
(7) Within five days after the appointment of the arbitrator 
pursuant to subsection (3), the corporation and the union 

shall each submit to the arbitrator a notice in writing 
setting forth the matters to be examined and decided by the 
arbitrator. 

 
(8) The arbitrator shall give full opportunity to the 
corporation and the union to present evidence, to make 
submissions and to be represented by counsel. 

 
(9) The arbitrator may, in his (or her) discretion, accept 
evidence of, or give consideration to: 

a) submissions respecting any proposal made by the 
corporation or the union to the other in bargaining 
collectively prior to the coming into force of this Act; 
(b) other collective bargaining agreements entered into 
in the electric power transmission and generation 
industries in Canada. 

 
(10) For the purposes of the arbitration, the arbitrator has 
all the powers of the commissioners pursuant to The Public 
Inquiries Act. 
 
(11) Where the corporation and the union have settled all 
matters set out in the notices received by the arbitrator 
pursuant to subsection (7) and have entered into a new or 
amended collective bargaining agreement, the arbitrator, 
on being so notified in writing by both the corporation and 
the union, shall discontinue the arbitration and shall notify 
the Minister of Labour of the agreement, and the 
arbitration is thereupon terminated. 
 
(12) Where the corporation and the union agree upon some 
of the matters set out in the notices received by the 
arbitrator pursuant to subsection (7) and the arbitrator is 
notified in writing by both the corporation and the union of 
the matters agreed upon, the arbitrator shall confine his 
decision to: 

(a) the matters set out in the notices that are not agreed 
upon; and 
(b) any other matters that appear to him to be necessary 
to be decided in order to render a decision. 
 

(13) The arbitrator shall, in respect of the matters set out in 
the notices received by him pursuant to subsection (7) 
upon which the corporation and the union have not agreed, 
render his decision in writing within one month after the 
hearing of the arbitration, or within any further period that 
the Minister of Labour may specify. 
 
(14) The decision of the arbitrator, in respect of any matter 
in dispute between the corporation and the union, may be 
made retroactive, in whole or in part, to January 1, 1998. 
 
(15) When the arbitrator has rendered his decision, he shall 
provide the Minister of Labour, the corporation and the 
union with a copy of his decision. 
 
(16) The corporation and the union shall each bear its own 
costs of the arbitration. 
 
(17) The Arbitration Act does not apply to an arbitration 
pursuant to this Act. 
 
(18) When the arbitrator has rendered his decision pursuant 



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 1998 

to this Act, the corporation and the union shall immediately 
conclude a new or amended collective bargaining 
agreement incorporating any terms and conditions that may 
be necessary to give full effect to the decision. 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I thank the hon. member for Melville 
for sharing this amendment to clause (7) with the table 
previously. 
 
I wish to draw to the hon. member’s attention that the 
amendment as proposed in clause 7, subsection (6), which 
begins with “The Minister of Labour shall pay . . .” contains a 
charge upon the public. 
 
Rule 36 states in part: 
 

Any vote, resolution, address or bill introduced in the 
Assembly for the appropriation of any part of the public 
revenue . . . shall be recommended to the Assembly by 
Message of the Lieutenant Governor before it is considered 
by the Assembly. 
 

Since the hon. member for Melville is not a member of 
Executive Council, and is incapable of securing a royal 
recommendation for this amendment, I must rule the 
amendment out of order. 
 
Why is the hon. member for Melville on his feet? 
 
(1900) 
 
Mr. Osika: — I then move, Mr. Chair: 
 

That that subsection be stricken from the amendment and 
the amendment be renumbered as read. 

 
The Deputy Chair: — The amendment has been ruled out of 
order and the debate will now continue on clause 7. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move the amended 
amendment and rather than read through the entire motion I 
would just like to point out that it would delete sub-paragraph 6 
on page 2 and replace that with: 
 

that person shall serve without remuneration. 
 

I so move. 
 
The division bells rang from 7:08 p.m. until 7:10 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 5 
 
Osika Hillson McPherson 
Aldridge McLane  
 

Nay — 34 
 
Romanow Calvert MacKinnon 
Lingenfelter Shillington Tchorzewski 
Johnson Upshall Kowalsky 
Crofford Van Mulligen Teichrob 

Bradley Koenker Sonntag 
Nilson Cline Serby 
Hamilton Junor Stanger 
Jess Wall Kasperski 
Ward Murray Thomson 
Krawetz Bjornerud D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
Heppner   
 
The Deputy Chair: — Clause seven, is that . . . Sorry, we have 
to bring back the officials. We’ll have to delay the procedures 
for a couple of moments. 
 
Order. Committee members I’ve just been informed that in the 
vote there’s a correction. It was 5 in favour as opposed to 7 in 
favour. Let the record be 5 in favour, 34 opposed. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 8 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 7:12 p.m. until 7:15 p.m. 
 
Clause 10 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 36 
 

Romanow Calvert MacKinnon 
Lingenfelter Shillington Tchorzewski 
Johnson Upshall Kowalsky 
Crofford Van Mulligen Teichrob 
Bradley Koenker Sonntag 
Nilson Cline Serby 
Hamilton Junor Stanger 
Jess Wall Kasperski 
Ward Murray Murrell 
Thomson Krawetz Bjornerud 
D’Autremont Boyd Draude 
Gantefoer Heppner Hillson 
 

Nays — 4 
 

Osika McPherson Aldridge 
McLane   
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1915) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Maintenance of Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation’s Operations Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 



October 19, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 2027 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 7:29 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 65 - The Maintenance of Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation’s Operations Act, 1998 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 7:31 p.m. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
move: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to a date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker upon the request of the government and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days’ notice if 
possible of such date and time. 

 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 7:32 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
 Deputy Speaker ..........................................................................................................................................................................1981 
 Romanow ....................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Pages 
  Deputy Speaker .......................................................................................................................................................................1981 
 Resignation of Member 
 Deputy Speaker ..........................................................................................................................................................................1981 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1981 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 Deputy Clerk...............................................................................................................................................................................1982 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Condolences 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1983 
 Housing Starts Increase 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1983 
 Condolences 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1983 
 Opening of Outlook Bridge 
  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1983 
 Welcome to Member from Saskatoon Eastview 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1984 
 YTV Series Filmed in Lumsden 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1984 
 SaskPower Negotiations 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1984 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskPower Management 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1984 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1985 
 Management Salaries at SaskPower 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1986 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1986 
 Labour Negotiations at SaskPower 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1987 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1987 
 Negotiations between Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1988 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1988 
 Power Supply in Saskatchewan 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1988 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1988 
 Purchasing Power from other Suppliers 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1989 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1989 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 65 — The Maintenance of Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s Operations Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1989 



 

SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 65  The Maintenance of Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s Operations Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1989 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1990 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1993 
  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................1994 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1995 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1997 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1998 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2003 
MOTIONS 
 Substitution of Names on Crown Corporations Committee 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2004 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 65  The Maintenance of Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s Operations Act, 1998 
  Nilson .............................................................................................................................................................................2004, 2010 
  Boyd ...............................................................................................................................................................................2004, 2015 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................2005 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2010 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................2015 
  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................2020, 2025 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2023 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 65 — The Maintenance of Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s Operations Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2026 
ROYAL ASSENT 
MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................2027 
 
 


