





























































Hansard: May 25, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1317 
 May 25, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to present petitions on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Lake Alma, Beaubier, Estevan 
areas of the province. I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, to present petitions as well to the 
Assembly, and the petitions are in regard to the drugs Copaxone 
and Betaseron and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the rigid 
requirements set to qualify for Betaseron and Copaxone 
coverage to ensure that all those who may benefit be 
covered under the provincial drug plan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitions are signed by numerous 
individuals from the communities of Wawota, Saskatoon, 
Maryfield, Kelso, Fairlight, Oxbow, actually throughout the 
majority of Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Rose Valley and 
the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition signed by people of this province. And I read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to put 
an immediate halt to all investments in foreign countries by 
all Saskatchewan corporations and instead invest Crown 
corporation profits in Saskatchewan. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to put 
an immediate halt to all investments in foreign countries by 
all Saskatchewan Crown corporations and instead invest 
Crown corporation profits in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

People that have signed this petition are from Kindersley and 
Smiley. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
this afternoon. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your. Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to relocate Highway 40 to east 
of the David Laird Campground in order to alleviate 
congestion at the entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 

Your petitioners this afternoon come from North Battleford. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
concerned that the many workers injured permanently through 
work-related accidents are not being covered by workmen’s 
compensation. They have legitimate workmen compensation 
claims and are denied or suspended at Saskatchewan taxpayers’ 
expense. Their prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to acknowledge the concerns of 
the taxpaying citizens by causing the government of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that absolute fairness and 
equitable treatment be given to those injured and disabled 
people and their families and be diligent in this most urgent 
matter. 
 

The petitioners are from Saskatoon, North Battleford, and 
Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take immediate action to 
address the long-standing concerns of northern people in 
regards to accessing quality health care, proper education 
and educational opportunities, affordable, quality housing, 
and most importantly, through meaningful, 
community-based economic development, access to quality 
jobs; 
 
and further, that this be accomplished with the proper 
infrastructure such as safe roads and affordable utilities 
being put in place to allow such economic development to 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

facilitate once and for all that our northern people join the 
rest of Saskatchewan in prosperity and social justice. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 
primarily from the city here. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present the following petition. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These folks, Mr. Speaker, come from the Golden Prairie 
community and a few from Red Deer, Alberta, and I’m happy 
to present them today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to fund the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; to save the Plains Health Centre; 
to call an independent public inquiry into Channel Lake; to 
halt all investments in foreign countries by Saskatchewan 
Crown corporations; to take action in health, education, 
jobs, homes, and roads to allow the North to join the rest of 
Saskatchewan; to take immediate action to ensure the 
survival of the Carrot River hospital. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased today to introduce to the House a group of people 
who are assembled with us today, located in your gallery, who 
form a committee to promote awareness and recognition of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Saskatchewan’s 
human rights protection. I’ll have more to say about this 
announcement under ministerial statements. 
 
Seated in your gallery then are the members of Saskatchewan’s 
committee. This is a tad dangerous because if my list isn’t 
complete it’ll become painfully apparent, but I’m going to ask 
them to stand as I introduce them: the chairperson, Donna Scott, 
chief commissioner and director of the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Commission. 
 
The committee members include: Deborah Parker-Loewen, the 
Children’s Advocate; Barbara Tomkins, the Ombudsman; Gail 
Quinney, communications officer with Women’s Secretariat; 
Joel Janow, co-director of the public legal education 
association; Sandra Folkins, director; Department of 

Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs; Madeleine 
Robertson, Crown counsel, Department of Justice; Gary Brown, 
senior policy analyst, Department of Labour; Tara Truemner, 
senior policy analyst, Department of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are four members of the committee who 
were unable to attend today. They are Michael Jackson, chief of 
protocol; Malcolm French of the Department of Education; 
Donalda Ford, assistant director of the Human Rights 
Commission; and Margaret Morrissette of the Department of 
Municipal Government. 
 
We have Ethna Coneghan, multi-cultural research counsel, 
who’s sitting in for Margeret. And finally we have Olivia 
Shumski, who’s the anniversary’s coordinator. 
 
I’ll close this, Mr. Speaker, by simply saying that these are 
people who have added to an already very full workload — 
these are all public servants — who have added to a very full 
workload to attempt to give leadership to Saskatchewan to 
recognize this very important event. 
 
I would hope all members would be particularly generous in not 
only recognizing them but thanking them for this work. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have two separate introductions to make today. I would like to 
introduce to the House through you and to you, 45 grade 7 to 9 
students from Saltcoats Junior High and their two teachers, Fred 
Nicholson and Grant Bjornerud. 
 
I would ask the members of the legislature to welcome them 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Also in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you Brenda Bod and Laverne Bod. Brenda’s 
from Macoun, who had a very close call on 47 Highway and 
has brought her problem in to us today. 
 
I would ask the members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
One of the reasons we celebrate things like the anniversaries of 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is so that young 
people might understand the importance that these events have 
played in world history. 
 
I am therefore particularly pleased today to be able to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of the Assembly, 44 
students who are in grade 12 at Robert Usher Collegiate, sitting 
in the west gallery. They’re accompanied by their teachers, 
Rick Ast and Todd Millen. I'll be pleased to be meeting with 
these students at the conclusion of the routine proceedings. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming these 
students. 
 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 
you and to members of the Assembly, a business person from 
Prince Albert. Lennie Myer is with Green Tree Fencing up in 
the Prince Alberta area. I just wanted to recognize Lennie 
seated in your gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
Sask. Party I’d too like to welcome the people here that are the 
committee promoting awareness of the declaration of human 
rights. And I think it’s also particularly important that we have 
a lot of young people with us today that can understand what’s 
happened in the world in the past and ensure that some of those 
things don’t happen again. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of the 
Liberal caucus to welcome our special guests this afternoon and 
pay tribute to them and to all those working in our province to 
combat racism and to work for a brighter future of racial 
cooperation. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Regional Economic Development Authority Network 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
was pleased this morning to accompany the Minister of 
Economic and Co-operative Development to a ceremony 
announcing more good economic news here in the city of 
Regina, this one being of particular benefit to our local area. 
 
The mayor of Regina, board members of the Regina Economic 
Development Authority, and representatives of the rural 
municipality of Sherwood announced that they are joining 
together to become part of a provincial regional economic 
development authority network. 
 
This is the 26th REDA (regional economic development 
authority) established in our province, Mr. Speaker, and it 
further strengthens our network from border to border to border, 
to quote our friends from the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation). And as the minister said this morning, and I quote 
her: 
 

The provincial government will continue to work in 
partnership with REDAs to ensure all communities in 
Saskatchewan can participate in our strong and thriving 
economy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, REDAs are a uniquely Saskatchewan creation. 
They allow municipal governments, community organizations, 
private businesses, and cooperatives to pool their resources in 
order to encourage job creation and investment in their 
particular region. 
 
Cooperation promoting development — that’s why this 

government, Mr. Speaker, increased our investment in REDAs 
by $2 million this year. And that’s why I am pleased to 
welcome the Regina REDA into our provincial REDA network. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Anniversary of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
marked the 125th anniversary of the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) in Canada. The RCMP is an integral part of 
our history. As Canadians, we often characterize our nation as a 
very friendly, civilized, and law-abiding country. I truly believe 
that the strong presence of the RCMP during Canada’s early 
years and their continued commitment to law and order has 
played a very significant role in Canada’s development. 
 
Over the years the RCMP have served us in many ways. They 
have provided services from horseback patrolling the prairie, 
military services in the Boer War, World Wars I and II, and on 
peacekeeping duty in strife-torn countries such as Haiti or 
Bosnia. 
 
While times and circumstances have changed and the RCMP no 
longer patrol the plains on horseback, the commitment to the 
people remains as strong as ever. In all areas, the RCMP serve 
Canadians with distinction and honour. 
 
In the last 125 years, a strong trust relationship has grown 
between the RCMP and the Canadian people. We have learned 
to work together to build better communities and better people. 
Our local RCMP officers have become an important and 
welcome part of Saskatchewan’s communities, not only through 
their work, but also through their participation in many 
community events. 
 
Today I would ask all members to join me in congratulating and 
thanking all past and present Saskatchewan RCMP officers for 
125 years of dedicated service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Caring Canadian Award Recipient 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to inform 
the Assembly today that a constituent of Regina Elphinstone is 
a recipient of one of Canada’s top honours. Former RCMP 
officer, Tony Brezinski, of Regina is one of the latest recipients 
of the Governor General’s Caring Canadian Award. 
 
Mr. Brezinski, who retired from the RCMP in 1978, has proven 
himself as a dedicated volunteer and has worked hard to 
improve the quality of life for members of our community. He 
received this honour in part for his significant contribution to 
the people with impaired vision. 
 
He is a volunteer with the Lion’s Club sight and service 
program and he’s involved in raising money for the new 
Canadian National Institute for the Blind building. And he has 
also coached a blind golfer at national and international 
tournaments. Mr. Brezinski also heads the RCMP Veterans 
Association Committee that provides breakfast for Regina’s 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

needy people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tony Brezinski represents the kind of 
commitment and sincerity Saskatchewan volunteers are famous 
for. On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I’m sure all 
members of the Assembly, I want to thank him for his hard 
work on behalf of the people of Elphinstone, and congratulate 
him on receiving this Governor General’s award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Channel Lake Inquiry 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 20, the 
Leader-Post correctly reported that I see the need for a police 
and law society investigation into some of the matters 
surrounding Channel Lake. 
 
Unfortunately the report linked my request to the testimony of 
Michael Hurst. Specifically the report suggested I was calling 
for a police investigation into Mr. Hurst’s failure to send copies 
of all sale documents to the corporate solicitor of SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, forgetting to send documents to SaskPower as he 
was supposed to, is arguably professional negligence. However, 
professional negligence is an insurance issue, not a criminal 
issue. It is not something which would be investigated by the 
police or even by the law society for that matter. 
 
I did suggest in my comments some of the areas into which I 
believe a police investigation is warranted. The alleged 
professional negligence of Michael Hurst is not one of them. 
Thank you. 
 

National Missing Children’s Day 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May has been 
declared Missing Children’s month in Saskatchewan. And 
today is National Missing Children’s Day across Canada. 
 
This is a time to increase the public’s awareness of missing 
children throughout our province and all of this country. Each 
year in Saskatchewan the police register as missing more than 
2,000 children under the age of 18. The majority are runaways, 
some of whom run away more than once. The largest number of 
runaways are between the age of 14 and 15. 
 
Today green ribbons are distributed through local merchants by 
Child Find Saskatchewan. Child Find Saskatchewan is 
observing its seventh annual Green Ribbon of Hope campaign. 
This green ribbon symbolizes the hope that all missing children 
will return safely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ribbon is a symbol which our government is 
backing up with action. In this year’s budget we dedicated 
nearly $35 million to new programs and services for children, 
youth, and families under the child action plan. 
 
We are working together with Saskatchewan people to build a 
strong future for our children and our communities. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Residents of Buffalo Narrows Recognized 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
honour the contributions of an entire family in my constituency. 
The Shatilla family, residents of Buffalo Narrows, have been 
dedicated in their efforts to community growth. Their 
commitment to the development in the North is an inspiration 
and motivation to all citizens of Buffalo Narrows. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they had a supper for the Shatilla family in 
appreciation of their many years of service to the community 
and to the residents of Buffalo Narrows. And the northern 
village of Buffalo Narrows presented a plaque, and the plaque 
read: 
 

The citizens of Buffalo Narrows recognize and appreciate 
the Shatilla family for many acts of kindness and 
generosity. Your family’s dedication and commitment to 
our community growth and development is an inspiration 
and motivation to all the community residents. Presented 
by the mayor and council of the northern village of Buffalo 
Narrows, April 18, 1998. 

 
And just in closing, Mr. Speaker, to basically indicate the 
amount of commitment these people have to the community of 
Buffalo Narrows, I just quickly read a quick excerpt of Mr. 
Shatilla’s, Alex, note: 
 

A & F Store was started by Alex and Flora Shatilla in the 
building you know today as Chilly Willy’s or the old liquor 
store. I went bankrupt with $40,000 of uncollected credit 
on the books. I had a great teacher for feeling sorry for 
people — my father Kelly. I couldn’t see anyone stuck. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very important to recognize the contributions 
of people such as Alex and Flora Shatilla from Buffalo 
Narrows. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Constituent Chosen for Sask-Cam Team 
 

Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Scott Linnell, a 
constituent and a neighbour of mine from Hafford, has made 
hockey’s Sask-Cam team. 
 
Scott, a grade 4 student at Hafford Central School, tried out for 
the team in Saskatoon in April. Twenty-five hundred kids were 
at the try-outs, but 38 made the team. Scott beat all other 
10-year-old boys for a spot on the team in two days of try-outs, 
which displayed puck handling, skating, and other skills. 
 
Scott now gets to play in three major tournaments this summer 
as a member of the Sask-Cam team. The first will be in 
Winnipeg on July 1, the second in Saskatoon on July 17 and 18, 
and the final tournament will be in the States in August. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Scott on this very 
significant sporting accomplishment and wish him and the 
Sask-Cam team the best of luck this summer. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

Globe Theatre Artistic Director Leaves Regina 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, tonight at Government 
House in Regina an event both sad and celebratory is taking 
place. The friends of Susan Ferley are gathering to honour her 
eight years as artistic director of the Globe Theatre here in 
Regina — eight years that have been marked by dramatic 
excellence, community involvement, and yes, even financial 
stability. 
 
We regret that she is leaving this post but we are delighted with 
what she has done on her watch in less than a decade. She has 
set her mark high but she has left her successor, Ruth Smillie, 
with admirable resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 18th century British writer, Samuel Johnson, 
said that, quote, “the stage but echoes back the public voice.” 
And I suppose if I had to choose from among Susan Ferley’s 
many talents, it would be her ability to both reflect and 
challenge her public. 
 
A public theatre in a small centre is in a difficult position. It 
can’t be too far out front, too avant-garde, or it will lose its 
audience. It can’t be too conservative or it will lose its soul. 
Susan Ferley walked this tightrope admirably. 
 
As well, she introduced new playwrights, new actors, and new 
techniques in her not-so-new facility. A good example is this 
season’s new production of Peter Pan with flying actors. And 
she also gave me my first and, thankfully, only opportunity to 
act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all members and all theatre-goers in 
Regina and across the province will join me in wishing Susan 
well in her future. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Highways Funding 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Highways. 
 
Madam Minister, on Friday morning, Brenda Bod of Macoun 
was driving south on Highway 47 near Boundary dam. As she 
went by an oncoming semi, one of the semi’s wheels kicked up 
a 10-pound, foot-long chunk of asphalt. It bounced off the hood 
of Brenda’s car, crashed through her windshield, bent her 
steering wheel, and then struck her — 10 pounds of pavement, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Brenda seriously injured her shoulder. It will be two months 
before she knows if the damage to her shoulder is permanent. 
 
Madam Minister, Brenda Bod is lucky she wasn’t killed, thanks 
to your crumbling highways. Madam Minister, we now have a 
chunk of highway flying through people’s windshields. What 
are you going to do about it? What are you going to do to fix 
Highway 47 and every other highway in Saskatchewan that is 

becoming a life-threatening hazard? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — First of all, to respond to that question. 
We have put out our strategy; we’re increasing dollars . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now I want to remind the 
hon. minister to direct her answers and the questions of course 
through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I was saying, in our recent budget we have increased the 
funding to be spent on our highways and road system right 
across this province. And that includes our rural highway 
system, our provincial, our national highway system, and 
certainly we’ve got to spend dollars in maintaining, upgrading, 
and doing as much repair work as we possibly can on our 
system. 
 
Any kind of an accident like this we certainly, as I have said 
previously too, if it was a fault of the highways not being 
marked and so on, we’ll certainly look at that on an individual 
basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve had many people bring highway complaints to 
our office. This is the first time we’ve actually had someone 
bring the piece of highway to our office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order, order. 
Order! Order. The hon. member . . . Order! The hon. member 
will recognize of course that it is improper in parliamentary 
debate to use exhibits and I’ll ask the page to remove the item 
as an exhibit from the Assembly. 
 
Order! Order. Order. Members will come to order on both sides 
of the House. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
how would you like to have that piece of pavement coming at 
you at 60 miles an hour. Madam Minister, Brenda wants to 
know if she is going to be compensated for the damage caused 
by this flying chunk of your highway. Are you going to pay for 
her vehicle deductible? Are you going to compensate her for 
lost time at work due to her injury? Are you going to reimburse 
her for the cost of leasing a vehicle while hers is being repaired 
and other costs she may incur? 
 
Madam Minister, are you going to take responsibility for the 
damage caused by this piece of flying pavement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, any time there is an 
accident or anything that happens on the highways, of course 
we take it; it’s of grave concern to us. And we take a great deal 
of concern on people being safe driving on our roads. And 
certainly we will meet with Brenda and look over all the 
circumstances of this type of an accident. And as we have said 
before . . . we’ll look at these on an individual basis. 
 
One thing I do want to say is that when we were aware of this 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

accident, that they have gone out to check this piece and 
certainly of doing the repair work that needs to be done on that 
stretch of road, and certainly that we would meet with Brenda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Madam 
Minister, there’s spots like that all over this province. That’s 
only one spot. Madam Minister, as you could see, there’s a big 
chunk of Highway 47 missing. 
 
The problem is there’s even a bigger chunk missing from the 
$250 million commitment to highway funding. In fact in the 
first two years you’re already $82 million short. That’s why our 
highways are in such terrible condition. That’s why more and 
more accidents are occurring as a direct result, on NDP (New 
Democratic Party) highways. And that’s why a big chunk of 47 
Highway came flying through Brenda Bod’s windshield on 
Friday morning. 
 
Madam Minister, it’s time to stop making excuses and start 
fixing the problem. When are you going to live up to your own 
commitment for highway funding? Or does someone have to be 
killed with a chunk of flying highway before something gets 
done? 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said 
. . . we will be looking at this individual case, but we are living 
up to our commitment. We added dollars last year. We’ve 
added more dollars this year. And we certainly take it seriously, 
the stress and the pressure on our system. And certainly we’ve 
got to repair the potholes on our system. 
 
But I want to tell you, the member opposite of me, the largest 
pothole in this province was the responsibility of your 
administration that allowed a debt in which we spent $2 million 
a day on interest that we still can’t get that pothole fixed. And 
what I’ve said, we’ve put $2.5 billion. It’s a commitment that 
we’ve made over . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! Now when the 
questioner asks the question, doesn’t necessarily need the 
assistance of colleagues to respond to the answers that’s being 
provided. And the hon. minister doesn’t need the assistance of 
colleagues to be shouting across the floor to assist with the 
answer either. 
 
I’ll give the hon. minister a few more seconds to wrap up her 
response. 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This province 
has made a commitment to highways and transportation both in 
planning and in dollars. But as I was saying, the biggest pothole 
that has been very difficult for us to fix right across this 
province, is the $16 billion debt, the $2 million a day of interest 
in fixing that pothole. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Memo to Regina Health District Employees 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just one 
comment about the highways. One thing the minister fails to 

recognize is the fact they still aren’t living up to the 1991 
budget. And this is seven years later, they haven’t caught up. 
 
But my question to the Minister of Health, is for the Minister of 
Health today. Mr. Minister, where does the CEO (chief 
executive officer) of the Regina District Health Board come off 
telling Plains hospital employees to get a life? Where does he 
come off trying to put a gag order on people for exercising their 
legitimate right to protest your decision to close the Plains 
hospital. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government is spending hundreds of 
thousands of dollars to tell everyone what a great decision this 
is; at the same time, your puppet health board is trying to 
muzzle anyone who would dare speak against the closure of the 
Plains. It’s no wonder Cuba sees Saskatchewan as a shining 
example of how to run a government. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you spoken to the CEO of the Regina Health 
Board about this memo, and why is the Regina District Health 
Board putting a gag order on its employees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, just in response to the 
member’s question. The department has had a discussion with 
the district health board. And the information that’s come back 
to my office through the department is that the memo that Mr. 
Bartlett had in fact crafted . . . or drafted was in fact a document 
that he had prepared to his management forum, which had a 
great deal of detail in it apart from the comment that you make, 
or the quotation that you make. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that in the 
performance of their duties, one of the issues that the district 
health board of course does is it employs a CEO that’s 
responsible for the day-to-day overseeing and management of 
their activities. 
 
So I say to the member opposite that as much as I’ve had the 
discussion with the Regina District Health Board, the 
responsibilities of the day-to-day management of the district 
health board really are in the purview of the district board and 
not with the minister’s office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again to 
the minister. The CEO of the Regina Health Board suggests that 
efforts to save the Plains are bad for morale and stressful on 
employees. Mr. Minister, the only thing that’s bad for morale is 
your decision to close the Plains, and the stress is due to nurses 
being overworked due to your government’s mismanagement of 
the health care system. 
 
But your decision is not only stressful and bad for morale for 
Plains employees, it’s stressful and bad for morale for all the 
people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan who are served by 
the Plains hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of putting a gag order on employees who 
are raising legitimate concerns about the health crisis in this 
province, why don’t you start listening to what they’re telling 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

you. When are you going to get a life and reverse your decision 
to close the Plains? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on a number of 
occasions I’ve been on my feet during the session and 
responding to the member opposite as to the reasons for why 
the Plains Health Centre decision was made, when it was made 
in 1993, and the decision about the eventual moving of those 
facilities to both the Pasqua and the General. And the member 
knows full well all of the rationale that goes along with that. 
 
But I say to the member opposite that rather than busily going 
out to the meetings across the province, which you have been as 
well, and then going to the podium and beating up — beating 
up — on the health system that we have today, of which you in 
part were responsible, my good friend, in terms of taking 
money out of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ pockets and putting it 
into areas that have benefited individuals. 
 
As a Conservative I say to you, you need to stop fearmongering 
around the province. What you need to do is assist in the 
development of health reform in the way in which 
Saskatchewan is a leader — is a leader — and that there are 
other parts of the country today that are coming here and are 
modelling their development around the Saskatchewan health 
care model. 
 
Why don’t you get onside and make that statement in terms of 
growing health care as opposed to dismantling it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, one final question to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, Plains employees aren’t the only ones facing a 
gag order. So are your own back-bench MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly). 
 
For four weeks the Saskatchewan Party has been calling for a 
free vote on the future of the Plains hospital. For four weeks 
you have blocked that request. Why? What are you afraid of? 
 
If this is such a sound decision, why not let your MLAs stand in 
their place and vote? Or are you afraid that some of your MLAs 
might vote to save the Plains if you were to lift the gag order? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well first I want to say to the member 
opposite that there is a sense of collegiality on this side of the 
House, that’s true, which would be something that would be 
brand-new to your vocabulary. Because there’s not much 
collegiality in terms of what happens on your side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — But I say to the member opposite that the 
decision about the closure of the Plains Health Centre was made 
in 1993. It was made by the district health board. It was made 
after three studies in fact were undertaken. 
 
And I want to say to you that there was a free vote. There was a 

free vote, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan in 1995. Everybody in 
Saskatchewan went to the polls in 1995 and made a decision 
about which party they wanted to ensure that the health care 
system grew, sustained itself and maintained itself. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan picked the NDP Party to 
continue to ensure that health care in this province is 
maintained and sustained and will never, Mr. Speaker, and will 
never in this province pick the Saskatchewan Tories to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Now the question period can proceed in a 
much more orderly manner without members shouting at one 
another from across the floor. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
recent years we have seen the government’s hand-picked 
political friends assume key management positions in our health 
districts. Some have used their authority to try and put gag 
orders on health care workers to keep them from speaking out 
about problems in the health care system. 
 
A less-than-subtle memo has been circulated at the Plains 
Health Centre in recent weeks suggesting if employees don’t 
have a life, they should get one and get one soon. My 
question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, is this 
memo a veiled threat aiming at intimidating employees from 
attending the Liberal opposition’s Save the Plains rally on 
Friday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you 
and the member opposite that I’m absolutely astounded — 
astounded — by that member’s comment, because just not 
more than six months ago I was in the northern part of 
Saskatchewan and we established two northern health 
districts, which is the first — first — occasion ever in this 
country where you have individuals who are taking 
responsibility for the management and direction of a health 
system. 
 
And on that health . . . and on those two health boards, Mr. 
Speaker, we have aboriginal people who serve on it, we have 
Metis people who serve on it, which is precedential. 
 
And you got the member opposite now standing up saying 
that he doesn’t believe and doesn’t support that individuals, 
who are elected and appointed to district health boards, who 
are of a local flavour or of aboriginal nature in his part of 
Canada and Saskatchewan saying that they can’t make those 
kinds of decisions and choices. 
 
And I say to you, you ought to be ashamed of yourself as the 
member from northern Saskatchewan to be making that 
comment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This city isn’t the 
only community in which threats are being levelled. In the 
Living Sky District a note is attached to pay stubs of nurses 



1324 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

indicating all matters related to clients’ care and the operation 
of health care facilities is to remain confidential. 
 
It goes on to read that anyone not following these rules faces 
discipline up to and including job loss — up to and including 
job loss. The situation apparently has gotten so bad that the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses has felt it necessary to replace 
the head of the nurses’ local in the district to protect her. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you aware of these threats and do you 
support these kinds of tactics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite 
that two weeks ago I was in the Living Sky District and I met 
with the nurses’ associations and the nurses in that area and 
we had a long discussion about this very issue. And the 
rationale that the district health board has provided, which by 
and large has satisfied the nurses organizations and 
associations in that area, is that there was some concern about 
information that was being provided around the 
confidentiality of a person’s health record. 
 
And the information that was put in the insert by the district 
health board was to state to employees — all employees — who 
would have access to confidential information that they need to 
be a lot more cautious and careful in the disbursement of 
individual information on people. And I say to you that’s the 
context in which that information flowed out of the Living Sky 
Health District. And I say to you, you need to be fully informed 
on that process and I’m glad to provide that for you today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Nurses and doctors 
are speaking out because they want to know what is wrong with 
our health care system. These front-line health care workers see 
it every day on the front lines. Care-givers in Living Sky 
District know that they’ll be left with minimal service. They 
also fear that the next step is the closure of more hospitals in 
their district, just as those in Carrot River are now experiencing. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to listen to what our 
front-line people have to say. When are you going to start 
defending them instead of supporting these attacks on them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the 
member has been since January, but I want to say to him that 
there have been a number of occasions in the province where 
he’s had an opportunity to learn and hear about what’s 
happening in the health care system and its growth. 
 
Today, Mr. Member, and Mr. Speaker, we have more services 
that are being provided to Saskatchewan people than in the 
history of our province, more services with more dollars that are 
being provided to Saskatchewan people across the province. 
 
Just a couple of days ago we introduced 200 more nursing 
positions to the province of Saskatchewan. It’s a commitment 
that we make. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — In January of this year, we signed a 

brand-new contract with physicians who say to us that there’ll 
be additional physicians practising in Saskatchewan, and that’s 
already the case. We’ve just completed, Mr. Member, just 
recently, the new rural initiatives health program bringing 
physicians to Saskatchewan —26 new physicians practising in 
Saskatchewan since January 1. 
 
And I say to you, that this government hasn’t been listening! 
You need to pay attention to what’s happening across the 
province in terms of growth in health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Environmental Concerns 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Cameco, another company in 
which the Government of Saskatchewan has a significant 
investment, has been involved apparently in a major spill of 
sodium cyanide into a river in Kyrgyzstan. Twenty tonnes of 
sodium cyanide was spilled according to reports; 180 people 
have been made sick; fish and cattle have died; and the 
Kyrgyzstan government is threatening to sue us. 
 
This government has showed a total lack of interest in 
environmental issues, whether it is the logging of the Nemeiben 
forest or the Saskatchewan NDP’s boycott of the international 
conference on global warming at Kyoto. 
 
What does the minister know about the sodium cyanide spill in 
Kyrgyzstan? The NDP says it is opposed to the MAI 
(multilateral agreement on investment) because they fear it will 
weaken environmental controls. What are you doing to ensure 
that companies owned by the Saskatchewan government are 
following environmental controls in their work around the 
world? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I find 
it somewhat passing strange the type of question that’s covered 
a number of issues here. 
 
Certainly the environment is very important. The environment 
is very important to the people of Saskatchewan as well as this 
government. We are doing a number of things in Saskatchewan 
here, all the way from recycling scrap tires, used oil, to uranium 
mining with some of the most stringent controls in the world. 
 
And certainly the catastrophe that did happen in Europe with 
that spill is very serious, and certainly something that we want 
to ensure that does not help again . . . does not happen again. 
And if we can help the federal government or anyone else to 
enhance environmental protection and quality, we are prepared 
to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Environment says he is concerned. But I would suggest putting 
this government in charge of environmental issues is like 
putting Colonel Sanders in charge of the chicken coop. 
 
What about the Nemeiben forest? You are about to approve 
logging of the Nemeiben forest with no consultation of the 
people of the North, the people of Missinipe. This is a major 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

area for ecotourism — the prime canoeing location in the 
province. If the Nemeiben forest is logged that will be 
destroyed for ecotourism. 
 
Will you give an undertaking today that there will be no logging 
of the Nemeiben forest until environmental study has been done 
and until the people of the North, especially the people of 
Missinipe, have been consulted about whether or not they want 
their lands destroyed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With 
regards to the Nemeiben forest, I would like to inform the 
House that I had the pleasure of meeting with representatives 
already last week on this issue and we’ll be meeting again with 
them this week, both up in La Ronge 
 
And the Nemeiben forest is not going to be cut down tomorrow 
or this year or even next year. What we will be looking at is a 
land use plan and certainly before any logging does occur, and a 
full-fledged, environmental impact assessment will be 
conducted. 
 
The news that is out there now, we are just seeing if there’s any 
interest from a contractor to do any logging in the area. There is 
much work to be done before any permits will be issued for 
logging. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporation Foreign Investments 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Jack Messer told us recently that 
the Crown corporations belong to the people of Saskatchewan. 
This is the same line that the government has been peddling. 
 
But then of course he turned right around and said that if 
anyone is nervous about the globe-trotting boondoggles of this 
government they are, as he put it, “immature and parochial”. 
 
My question for the Minister of Crown Investments. The new 
Act before this House will destroy and even lessen public 
accountability instead of strengthening it. 
 
Are you prepared for there to be a full debate in this House and 
in the province before there are any more foreign investments 
by our Crowns in equity positions? Or do you take the position 
that we are immature and parochial if we get nervous about 
Guyana, about the Chicago cable company, about Channel 
Lake, and all the other problems we’ve had with foreign 
investments that have had little scrutiny? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the members 
opposite as it relates to the working of the Crowns in the 
province of Saskatchewan, there has been a huge amount of 
work done in studying the Crowns, the support for the Crowns, 
changes that might or should be made. 
 
An extensive review, Mr. Speaker, was done in 1996. The then 
minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), the member from Rosetown, was very, very 
much involved in a very integral way in the study and process 
that went on. Many meetings were held throughout the 
province. 

And the results are clear and you have those results — that the 
public of Saskatchewan is extremely proud of the investments 
that they have made through their governments, all 
governments historically, all the way back, Mr. Speaker, to 
1901, even before Saskatchewan was a province, when 
creameries and hail insurance companies were set up because 
there was no one else to do the work. That’s why still over 65 
per cent of the people in the province support Crowns. 
 
For that member opposite to stand here today and to try to 
belittle the men and women and programs that have been built 
in this province does a disservice to you, sir, and to the men and 
women of the province who have built the Crown corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Advertising 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for SaskPower. Mr. Minister, you can 
always tell when the NDP is getting whacked on their Crown 
corporations — when they start spending taxpayers’ money 
telling us what a great job they’re doing. Health department did 
it to the tune of 600,000. Now on the same page, judging from 
the barrage of feel-good ads in the provincial papers, 
SaskPower’s decided to get into the game as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, the past couple of weeks we’ve seen quarter-page 
full-colour ads in the Star-Phoenix, in the Leader-Post, and 
other newspapers telling us that SaskPower creates electricity. 
Mr. Minister, what a relief. Our SaskPower can actually 
generate electricity. 
 
And then I’ll read one line from the ad, Mr. Minister, and it 
goes as follows: “SaskPower . . . (is) constantly finding new 
ways to charge progress in business and industry.” Well if that 
isn’t something exciting, SaskPower can charge everyone in 
this province for progress. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you how much of the taxpayers’ money is 
being wasted so the NDP can feel better about their disastrous 
management of Channel Lake and SaskPower? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite, and whether Tories or Liberals, you can see 
their approach and that is that they would like to sell off, Mr. 
Speaker, the Crown corporations. That’s their policy. But I 
want to say that they should know . . . And speaking of getting 
whacked, when that party got whacked on the head by the 
people of Saskatchewan in 1991 because of their policy on 
Crown corporations, they still haven’t forgot . . . they still 
haven’t forgot that their ill-fated attempt to privatize the Crown 
corporations failed and got them defeated. They’re still back 
there. They’re still back there in the good old days trying to 
re-fight the 1991 campaign about privatization. 
 
I say to the member opposite, on one hand he says the Crowns 
have to communicate more. When they communicate about 
farm safety, about natural gas installation, they get a little goofy 
and the start yelling and hollering from their seats. But I say, 
Mr. Speaker, that they should remember history. They lost the 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

battle on privatization. They got whacked real bad in 1991. 
They should apologize for trying to privatize and maybe then 
the people of the province would start to forgive them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order! Order! The question period has ended 
and I’ve recognized the Provincial Secretary for ministerial 
statements. Order! But I suspect . . . Order. But I suspect a good 
part of the House didn’t even hear him being recognized and I’ll 
ask for the cooperation of the House in order to hear the 
statement by the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier 
today I introduced a group of people located in your gallery 
who will form a committee to promote awareness and 
recognition of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and 
Saskatchewan’s remarkable role in human rights protections 
and the enshrinement of these rights in legislation in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1998 marks the 50th anniversary of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the United Nations on 
December 10, 1948. The committee assembled here with us 
today have been working over the course of the last five months 
and will continue to work throughout 1998 to support and 
participate in activities to commemorate this important 
anniversary. 
 
December 10, 1998 marks 50 years since the signing of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, a document drafted by 
a Canadian, John Peters Humphrey. The declaration has 
influenced the development of human rights legislation across 
Canada and around the world. Indeed, one of Canada’s most 
distinguished diplomats, Lester Pearson, then Minister of 
Municipal Affairs . . . then Minister of External Affairs, also 
played a key role in promoting the concept of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights in the United Nations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has always been a leader in human 
rights protection. These pioneering efforts in human rights 
ensure that everyone in Saskatchewan enjoys the right to 
freedom of conscience, expression, association, and the right to 
freedom from discrimination. 
 
It is particularly appropriate that the people of Saskatchewan 
participate in this historic event. One of the early initiatives of 
the Douglas government was the passing of The Saskatchewan 
Bill of Rights Act, which went into effect May 1, 1947, some 
18 months before the passage of the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights. 
 
The Act was the first such Bill of Rights in North America, and 
it was a pivotal advance in Canada’s growing role as a world 
leader in the promotion of human rights and, I might add, a 
forerunner of the United Nations declaration. 
 
It’s particularly appropriate therefore that Saskatchewan mark 

this important anniversary. To this end, Mr. Speaker, the 
mandate of the Saskatchewan Committee on Human Rights is 
that the committee will act as a catalyst and a coordinator for 
human rights observances in Saskatchewan and will increase 
awareness of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and of 
human rights in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in honour of the 50th anniversary, government 
agencies, non-profit groups, community organizations, and 
individuals are planning many special conferences, artistic 
events, publications, and meetings throughout 1998. Much is 
being done already but much more needs to be done to promote 
awareness and recognition of the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights and Saskatchewan’s early and astonishing role in 
the early days of this movement. 
 
To this end, Mr. Speaker, I thank the committee for their work 
and encourage all Saskatchewan people to take advantage of 
this opportunity to acknowledge human rights advancements 
but not to forget that there is still much more to be done as we 
work together to ensure that the fundamental rights to which all 
people are entitled are ensured. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we look around 
the world I think we very much appreciate living in countries 
and parts of the world that have a high standard of living, and 
especially countries that have rights and freedoms for their 
people. And I think Canada’s very definitely one of those places 
and so is Saskatchewan. And I think we need to sort of also 
remember that it was John Diefenbaker that brought in the 
Canadian Bill of Rights. So this province has always been in a 
position of leadership. 
 
However, there’s one particular line that I believe was 
mentioned that I’d like to underline and restate, and that is: but 
not to forget there is still much more to be done as we work 
together. I don’t think we can say in this province that we’ve 
come to the end of dealing with human rights, that we have 
achieved it totally — we most definitely haven’t. 
 
And I think in Saskatchewan we have to address the fact that in 
many cases we’re getting carried away with dealing with what 
is politically correct, probably more often than what is involved 
in human rights. And I think this morning in the question 
period, Mr. Speaker, when we find that the nurses, rather than 
being allowed to get involved in public affairs are told to get a 
life, truly lets not forget in Saskatchewan there’s still much to 
be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today’s an important day to recognize for all people. I always 
welcome an opportunity to recognize progress. In fact 
tremendous progress has been made towards the fundamental 
rights to which all people are entitled in Saskatchewan. 
 
But one must also recognize the challenges that still have to be 
overcome. The Universal Declaration Of Human Rights was 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

adopted by the United Nations December 10, 1948, the first 
comprehensive agreement amongst nations as to the specific 
rights and freedoms of all human beings. 
 
The universal declaration sets a common standard of 
achievement for all peoples and all nations. It provides all 
people with civil, political, economic, social, and cultural rights. 
The declaration has been the foundation for international law as 
well as for constitutions and regulations of many countries as 
all countries are obligated to apply its principles. 
 
Saskatchewan people are working towards the full 
implementation of the declaration of human rights. It is very 
important that all individuals have the right to be treated fairly 
and respectfully. It is equally important for each and every one 
of us to defend those rights for ourselves and for those unable to 
defend themselves. 
 
Achieving the full implementation of the declaration of human 
rights requires active participation and support of all citizens. It 
troubles me, Mr. Speaker, that in the current day there are still 
people in society, members of this Assembly, an opposition 
party that do not see the need for the Human Rights 
Commission. I would ask that members of the Assembly and all 
Saskatchewan people take time to get involved in activities that 
strengthen respect for human rights. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we are honoured with the presence of a 
committee of the province’s most dedicated people committed 
to furthering human rights initiatives and increasing the 
awareness of human rights in Saskatchewan. 
 
On behalf of myself and my colleagues, thank you for your 
contributions, for making our society a better place to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, by leave of 
the Assembly, to address the ministerial statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m really 
very pleased to be able to speak to the ministerial statement 
today and to commend the committee on the work that they will 
be doing to promote awareness and recognition of the 
declaration of human rights. 
 
I think that this is a really important work but I think, without a 
follow-up and a dedication on the part of government to 
certainly look at the human rights that are being violated within 
our own province, committees can be of no help. 
 
We have seen within the last few weeks the widows, widowers 
experiencing a revocation of their deceased partner’s pensions. 
They say that they are being discriminated against because they 
have married again. I think we need to look at that fully, clearly, 
and honourably; I think the government too . . . 
 
I’d just like to make the mention that it’s important to 
understand that the charter of rights for children as put forward 
by the UN (United Nations) is something else that we need to 
look at more closely in this province, especially for the children 

that are suffering under the atrocity of child prostitution. 
 
And so yes, much more does need to be done. We need to look 
at those two issues precisely as soon as possible. And I once 
again wish you all the very best in your committee and I 
commend you for the work you’re doing. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — In keeping with the tradition of a 
government that is open, accountable, and responsible, Mr. 
Speaker, I hereby submit the answer to question 65. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 65 is tabled. 
 
(1430) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — Before we get to that I would ask the minister to 
introduce his officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, thank you. This afternoon I 
have with me basically the same team of individuals that were 
here on Friday. I’m sorry that you missed that opportunity for 
me to introduce them all, Mr. Chair. I could do that for your 
benefit, but on your direction only add two of the new people 
who are the replacements that are here today. 
 
Lauren Donnelly, who is the project director for acute and 
emergency services branch, is here today replacing Mr. Krahn. 
And Karen Gibbons, the director of program support unit, 
community care branch, is here today. Other than that, the 
officials that were here last week are joining me again this 
afternoon, Mr. Chair. 
 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Chairman, 
it’s a pleasure to have your presence back in the Assembly. I 
trust you had an enjoyable time in England, following up on a 
trip I think Mr. Speaker would have enjoyed to have been on, 
but I’m sure that the information that you’ve gleaned will 
certainly assist you in your role as Chair of this committee, and 
we certainly welcome you back. 
 
Mr. Minister, a couple of questions that have come to my 
attention in regards to just some specific personal areas. One of 
the issues I’d like to talk about for just a moment today, and 
that goes in regards to the petition that was presented earlier on 
about the drugs Copaxone and Betaseron for MS sufferers. 
 
Received a letter from a Deb Smyth at Wawota who indicates 
for a number of years her MS has been in remission, was 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

pleased to see the government finally move to put Betaseron 
and Copaxone on the drug plan; however is disturbed by the 
fact that there are such stringent requirements in order to qualify 
to receive the drugs. And I just want to read for you a paragraph 
out of the letter that she has presented. 
 
But she talks about the fact that while here MS was in 
remission, one day she all of a sudden found herself with her 
eyes not focusing, her legs not really wanting to work, hard in 
getting her arms to move, and all of the symptoms of MS. And 
this is the paragraph I want to share out of the letter. It says: 
 

Mr. Serby, this is where the rules have to bend. There 
should not be laws, as you try to state. This is a disease, we 
know little about, but, if there is something that will stop it 
in any way, please make it only fair, make this only 
between the doctor and (the) patient. So far we have no 
cure, but we may have a stop for recurring lapps. Please 
help the ones with this disease (take) the drugs. You and 
your gov’t may have put the drug on the plan, but let it be 
available to all that need it now. 
 

And, Mr. Minister, I understand there are very strident 
restrictions in place in regards to the availability of Copaxone 
and Betaseron. And I think you can appreciate, Mr. Minister, 
that what Deb Smyth is saying here, while she understood that 
not everyone who is suffering with MS may qualify, and while 
she was in remission she didn’t see the need for the drug, but 
now that it’s really flared up she really feels it’s an area . . . that 
she should have access to it. 
 
I think you can appreciate, if you really sat down and just met 
with MS (multiple sclerosis) sufferers, Mr. Minister, you’d get 
a better understanding of exactly what this disease does to 
individuals. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you can respond to this 
question and the fact why we have such stringent limitations on 
the usage of Betaseron or Copaxone for MS sufferers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you. Mr. Chair, to the member. 
I want to say first and foremost that over the last several months 
in the debate and discussion around the importance of the two 
drugs — Betaseron and Copaxone — for MS sufferers, we have 
had an opportunity and personally to receive a fair bit of 
education on the benefits that some of these drugs might 
provide, or these two drugs would provide for people who are 
infected by MS. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that I have a very 
personal understanding of the effects that this drug has on 
individuals and family, having been very much associated with 
a family member for many years who had the disease, that isn’t 
with us today. And so I want to share with you that the 
closeness of the understanding and magnitude that this 
particular disease disables individuals and families is, as you’ve 
shared, very difficult — very difficult. 
 
And so I’ll share with you on the issue that this is a difficult 
time for families that have this disease that they live with. To 
say to you that the criteria that today we use in Saskatchewan is 
not unlike or similar and very much the same as that that’s 
being used today in the four other provinces that in fact . . . or 

three other provinces that have MS as part of their drug 
program. 
 
And when we established our criteria and panel, we took the 
criteria that was already in place and implemented it here and 
used that criteria then to assist us in making determinations of 
who in fact would be the best benefactor of the two drugs that 
we’ve insured. 
 
To say further that in respect to the panel, we felt that it would 
be important to have on the panel people who would in fact be 
involved in the process of actually diagnosing people, who 
might be the front-line individuals, like a general practitioner or 
GP and then a specialist — and so the panel is involved — and 
a nurse, a pharmacist. 
 
And these people on a daily basis, or every couple of weeks . . . 
sorry, every couple of weeks, review the applications that come 
in and then apply the very basic criteria that is similar to what 
we have across the country in the other three provinces. 
 
And that criteria really talks about relapsing and remitting MS, 
whether they’ve had two attacks in the last two years or whether 
or not they’re ambulatory for at least 100 metres. 
 
Now when that information arrives at the panel’s disposal, what 
they do is they examine it along with the criteria that physicians 
or specialists might provide. And in some cases it’s very 
detailed; in other cases it’s very, very skimpy. And if the panel 
isn’t comfortable with the data or the information they have, 
they resubmit a request to the specialist that’s making a referral 
or the general practitioner that’s making the referral and try to 
get broader information on it. 
 
Now we’ve had a couple of instances in the province where in 
fact the committee or the panel itself has sent an individual for 
yet another opinion. So it’s almost as though you might have an 
appeal process where they might then refer the person to yet 
another . . . or a second opinion, of which they’ve done in a 
couple of occasions to try to strengthen the decisions in which 
the panel was charged with making. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I guess another question and a 
follow-up. What we’ve basically done, even though we’ve put 
Betaseron and Copaxone on the drug plan, the facts are, Mr. 
Minister, even for individuals who have to face the use of these 
drugs and the fact that they’re on the drug plan does not mean 
that they still are not a financial drain and a burden to 
individuals who use the drugs because of the $1,700 deductible 
and then the percentage you pay after that. At least I haven’t 
understood . . . I’m not aware of the fact that there are any 
changes so the drug totally is covered for these individuals. 
 
But for people suffering with MS, Mr. Minister, what you’re 
basically saying is while Copaxone and Betaseron may have a 
positive effect, you’re basically saying to all MS sufferers, 
unless you’ve reached a degree where you basically are losing a 
lot of your mobility, you do not qualify for the use of the drug. 
 
I guess what I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, is when we 
talk about the two drugs and we talk about having so . . . 
attaining a level of decreased mobility before you qualify, are 
we basically saying the drugs have a limitation in their ability to 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

assist patients? Or if patients were to take the drug earlier, 
would that give them more quality of life before they reach such 
a debilitated stage of development of the MS in their bodies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — To your last question first, Mr. Chair, I 
want to say to the member opposite that as you know, that prior 
to the decision being made in Saskatchewan regarding the 
insuring of Betaseron and Copaxone, there was a very long and 
charged debate on really what is the value that this drug 
provides to individuals who are in fact MS sufferers. And the 
drug is only beneficial to a very small target group with a 
population of whom are infected . . . or affected — I’m sorry —
by the disease of MS. And that’s the rationale and the reason for 
why you don’t have it universally covered across the country; 
where today you have four provinces that by and large insure in 
a variety of different ways the drug Betaseron yet not 
Copaxone, in a couple of provinces that in fact are in fact 
insuring the drugs. 
 
And so to some degree, the medical jury is still out on whether 
or not there are full benefits, or the type of benefits that people 
receive from these two drugs. 
 
Now in Saskatchewan a part of the initiative of establishing the 
panel is that you could start to track more fully the individuals 
who in fact are being served by the two drugs, to get a better 
appreciation of what value they’re actually providing — what 
the value of the drugs are providing in terms of enhancing the 
quality of life for individuals. 
 
In respect to the level of payment that people today are assisted 
by, it really does depend, as you noted, on what their income 
base is; and if in fact it provides additional hardship for family 
or individuals, they can apply for special support. 
 
And clearly what’s happened here is that you have a large range 
of what the actual contributions are that people might be 
making in terms of supplying the medication for themselves. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think you can appreciate the 
fact — or, Mr. Chairman, to the minister — can appreciate the 
fact that anyone who has symptoms of MS, they’re going to 
look for anything that may assist them in overcoming some of 
the difficulties that are associated with MS especially as it 
progresses in their bodies. 
 
Mr. Minister, above and beyond the drugs Betaseron and 
Copaxone, is the department doing anything or any research 
into natural herbs and medicines that may be available, or 
whether dietary forms that groups have come up with or 
suggestions . . . Is there any research in that area and any 
assistance given if people choose to go on a plan of natural 
herbs? 
 
While we’ve got Betaseron and Copaxone covered under the 
drug plan, some people have found that certainly they have 
received or felt they’ve received solid assistance through natural 
herbs — but those are fairly expensive as well. 
 
So I guess my question to you is, what is the department doing 
right now, the Department of Health, in regards to looking at 

other alternatives that might be useful in stemming the 
debilitating disease of MS in patients? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — This is, Mr. Chair, a real good question 
that the member raises, because recently, as you know, there 
has been a great deal of discussion at the national level about 
the importance of the national pharmacare program in Canada 
and the value and importance of looking at the pharmacare 
program that in fact could enhance the level of services that 
Canadians could receive. 
 
And as a Saskatchewan Health minister, we’ve advanced your 
notion as well, our thoughts as well, that there needs to be some 
examination of what kinds of alternate drugs we might use in 
terms of enhancing the quality of life that people might receive. 
As you know, we are seeing more and more on a daily basis, the 
increased cost of drugs. And in this province of course, we’ve 
established a panel that looks at the high-cost drugs. But I say to 
you that it is really the responsibility of the federal government, 
as it relates to the Food and Drug Act, for us to ask them to 
examine those processes. 
 
And as you asked the question, I share with you that we too 
have been saying, as the team of professional Health ministers 
across the nation, that we need to do a broad examination of 
that. 
 
The federal government is leading that because of course any 
time that you have a drug that makes itself available to the 
market-place, it has to go through a very scrutinous exercise of 
which the federal government needs to provide the approval. 
 
But in respect specifically to your question as to what we’re 
doing with alternate medications, alternate drugs, we have that 
on the table as well and are working in partnership with the 
federal government to try to look at which procedures . . . or 
which drugs might in fact be more beneficial along the way. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. So as I 
understand it from your comments in regards to the drugs 
Copaxone, Betaseron, and specifically to the question that Deb 
Smyth has indicated, nothing has changed. Basically she would 
go to her family physician, the family physician, or she would 
make application for the drugs; then there’s a panel that would 
assess whether or not they feel she qualifies for that drug. 
 
And if they say no, then what does she do, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well as you well know, in Canada we 
have what we call the health protection branch, it’s what I’ve 
alluded to earlier. And once the health protection branch, of 
course — and it’s responsible for the regulation of drugs in the 
country — and once they’ve in fact provided that approval, then 
what would happen is that that particular job would make its 
way, in the case of Saskatchewan, onto the formulary 
committee. 
 
Then the formulary committee, which is made up of a vast array 
of professionals, health professionals, pharmaceutical people, 
who would then look at the efficacy of a particular drug and 
fully provide an examination of it in respect to the value that it 
would provide within the system — and it would be the 
Department of Health and my dependence on the evaluation of 



1330 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

that particular drug. And if in fact a recommendation were 
made that it should be part of the formulary, then in fact it 
would be included as a drug that would be covered in a variety 
of different fashions. 
 
Otherwise it would be left off . . . otherwise it’s left off the 
formulary and the individual would, if in fact it was prescribed, 
would need to assume the responsibility of using it but also 
having the full cost of having that medication administered. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in regards 
to the costs of drugs — and certainly Betaseron and Copaxone 
are two drugs that are fairly expensive — I’d like to ask, I 
guess, what exactly has your department been doing recently to 
address the cost of drugs? 
 
I understand if I’m correct — and you can correct me — that 
the drug patent law certainly has created, I would have to 
suggest, an unlevel playing field whereby the fact that when 
new drugs come on, there’s a number of years before any other 
generic drug is made available on the system. Which means it’s 
almost like a closed system that allows companies to just gouge 
the consumers when it comes those drugs. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, in the past while what is your department 
been doing to address that? While we talk of two drugs for MS 
patients, we talk about drugs for all patients of actually any type 
of disease in the province, some drugs are much more 
expensive than the other drugs. What have you been doing as a 
province and as a department to address this concern? 
 
And I realize it’s a federal issue, but I think it needs to be raised 
and it needs to be looked at very seriously. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, we like 
you recognize the growing concern about the number of 
high-cost drugs that are making their way, you know, into the 
market-place today. And of course some of them, as we talked 
earlier about Betaseron and Copaxone, the medical community 
is still out in terms of what value some of those drugs might be 
providing. 
 
And on a daily basis today Canadians are confronted, and 
Canadian governments and provincial governments not only in 
Saskatchewan, are confronted with the issue of how is it that 
into the future we’re going to be able to provide some kinds of 
semblance of coverage for high-cost drugs that have value in 
terms of the service to people. 
 
And in Saskatchewan, when you ask what we’re doing, we 
established in or about November I think of last year what we 
call a task force on high-cost drugs. This task force, I expect, 
will be reporting near the end of June, which is the time line 
that we’ve given them. And it was early November in which we 
established a task force. 
 
And the membership on that particular task force, I might just 
read for you because it may be important: Dr. Stewart 
MacMillan is the Chair — Dr. Ralph Nilson and Dr. Tom 
Wilson, Dr. Bruce Schnell, Ms. Tenny Carter, and Ms. Honey 
Deglau. 
 
And so the terms of reference for that committee are really 

three, and they’re to review what improvements might be 
appropriate to the way government evaluates new 
pharmaceuticals, including bringing a greater transparency to 
the process; secondly, to review the implications of providing 
coverage for new drugs on the scope of the Saskatchewan drug 
plan; and finally to review what action Saskatchewan should 
take in the months to come at the federal/provincial level, 
including approaches on the national pharmacare program 
which I talked about earlier. 
 
Because we’re raising at the national level — and did when the 
pharmacare conference was in fact in Saskatchewan — the 
importance of having a national strategy in dealing with the 
growing concern about the cost of drugs and the value that these 
high-cost drugs might be providing for Canadians across the 
piece . . . there has not been a meeting of health ministers to 
date of which we’ve been able to get the pharmacare issue on 
the agenda. 
 
We’ve been, as you know, very much preoccupied with the 
work around blood and have not have an opportunity to sort of 
fully debrief on the work that came out of the pharmacare 
conference, although much of that analysis of what the 
conference tried to achieve and the outcomes of it are for our 
disposal today as health ministers, but have not yet been able to 
debrief on fully. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, a question related to the 
last time we had Health up in estimates in the Assembly and 
that’s in regard to the cost of acute care beds. At that time, 
you’d indicated that it varies due to the centre and regional or 
local . . . I wonder if that information is available, if you’ve had 
a chance to put it together, and if you could send me some 
information in regards to that please, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I have for the member some of 
the information that he’s asked us about. And the range that we 
talked about, because we weren’t clear, but the range from base 
hospitals is about $627 per day, then moving downward to 
regional hospitals, large community hospitals, and community 
hospitals to 307 per day. So the range is about $307 per day to 
$627 per day. 
 
And certainly we would be more than happy to make this 
information available to you. We’ll send it across so that you 
have access to it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that and I 
thank you for it. Mr. Minister, there’s quite a variance. If I 
understand correctly, just from the comments you made in 
regarding that number . . . and from base community hospitals a 
substantial difference — can you explain exactly what the 
difference is? 
 
And I guess what we’re looking at, and I would suggest to you, 
that if some of our smaller centres with lower costs can operate 
those acute care beds, if as we discussed on Friday last, the 
facts are . . . after an operation is completed, if there could be 
some post-op recovery out in some of the local centres, what 
kind of a savings would that bring to the department. And not 
just the savings, but also the fact that we’d open up beds in 
large base hospitals to allow for more surgeries to take place. 
 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well first, when you look at the cost of a 
base hospital, we need to take into account that in those 
facilities of course you have a high number of specialists today 
that are practising; you have a large team or component of 
individuals who are support staff in the system — nurses, 
people who are operating diagnostic equipment — so there is a 
large, large range of individuals who are involved in that 
system. 
 
And that of course increases the level of costs in those facilities. 
And as you move to the smaller facilities that we’ve highlighted 
for you, because many of those specialties don’t exist there and 
the level of expertise — if I might use that — at the health level 
aren’t part of those systems. And so accordingly you see a 
reduced rate. 
 
The question about whether or not you can move some of those 
highly specialized services to other parts of the province, I think 
is a discussion that . . . or a question that begs some discussion. 
Clearly in our approach we’re looking, as we talked last week, 
about the importance of providing some of those services at the 
regional levels because today they’re there anyway. Some of 
that’s being done. 
 
Clearly we’re not going to be able to do some of those 
procedures. I mean, today when somebody needs a kidney 
transplant, we’ll expect that that will only be achieved likely in 
this province in one location. Today it’s being done in 
Saskatoon and conceivably I can’t ever imagine that we’ll ever 
see those procedures in a province our size being done 
anywhere else. Nor, in my opinion, should we be supporting 
that to happen in other parts of the province, for those kinds of 
highly specialized . . . 
 
Today we do a great deal of heart surgery in the two large 
centres of Saskatoon and Regina. You need to have very 
specialized equipment at hand, and you need to have the 
individuals who can perform those kinds of procedures. And 
best, in my opinion, for those kinds of things to occur in the 
larger centres of the province where your can provide centres of 
excellence for them. 
 
And today we’re having some discussions with our neighbours 
to the east and west of us, because often it is difficult to attract 
somebody who is very highly qualified to perform some 
procedures. And as a result of that, we have reciprocal 
agreements with provinces. And those discussions are going on 
today where we might start building centres of excellence 
taking into account, for example, the prairie provinces. 
 
And more specific I would suggest to you that there are some 
things we can do in some of the regional centres across the 
province or the larger community hospitals. Part of the 
discussion with the medical community, when we signed our 
contract with them this year, was the fact that we are going to 
work together in partnership in recruiting more physicians to 
the province, more specialities to the province. 
 
And some of those we’re going to try and work at placing, 
either directly or assisting in having them work directly in some 
of the larger communities across the province, and/or using 
their itinerant abilities to come to larger communities and 
provide some of those services. 

(1500) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, when we’re looking 
at the numbers here, and while I appreciate the comments 
you’re making about the fact that we don’t expect — I don’t 
think Saskatchewan residents as well expect a lot of procedures 
outside of the base or the regional centres. I think certainly the 
regional centres can play a major role in a number of 
procedures. But I think when it comes to some of the 
post-operative care . . . and I guess that’s one of the questions 
that I have thrown at me from some of even our local 
community facilities where there are beds available and you do 
have the quality of care. 
 
Now that doesn’t mean you move a patient out shortly after an 
operation. But when a patient is at the point where it’s basically 
just some observatory care to make sure that there aren’t any 
major complications that would arise, where they could be 
moved for that two or three-day extended period of care, it 
would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that you’re not really putting 
on more staff. You do have the staff in a lot of the community 
hospitals already that can provide that care. 
 
And it would only, I think it would enhance a role of the 
community health facilities plus it would be a savings to the 
department that could be used for further surgeries as well as 
opening up beds in the base or regional hospitals for patients 
who are on waiting-lists, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I think that is an area we could certainly look at. And I 
would certainly recommend that the department take a look at 
this. I think for too long we’ve been working at pushing people 
into the large urban centres. And on many occasions we’ve shut 
down local community centres because we say they’re not 
efficient — there isn’t a role for them. 
 
I think there is a role that can be played. What I’m suggesting 
. . . I’m not suggesting here we start opening up a lot of beds 
outside of the large urban centres, but I do believe that there is a 
role that some of the community facilities out there can still 
play in the delivery of health care and also enhance the 
opportunity for the base and the regional centres to meet the 
needs that are being pressed upon them as a result of the 
unavailability of beds and the waiting-lists that arise as a result 
of that. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would certainly ask you to take a serious 
look and ask your department to start looking at Saskatchewan 
as a broad base of health care versus just the large urban 
centres. And I’ll await your response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, to the member, that 
clearly we have been examining sort of the broad compendium 
or continuum of what we need within the health care system of 
which, as you’ve identified, a full understanding and 
appreciation of the variety of different roles that can be played 
across the piece. Which includes, when you’re talking about 
acute care services, the kinds of services that today you can find 
in a tertiary centre. The kinds of services that you can find in 
the large regional hospital and larger community hospitals and 
certainly community hospitals across the way. 
 
And so our effort within the department has been, as you’ve 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

suggested, to look very carefully at how in fact we can be a 
partner or a player in assisting the district health boards and 
redefining what some of those roles are. 
 
And then, in partnership, and concert with the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association because it’s critical today, as you know, to 
have the physicians involved in the process. Not only from the 
point of view of assisting in developing strategy or the 
planning, but also there needs to be a very active campaign to 
ensure that you have adequate physicians that you can employ 
within the system. 
 
Because along the way we realize that many people believe that 
big is better. And we have seen from rural Saskatchewan as you 
have and I have, a significant gravitation to the larger centres 
for your services. Only because there is a sense to some degree 
that there’s a greater level of comfort if you go to a facility to 
— like a Saskatoon or Regina for a procedure, you have a large 
team of specialities around you — a large team of support staff. 
And as a result of that you’re seeing that kind of gravitation to 
the larger centres. 
 
So our effort as you’ve suggested and I’ve indicated in a 
previous discussion that we’ve had here, is that we’re looking at 
how we might be able to team with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association; provided some initiatives over the last two budgets 
to see if we can direct some of our funding and energy into 
growing some of the services at the rural level in particular, as 
you’ve highlighted. And at the same time, developing some 
additional resources in home care, long-term care, respite care, 
palliative care, because we need all of those services in order to 
ensure that people are well served across the province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome to 
your officials, Mr. Minister. I had an opportunity to ask a few 
questions the other day and I have a few different issues to 
discuss today. 
 
But first of all, I was wondering if you’d had an opportunity to 
discuss the issue of the CCT (certified combined technician) 
person in Rose Valley. I had a call this morning from the CEO 
of Pasqua Health District and also a member of the town 
council in Rose Valley, who are concerned about this position, 
and wondering at the grandfathering clause . . . if opportunity is 
available so that they can keep their health centre open 24 hours 
a day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the member, 
we’ve had some discussion within the department around your 
individual issue that you raised with me and the department has 
had some discussions now with what I’ve indicated to you 
would be a decision that the association by and large has to take 
responsibility for, the professional association. 
 
Because when we talk about the ability to grandfather in, that 
process of course was established when the CCT program was 
enriched in the province. And the opportunities for falling 
within that time frame or venue would have passed for this 
particular individual that you and I talked about. And of course 
the association now has made a number of . . . there are a 
number of expectations that this person would need to meet in 
order for her to practice in the community again. 
 

Now our discussions are ongoing and we’ve not completed that 
process as I might inform you. But we hope that we’ll have that 
done in the next short while. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then I guess that I 
can tell the people that are waiting for a phone call or who are 
perhaps watching this right now is that in the next few days 
there will be a decision made as to whether this individual will 
be allowed to work, as she has for the last 15 years, in that 
position. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What I want to say, Mr. Chair, is that just 
to make sure you and I both understand who makes this 
decision, the Saskatchewan Association of Medical Radiation 
Technologists, which is the short . . . sort of the acronym for 
that is SAMRT, or to be certified combined technicians, it is 
really they who will be making the decision as to whether or not 
they will provide whatever opportunities might be there for this 
individual to be involved in, to allow her to practise and at the 
same time to provide the additional enrichment that she would 
need to in order to meet the certification standards through 
practices of CCT (certified combined technicians). 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, I 
have . . . I will just advise the community then that probably in 
a short time someone will come to you with that decision and 
hopefully it’s something that will be beneficial not only to the 
individual but also to the town of Rose Valley. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a number of questions about Parkinson’s 
and I’m wondering what . . . I understand that Saskatchewan 
has a high number of people who have this condition, perhaps 
the highest percentage per capita of any place in Canada and 
perhaps even the world. I’m wondering if there’s been any . . . 
if the government is working with any of the companies to 
encourage some of the studies to be done. 
 
I understand that we’re losing some of our specialists and that 
because there are a number of hospitals that are no longer used 
as a hospital facility. Has there been consideration for studies 
done where maybe some of these individuals could be kept in 
one . . . used to be hospital . . . where their condition can be 
monitored, drugs be monitored, and actually allow them some 
hope for the future as we get involved in some of the new 
technology that we’re using with Parkinson’s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member. It’s true 
in our review of our data in the province that there is a growing 
element of Parkinson’s disease in our province. It has to do of 
course with the populations as they get a bit older. Here we are 
as the baby boomers in Canada and soon of course we’ll have 
the largest population that will be visible in Canada. So when 
you talk about the significant number of people today who are 
suffering from Parkinson’s disease, this is a growing issue. 
 
In respect to what we’re doing specifically, we’ve approved just 
recently two new drugs to assist with the treatment of 
Parkinson’s or at least the enrichment of quality of life that 
people can experience with the use of the drugs. 
 
But at the same time you make the point about the importance 
of recognizing that there are opportunities for research across 
the country or particularly in our province, and we’ve raised 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

this issue federally in respect to the amount of money today that 
is allocated for research, not only for this particular disease but 
for medical research in general. 
 
And when you look at what’s happened in Canada regarding the 
reduction of the funding to research, you’ll see a significant 
reduction of course at the federal level. Although this year there 
has been a slight injection again, which I believe brings it back 
to the 1996 levels or 1995 levels, but still significantly under 
funded. 
 
In Saskatchewan we’ve enriched some of our ability to . . . or 
enriched some of our funding for research over the last couple 
of years. But it’s a far cry from where we’d like to see it, and 
there’s no question about that. But we do what we can with the 
resources that we have at our disposal. 
 
And we’ll continue to work at the national level, at the health 
ministers’ table to continue to promote the importance of 
medical research in the country because clearly . . . and include 
in that work the various different drug companies, the 
pharmaceuticals, which I think need to also be part of that 
exercise. They’re investing in some areas today. I think there’s 
a greater role that they can play. 
 
And those are the directions that we’re taking in terms of trying 
to ensure that we can enrich the level of research across the 
country, which would include of course the disease Parkinson’s. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, I understand or I know from 
first-hand knowledge that there is a doctor in Regina that does 
implants for Parkinson’s patients. And I believe there’s only 
one other doctor in Canada that does that and that doctor is in 
Toronto. I understand and I know that he is doing a lot of 
valuable work. 
 
My question is: if a patient would come from an area such as 
mine, Central Plains Health District, and has this operation, is 
that — the dollars that it would cost to have that work done — 
does it come out of the Central Plains’ budget or is that 
something that would come out of the budget for the Regina 
district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the money would come out of 
the Regina district’s budget. It wouldn’t come out of the 
district’s allocation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I also 
have a question, a number of questions on diabetes. I think 
that’s also one of the diseases or conditions that in 
Saskatchewan has a lot of patients. There are a lot of people that 
are afflicted with that condition. And it’s something that costs 
society a lot of money later on if their health isn’t able . . . if 
they can’t maintain their lifestyle. 
 
I wonder if you can tell me how many people in Saskatchewan 
have diabetes and how many are insulin dependent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, in terms of the number of 
beneficiaries, which is the utilization by diabetics of the drug 
plan is sort of our, probably our most scientific number that we 
can provide you. The number of insulin users in 1997 is 7,716 
people; in 1991 it was 7,662, so you’ll see that there’s been a 

small growth over a period of six years in terms of the number 
of people who are actually using insulin. Now the blood test 
agents in 1997, there were 13,662 persons; in 1991 there were 
10,230 so it’s about 400 more people over that period of time 
that are currently being tested. 
 
The average usage for insulin is about 1.5 vials per month, and 
what I might say as it relates to the direction that we’re going, 
as it relates to diabetes, is that there was the formation of an 
advisory committee and that advisory committee was put into 
place in the spring of 1997. And the advisory committee really 
identified about four areas that were important to do some work 
around and they are these: to identify, summarize and review, 
and evaluate diabetic services currently available in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And then secondly, to recommend strategies in keeping with 
population health promotion approaches for education, because 
there are a variety of different aspects, as you appreciate, that 
you would want to be involved in and those would include 
education, prevention, the treatment services. 
 
And then thirdly, recommend research approaches like similar 
to the question that you asked about Parkinson’s. What work 
can be done today to sort of expand the research to align and 
recommend services to help enhance the efficiency and 
cost-effectiveness and quality of life for people who suffer from 
diabetes. 
 
And then sort of fourthly is to look at, identify an optional 
system . . . an optimal system I’m sorry, of health service 
delivery for diabetics. 
 
The committee is chaired currently by Dr. Mark Boctor and 
he’s an endocrinologist in the province, and the funding to 
provide some of these support services for the committee is 
provided through the department and we’re covering off 
honoraria and some of the expenses. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair, I’ve appreciated 
hearing in the last while that there’s been at least two more 
dialysis machines set up in the province — one in Yorkton; now 
again I believe it’s Tisdale. And this is going to be a big benefit 
to a number of people who have diabetes. Can you tell me how 
many people are using them and what is the cost of actually 
operating these machines? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, there are in Saskatchewan 315 
people today who are on some form of dialysis — 315 people 
that are on some form of dialysis which is the home dialysis; 
the satellite dialysis that you referred to have been established 
in Tisdale in East Central. And then of course there are 
individuals who will continue to need to travel to Regina or 
Saskatoon for some of the more advanced needs that they have 
that can’t be done through the satellite sites. 
 
If the question is specific around Tisdale and/or East Central, on 
the development of the East Central strategy or services, their 
hope was that they’d be serving somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 10 to 15 people when the program is fully 
functional. I think in the Tisdale area — Melfort, Tisdale, 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

Nipawin — the projections are that there would be somewhere 
in the neighbourhood of I think 10 to 20 people that would be 
served. I don’t have the exact number. It’s closer probably to 
15; 14 or 15 people from that part of the area. 
 
We’ve established them primarily in the areas of the province 
today, the satellite ones, where you have your largest user 
group. And that’s the rationale for why we have it today in 
those two sites — Prince Albert also has one as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand from 
some of the studies I’ve been reading, and I’m hoping you can 
confirm it, is the number of aboriginal people in the province 
with diabetes, is that number increasing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It is increasing in the North. There’s no 
question that there has been a large increase in the number of 
people who are affected by diabetes. And clearly this is why 
we’re working very closely with the federal government in 
developing strategy, in terms of how we provide enhanced, 
enriched services, particularly for northern people. 
 
My hope is that through the establishment of the two northern 
district health boards, you’re going to see a greater partnership 
between the work of the federal government and that of the 
provincial department. The new child action plan and the child 
benefits, we think will further enhance the level of services that 
are provided to northern people and that we’ll continue to grow 
that into the future. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, with the studies and work you’ve 
done, can you give me an idea of what you feel the cost is per 
individual for out-of-pocket supplies that aren’t covered for 
diabetics — the test strip supplies that they . . . syringes that 
they would need that they have to cover by themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, this would be a very difficult 
question for me to answer on the basis that people who have 
diabetes, it affects them in a variety of different ways and as a 
result of that are treated differently. And so to be able to 
provide sort of an accurate accounting of what an individual . . . 
what it might cost an individual, I don’t have that information 
fully, because there’re some people who of course would be on 
supplementary coverage. There would be others in fact that 
would be paying their entire costs. It would depend on whether 
or not you’re a senior or whether you’re a younger person that 
would be on the program. 
 
And so in order to try to determine that, I don’t have the answer 
to that and nor do we have the detail I think in place to be able 
to answer that fully for you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You talked earlier 
about a survey that was being undertaken last year, two 
diabetics were . . . involving diabetics in Saskatchewan. And 
you probably have had the results — I know I’ve seen, if we’re 
talking about the same survey, I have seen the results — and 
one of the first things that most of the diabetics are saying, and I 
think it’s over 90 per cent of them of saying, that the costs 
involved for supplies that aren’t covered under the plan in any 
way no matter even if you do have the supplement — things 
like test strips and syringes — are very high, and they are 
cost-prohibitive in lots of cases because people like students 

and seniors can’t afford them. 
 
They’ll find that — we all know — that diabetes kept under 
control is something where it’ll cost the individual less money 
and their health will remain better longer if there’re able to test 
more frequently, and to ensure that their blood levels are kept in 
a more constant fashion. Saskatchewan is only one of, I believe 
it’s three provinces now, that does not cover these supplies for 
these people. I think it’s because do we have a high number of 
diabetics and because we know that it costs the medical system 
a lot of money if we don’t manage diabetes. 
 
From the surveys I’ve read, it’s basically a cost saving if we’re 
able to cover this for people so they can make sure that they 
keep their condition under control. 
 
Are you considering including these materials under the plan in 
some way so that we can ensure that our people here in 
Saskatchewan have the same advantages people right across 
Canada have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, what’s important to 
note, is that insulin is covered in the same fashion that other 
medication is across the province. And also I think what’s 
important to note too, is that the test strips are also covered by 
the program. 
 
I think as well, what we need to remember is, that as you asked 
earlier in your question about how we’re treating diabetics 
today, there are new approaches and new treatments available, 
and of course the dialysis process is one of those. And so we’re 
going to be working to advance that further. 
 
But if you ask the question about, you know, whether or not 
today there is a process in place to provide an even broader 
level of funding for people who are suffering from diabetes, we 
aren’t proposing that certainly in this budget period. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, from speaking to a number of 
people who have diabetes, I can tell you that their average cost 
per month out of pocket, and this is somebody who is giving 
himself two shots a day, is about $180. That’s a lot of money if 
you’re a student or if you’re a senior. And lots of times it means 
that they aren’t giving themselves the medication in the regular 
fashion that they should, and it of course means that their 
disease isn’t kept under control the way it should be. 
 
I also have been told that in some provinces, and I don’t know 
if Saskatchewan is one of them, there are times when syringes 
are given out to young people that have . . . they’re on the street 
. . . that are using drugs because it cuts down on the chance of 
them getting AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome). 
Does Saskatchewan give out syringes to young people and if so 
can you tell me how much that costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, if the question is in 
relationship to, do we have a needle exchange program for 
diabetics, should we provide needles for diabetics, for AIDS, 
we have a needle exchange program for people who . . . around 
the AIDS program, we have that. But we do not have a needle 
program or needle exchange program for people who in fact are 
diabetic. We don’t provide the syringes, if that’s the question, 
for people who have diabetes. 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1335 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure you know what my 
question is going to be then. Why can’t we supply syringes to 
people who have a disease through no fault of their own. We 
know it would cost us less money in the long run; it will keep 
them healthy a lot longer. 
 
We can supply money for people who have a drug problem but 
we’re not supplying syringes for people who have diabetes. 
This doesn’t make any sense to me and I’m sure it wouldn’t 
make any sense to anybody else who would think about it. 
Surely this is one aspect that could be looked at and looked at 
quickly. 
 
I know of university students who are telling me that if they 
could go out and get those syringes for nothing, if they felt that 
it was something that they wanted to do it . . . I don’t know of 
any that are doing it but I think it’s really shameful that we’re 
not looking at this for people who would actually benefit so 
greatly and need it so much. I’m hoping that, Mr. Minister, you 
will look at this immediately. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think first of all, it is something that 
we’ve looked at and had some discussion around. Not to the 
kind of . . . certainly not to the detail that would suggest that we 
should be providing a program today for people who are 
diabetic. 
 
And then from within that group, what we would do is identify 
and target the population that in fact would receive some 
benefits that would be at no cost to them. And you’re 
suggesting that that should happen to students or maybe it 
would happen to a portion of the senior population. 
 
But in part of what we are using today is that we have the 
supplementary drug plan. And so that if in fact people are 
requiring some assistance, then the supplementary health plan 
kicks in and offers those kinds of benefits to people in the same 
way that it does across the piece. 
 
I mean you can make the same argument for people who are 
attending universities today who suffer from asthma and require 
an inhaler or they require a Ventolin machine to assist them on 
a daily basis to get through, you know, their daily performances 
within the educational system. 
 
And so it’s a question that I think that begs the broader 
approach in terms of the analysis, because there are other folks 
across the province today who require a variety of different 
treatment processes that are not necessarily covered within the 
plan. And I give you the example of people who are asthmatic. 
 
And I think what you would need to do then is, of course, 
develop a criteria that would be target structured and it would 
then need to be built into a program of which you would 
provide that kind of subsidy. And you wouldn’t want it, I don’t 
think, that would be segregating people, but more would be 
inclusive. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, I only have a few questions today but 
I’m very concerned about the East Central Health District, 

which is yours and mine. 
 
And I think the problem probably you know already but I 
believe — and you can correct me if I’m wrong — but I believe 
they already have an existing $11 million deficit sitting there in 
the East Central Health District. The proposal, when they bring 
their budget down, is probably going to be in the area of three 
to three and a half million dollars again this year — another 
deficit. 
 
But I guess my concern is that within two years, the chairman 
of the East Central Health District, Mary Anderson, has said 
that they hope to be working at a zero deficit. Well now that’s 
great financially for the East Central Health District, but may 
not be so great for the people that use the facilities within the 
East Central Health District. 
 
And I guess my question to you, Mr. Minister, is — I’m sure 
you understand what she is saying and their agenda to have a 
zero deficit — how do you think they’re going to get to that 
point of a zero deficit? And are we going to lose more beds? 
Are we going to have more wings close in say the Yorkton 
hospital, Foam Lake, or wherever it might be? Are we going to 
lose another part of our health care to get to that zero deficit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think what’s important, Mr. Chair, 
to recognize is that the situation that the East Central Health 
District finds themselves in today, they didn’t arrive at, you 
know, overnight. That process has been a long one for them and 
not one that I know that they’re proud of, or that we are as 
residents of the area. 
 
But the reality is is that over the last 10 years, when you look at 
the level of service that that part of the province has provided, 
they, along the way, have accumulated a fairly significant debt 
which, you’re right, today will be somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 11 million when we’re in and all done, likely 
at the end of April . . . or at the end of March. 
 
What I say to you is that our expectations in the Department of 
Health is that, like with other districts across the province, we 
need to work with them and to look at what kind of a strategy or 
a plan you can put into place that will do a couple of things. 
One that will work at retiring that level of debt that’s been 
accumulated over that period of time and with full examination 
of what it is that’s drawn them to that final situation or that 
present situation. And then look at how you might retire that in 
such a fashion that you don’t affect, in a major way, the 
delivery of services to that district or, in your opinion and mine, 
to the region. 
 
Because it’s not only a district that provides services to its own 
folks within the district, but they also provide a large battery of 
services to people who are outside the district; who are in 
Assiniboia and the North Valley, also in Manitoba. A lot of the 
Manitoba people really depend on the East Central Health 
District for a large piece of their services. 
 
So in that examination with the department and the district 
health board, our focus will be to try to ensure that we can 
continue to have on that end of the province, on that part of the 
province, good, strong services that will continue to provide the 
kind of magnitude that they do today. And at the same time, 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

develop a strategy or a plan that will help retire some of that 
debt that’s currently there. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, but I don’t think 
you really touched on the real question that I had. And I would 
ask it again. And I understand the concerns that you brought to 
the table today, but when they reduce that three and a half 
million dollars that they’re talking about running again this 
year, where is that going to come from? 
 
And if funding is staying at the same level that we’re at now, 
my understanding of how business works and from being 
involved in things like that before, there’s only one way that 
can happen, and that’s to make more cuts within the East 
Central Health District. 
 
The concerns that are being brought to me — and I’m sure 
they’re being brought to you too, Mr. Minister, because you 
represent people in the same area — is what’s going to happen. 
Are we going to lose more beds? And at this time I’d like to 
also commend you on the positions of nurses that we’re going 
to increase out there. I believe it’s eight for the East Central 
Health District and I think that was something that was really 
needed. 
 
But are we going to lose some of these positions again? So are 
we really going to gain anything out there. Like three and a half 
million dollars, you know as well as I do, is a great amount of 
money. And to get to zero something has to happen. It either 
has to have more funding from the Health department or cuts 
have to be made. 
 
And I guess what I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, can you 
reassure my constituents, and yours for that matter, how they’re 
going to reach that goal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member. Just to 
indicate there has been an injection of additional money this 
year into their budget for 1998-99. And there’ll continue to be 
an examination of what the level of funding enrichment needs 
to be for the area or the district; and a continued examination of 
how the needs-based funding formula applies to East Central 
and of course to all the rest of the province. 
 
Part of the issue, as you can well appreciate, is that there has 
been a significant growth in the number of specialists in that 
part of Saskatchewan over the last four or five years. And some 
of those specialities of course are very high-cost ones in that of 
the orthopods, and along with it of course has come the initial 
increases. 
 
To some degree the need to base funding formula lapses in 
terms of how it funds the districts. And our examination would 
be to continue to look at how that applies to not only East 
Central but across the province. And the decision that we’ve 
made within the department is that we’ll expect from the 
districts to have their final submissions to us by the end of June, 
which is sort of the long-about answer to your question about 
what will happen in the district specifically, immediately. 
 
And I say to you that that process is currently ongoing. Our 
expectation and our approach today is to sit down with the 
district health board. We have people on the ground from the 

department that are there with them sorting out, you know, what 
kinds of options we have available to us, and we have a 
number. 
 
And like you, the concerns are certainly ones that we don’t 
want to see any loss of service to the area. We don’t want to see 
any loss of specialties. In fact, on the contrary, like the 
announcement on nurses, we want to see enrichments to 
particularly regional centres around the province, is what I’ve 
been talking about, and try to expand some of those. 
 
But as I say to you over the next several weeks our hope is that 
we’ll have a more definitive answer for you and the people of 
that part of the province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll be awaiting 
with bated breath to see what’s going to happen. 
 
You talked about specialists and the number of specialists being 
in the Yorkton hospital and in the East Central Heath District. 
Doctors like Dr. Van Sittert and doctors like that, that we have 
in Yorkton. We’re very fortunate to have these people out there. 
They do amazing work. And I haven’t found anybody that isn’t 
really very satisfied with these type of doctors out there. 
 
And I guess what I’m saying is it would be a real shame if 
through funding cuts that we had to lose doctors like this. I 
think we have a real asset in people like that out there and are 
very fortunate to have them. 
 
Another concern that’s been brought to my attention a number 
of times — and maybe yours — is the migration from Manitoba 
to the Yorkton hospital and work being done on Manitobans 
there. How does the funding follow those people? 
 
Do we bill the Manitoba health system? And is the East Central 
Health District actively running short partly because of 
Manitoba people coming to Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, what we have is, in Canada we 
have reciprocal agreements. I think it’s only Quebec that’s not 
part of this process. But the reciprocal agreements really look 
after the financing of individuals who cross borders for health 
services. 
 
So the people who come from Manitoba, we bill the Manitoba 
government for those services. And those of us from 
Saskatchewan who go there, accordingly they bill us. So that 
agreement’s reciprocal. And as I say, I think it exists in all the 
provinces in Canada except, I believe, Quebec. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I guess my 
concern . . . and we’ve talked many times about the Plains 
closing in the legislature. 
 
I think my feeling and I believe that of my colleagues, Mr. 
Minister, is that if we would maybe pay a little more attention 
to our regional hospitals such as Yorkton, Estevan, Swift 
Current, and hospitals like that out there, maybe we could 
alleviate some of the load that is on the Regina hospitals — the 
ones we’re going to have left, the General and the Pasqua. 
 
And maybe if we could put more funding into that or find a way 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

to make those hospitals be able to handle more people out there 
rather than . . . An example that’s brought to my attention quite 
often is that we are losing confidence in the Yorkton hospital 
not because of the quality of care we get, but because so many 
times the problem . . . the beds are full there and we’re 
transferred into the Plains in Regina. And I guess with the 
Plains going, as you know, people are very concerned. 
 
But even down the road after the Plains is closed — and I think 
we all realize that your intention’s to close it and there’s 
probably no changing your mind on that — that I think we feel 
that hospitals like Yorkton have to be . . . a situation out there 
has to be addressed. I believe there’s a shortage of beds out 
there. Many times all the beds are full and people have to be 
turned away to another centre, whether it’s Canora or Kamsack, 
Esterhazy, Melville, wherever. 
 
Possibly if we could put more of our attention to these regional 
hospitals and take some of the load off the Regina hospitals, 
maybe we would solve a problem for more than just one area 
but a part of the area of the whole province for that matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well as you know, over the last several 
months I’ve been talking a lot about the importance of 
strengthening the regional systems across the province and the 
larger community hospitals. And my sense is like yours that if 
we can provide the kind of expertise that’s necessary to practise 
in the rural centres, and I call east-central or North Battleford or 
Lloydminster rural as it relates to the larger health piece of the 
Saskatoon, Reginas, because two-thirds of our population today 
are already served in Regina and Saskatoon for the highly 
specialized services. 
 
And so we’re working on a comprehensive strategy that 
addresses hopefully some of the issues that the larger tertiaries 
are facing. But it also is sort of a migratory trend where people 
are going to the larger centres, and have for some time, for 
some of their procedures. 
 
And if we’re going to have any influence at all in reversing 
some of that process, it will be important, as you identified, to 
keep the people like the Van Sitters and the Hennings which are 
the specialists doing orthopedic work in some of those rural 
centres so that the public doesn’t travel to the larger centres for 
those kinds of services. So we want to do that. 
 
I want to say to you that it was never the decision of this 
administration to close the Plains Health Centre, and clearly it is 
not my decision to close the Plains Health Centre; that those 
decisions were made well before I had the chair of the Health 
ministry and that responsibility is really charged with the 
district health boards. 
 
And as much as you and I have heard from time to time that 
district health boards don’t have a lot of latitude, that they don’t 
have a lot of authority, that in fact they don’t play a very 
significant role because they’re muted by the department or 
they’re muted by the government, the reality is that these 
district health boards take their responsibilities very seriously 
and have done, in my opinion, a tremendous job in managing 
the health system at the local level. 
 
And clearly the decision about the closure of the Plains Health 

Centre was made in 1993. Today we’re having a lot of 
discussion around the culmination of some of that work that 
was really done in 1993, or decisions that were made in 1993. 
 
Will we have enriched or enhanced services in Regina with the 
closure or the moving of the Plains services? And my opinion 
has always been, and I’ve been convinced on it from anything 
that I’ve seen, that southern Saskatchewan won’t be 
disadvantaged by the loss of the Plains in terms of their services 
that we get in Regina and/or southern Saskatchewan. We won’t 
be disadvantaged by it. 
 
In fact, what we’ll see is we should see some enrichments to the 
process with the addition of the MRI (magnetic resonance 
imaging), the CT (computerized axial tomography) scanner that 
will go there, the linkages that we’re making today with other 
communities like the renal dialysis site. I think that there are 
opportunities where you might do some CT work across the 
province, particularly to the South, and you might expand the 
role of the tertiary centres in partnership with the regionals into 
the future. 
 
And that’s part of the direction that we want to take this health 
department and this vision. But it will be one that we need to 
convince the public around as well, because the public will need 
to use their community facilities and that would dictate whether 
or not they’re able to sustain themselves into the future. 
 
And it’s not any different, as you can appreciate having been a 
farmer, when you and I stop using our grain elevator or our 
Esso station or our hardware store they don’t survive in those 
communities. And all you need to do today is look at what’s 
happened in rural Saskatchewan across the piece and we see 
that migration of people to the larger centres for their services, 
and accordingly, you’ve seen the loss of some of those very, 
very significant community-based services that have been there 
for some time. 
 
So health isn’t any different than that. So what we’ll try to do of 
course in our strategy and in our work is to try to get 
professionals to work in our communities, try to link them with 
the larger tertiaries so that you can use both the diagnostic 
services and the equipment and technology today but at the 
same time, try to get the manpower, that of the physicians and 
the specialists, to practise in some of those communities. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess while 
we’re talking on the issue of the Plains, I guess personally I 
wish they had taken more time to think out the plan of closing 
the Plains and expanding the General. I believe we’re in an area 
of — what? — 110, 100-and-some million dollars we’ve spent 
on the Pasqua and the General. 
 
I think common sense would have told us that if we’d have 
spent that kind of money on the Plains, we could have had that 
up and running every bit as good as what we’re going to have 
now except we’d be a lot better because of the convenience of 
where the Plains is. There is nowhere but wide-open space there 
to expand in the future had we needed it. And for anyone out 
there to have ever gone to the General, if you didn’t know 
where it was and had never been there before, Mr. Minister, it’s 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

a pain — it really is. 
 
The parking there is not even comparable to the Plains and now 
we’ve built on, we’ve expanded it, and I know in the future you 
promised us that we’re going to have better parking and stuff 
but I think the Plains was just a win-win situation and I think 
somebody really screwed up by deciding to close the Plains and 
keeping the General open. 
 
Mr. Minister, I only have one more question for you and to start 
it off I would like to commend you and your department for the 
renal dialysis that’s going to be up and running in the Yorkton 
hospital if I understand. This has been a pet peeve of mine as 
you know because I have a number of constituents out there 
who have been driving to Regina, and possibly even to 
Saskatoon for that matter, up to three times a week and I’m 
getting feedback on that and I’m sure you are too, Mr. Minister. 
I want to commend you for that. 
 
My question is though, is the plan still to have that up and 
running this fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — First of all, I want to thank you for your 
compliment on the renal dialysis site in east-central 
Saskatchewan. I think that the people who really deserve the 
accolades in terms of sort of finally completing the decision 
about where it will be located is three or four district health 
boards that really worked in unison with each other. I know that 
from time to time it’s important for people like you and I to step 
to the front of the scene in order that we might get some of the 
spotlight, if I might use that, in terms of our efforts in 
promoting a particular piece of work. 
 
But in this instance as it was in Tisdale, and I know that in other 
sites around the province where we’ll look at this in more 
detail, it’s the partnership of the district health boards. And I 
think we need to see more of that into the future. Any time that 
you can get, as you and I both know, Canora and Yorkton and 
Melville and Langenburg, you know, coming together and 
having a discussion about what’s good for the area is really 
quite an accomplishment because by and large we all have . . . 
all of those communities have their own agendas. They all view 
themselves as being the most important to the piece. 
 
And so I think through some of the deliberations and work that 
we’ve be able to do I think as elected officials have been useful 
in this process in order for them to achieve that. So I appreciate 
your comment and I know that people in that part of the 
province will be well served. 
 
I don’t want to leave the Plains without a comment because I 
think it’s important to put into perspective the fact . . . I’m not 
sure if you personally have had to opportunity to see the 
General or to tour the General today and/or the Pasqua, but it 
would be well worth the opportunity, if you ever get a chance to 
do that, to see what’s happening there in terms of the 
development of the two facilities. 
 
Because as much as people across the province are concerned 
about the loss of the building . . . and that’s primarily what it is, 
I think is a tremendous attachment to the facility. And you can 
see it when you and I drive in from our constituencies; we get to 
Balgonie and we can see the Plains Health Centre. So to some 

degree, you know, we get a sense of relief because we think that 
we’re there, okay. 
 
But when you look at the number of people who have been 
served from southern Saskatchewan by the General Hospital 
itself, there are few people in this province from southern 
Saskatchewan who don’t know where the General is, okay, 
because they’ve been there for a variety of different procedures 
or services in the past as well as they’ve been to the Plains. 
 
So I think if you get an opportunity at all in the next little while, 
it would be very much worth your experience, if you haven’t, to 
go to those two facilities and to get a full appreciation of the 
level of services that the Saskatchewan people, particularly to 
the South, will be advantaged with when the actual conversion 
and the move occurs. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, welcome this afternoon. I was listening intently to 
your comments about communities getting together and 
sharing, and I was at one point hoping to say, you know, tell 
me, Mr. Minister, that isn’t so, that they’re on their own 
agendas. But I know that that is reality in some cases. 
 
I did not hear your answer though, Mr. Minister, about whether 
or not the machine will be up and functioning in 1998, and how 
soon that is. Because as my colleague from Saltcoats has 
indicated, I too have many people, who are constituents of 
Canora-Pelly who have been driving to Saskatoon or driving to 
Yorkton, same amount of times per week, tremendous cost to 
them, and they’re looking forward to that machine. So I’d ask 
you to make a comment on that. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I do want to raise is another issue about — 
I’ll refer to it as acute care bed space or emergency care bed 
space — and I want to relate two incidents to you, Mr. Minister, 
and from those two incidents could you explain to people not 
only in my area of the province, the east-central Saskatchewan, 
but also from other parts of the province. 
 
The two issues are these, Mr. Minister. Back in February a 
young lad in the community of Invermay was injured in a 
hockey game in the middle of a Saturday afternoon. Unknown 
to the people present as to what degree . . . how serious his 
injuries were, he was placed on a rigid backboard and 
transported to the facility in Invermay — as you are aware, it’s 
one of the 52 hospitals that was closed — and the nurses there 
of course looked at how the responders had stabilized the young 
lad and said all that they could do was already done. 
 
He was then transported to the community of Canora. Well 
when he got to Canora, Mr. Minister, the situation that faced his 
family was that there was no beds. There were no beds and no 
doctor would admit the young lad into Canora, a hospital, our 
nearest hospital that people depend upon for care. As a result, 
they then transported him directly to Yorkton. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I’m sure you can appreciate that from the 
time of his injury till a doctor actually looking at this young lad 
well over an hour and a half had passed by. And the family is 
very, very concerned that that kind of care is now the level of 
care that we have in rural Saskatchewan. He could not count on 
a bed being available in the nearest Canora facility, which is the 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

one that we’re supposed to be served by. And that was how 
health reform was sold in our area. 
 
The second incident, Mr. Minister, is very similar, and this is a 
gentleman from the community of Margo. Mr. Steve Hanchuk 
back in February had serious surgery in the hospital in Yorkton 
on a Friday. But by Sunday evening his physician tells him, the 
surgeon tells him that they need the bed because there is a 
serious occurrence and the bed is needed. And he is asked to 
leave. He’s still very ill and he claims to the nurses that he will 
not be able to go home. However, he is forced to go. He leaves. 
 
Two days later he’s very, very ill. He phones his doctor in 
Canora, his family physician, and the doctor says, sorry, we’re 
full up. We have . . . I think at that time it was a pneumonia 
outbreak — all beds were full. The man stayed home for a 
couple more days, then finally he is in a state where he has a 
fever. His niece comes along and says to him, you must go, 
you’re an emergency case. 
 
The doctor places him in an observation bed and treats him for, 
I believe, it was three days. It was a day past the maximum 
amount that this patient was supposed to stay in an observation 
bed, but the doctor says I’m going to keep you there because we 
have no other place to place you, and secondly, you are a very 
ill person. It turns out that the man takes weeks and weeks to 
recover because he’s had an infection develop. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what has happened is we’ve moved the person 
through the system. Where he should have spent some time in 
the hospital, we couldn’t keep him there in Yorkton. We 
shipped him out. Canora couldn’t receive this patient and deal 
with him properly. And as a result he spends his time at home 
becoming much more ill. The anxiety and the frustration level 
builds and the gentleman is at his wit’s end by saying to me the 
other day that he would never . . . never wants to be sick again 
because his impression of what happened to him back in 
February is not something someone should go through. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you’ve taken . . . You’ve 
talked about assessing the needs and assessing the concerns. 
This is a very serious concern in the area of the communities of 
Preeceville and Sturgis and Invermay and Canora, where now 
the two hospitals that we depend upon — Preeceville and 
Canora — have been reduced so significantly that there never 
seems to be emergency spaces available for these injuries, for 
these sudden sicknesses that occur where someone has to be 
admitted. 
 
They can also not depend upon Yorkton because if they go to 
Yorkton for a major surgery, as my colleague has indicated, the 
regional hospital as a focus has been significantly reduced. 
 
What is your plan to ensure that there is adequate health care so 
we don’t have a young lad who takes one and a half hours to 
receive medical care from something that could have been very 
serious? And I do want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that the young 
lad spent a couple of days in hospital and was discharged 
without any permanent injury, and his condition is good. 
 
But what if? What if that would have been a serious neck injury 
and he was unable to receive care for an hour and a half after 
having gone through an emergency clinic, after having gone to 

a community that was supposed to have a hospital and have 
beds available and didn’t, and finally ends up in Yorkton. That 
is unacceptable, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well first, Mr. Chair, I was so excited 
about the wonderful partnership that the people in Yorkton and 
Canora and Saltcoats were having that I neglected to answer the 
first part of the question that the member from Saltcoats had 
asked me. I’m glad you reminded me of what it was. Then you 
went on to sort of dampen my excitement. 
 
But I want to say to you that the people from our part of the 
province will receive their renal dialysis services probably 
around November 1, is the time line that we’re looking for the 
actual delivery of service there. There’ll be some training that 
will be required, etc., for people prior to them receiving some of 
their service. 
 
In respect to your questions about how it is that emergency 
acute care services across the province are being provided 
today, and specifically the two cases that you talk about, I mean 
what we could do here, you and I, is that we could compare 
notes about how it is that the east-central side of the province 
today is delivering a broad range of services which are certainly 
acute care, emergency services, home care, and the list goes on. 
And what we’d find, by and large, if we were to do that, is that 
there’s a great deal of sharing of resources today amongst the 
districts. 
 
Just a couple of days ago when I was speaking with some 
people from the East Central Health District, they told me that 
there was someone from Langenburg who in fact required some 
emergency services, ended up in the East Central health system 
at the Yorkton hospital, was there for two days and then was 
transferred to the Canora hospital where he convalesced for the 
next four or five days because Canora hospital had some beds 
available to them. 
 
So as much as you make the case that from time to time the 
system is tight, and I’ve said that too, from time to time the 
system is tight, but by and large if you were to look at our area 
of the province and to examine carefully whether or not we 
have ability to provide some greater potential of bed utilization, 
we could do that. And we could do that nicely but it would 
require a much, much greater involvement and participation of 
those district boards that are there. It would require a great deal 
more of that. 
 
Now from time to time you state the case about someone who 
requires emergency services. Well in this province today we 
have probably exceeded the level of first responders and 
emergency front-line training and certification than anywhere in 
the country of North America. Okay? 
 
That’s the level of training that some of our people have today. 
You have emergency responders today that have their EMTs 
(emergency medical technician), they’re certified as EMTs, and 
you only have to look across the districts across the province to 
see the quality and level of training that these people have. 
 
And it’s not unusual, you know, for us in rural Saskatchewan 
today to be travelling longer distances in order for us to get our 
emergency services. And I’m not convinced, and certainly you 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

won’t convince me today, that if somebody requires an 
emergent service that they don’t get it. Because there has not 
been an example in the time that I’ve occupied this chair where 
somebody who requires an emergency response, where they’ve 
been denied it. Whether it’s in the local hospital in a Canora, 
Saskatchewan, or whether it’s in a regional centre like a 
Yorkton, or it’s a tertiary centre in the Regina-Saskatoon, there 
has never been, in the time that I’ve been responsible as I say, a 
denial for an emergency service. 
 
And I want to say to you that a very, very high compliment just 
the other day was paid to me by someone . . . or not to me but to 
our district, or to our area where you and I both come from, 
who said that when people arrive at the large tertiary centres, 
Saskatoon and Regina, from the East Central District, it’s 
because they absolutely have to be there. That those services 
that we have in our part of Saskatchewan today have been taxed 
and maximized to their fullest, and they only send people at the 
end of the day because they absolutely can’t provide the next 
step of specialized services that they have. 
 
(1600) 
 
So I say to you that we need to be careful when we’re talking 
about the value of professional training and staffing and 
expertise that we have in our part of Saskatchewan, east-central 
or the east-central region of the province, because there has 
been a tremendous investment in services out there by the three 
districts or the four district boards. And we are fortunate in rural 
Saskatchewan today, far more fortunate than we’ve ever been 
than you and I were when we were growing up as young people 
in our communities, to have front-line responders that we have 
today. 
 
We have people today who are in our backyards who are very 
highly trained and their expertise is very much valued in 
making sure that they can respond to some of the issues that we 
have. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you to the Leader of the 
Opposition and to the minister for this interruption in the 
proceedings. 
 
Mr. Chair, I would like all members to note that in the west 
gallery is seated Mr. Kevin Yeates and other members of the 
bargaining team from the Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Union. We’re very, very happy to have them in the 
gallery this afternoon and look forward to other announcements 
which we hope to make soon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
my comments about the first responders that handled the young 
lad were not to be taken as being critical of them. They did 
what they could, and you have to I’m sure appreciate that a 
group of first responders placing a young lad on a rigid 
backboard have completed all they could do. And they do not 
know whether there is a serious injury. They are preparing the 
young fellow for transport. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, was that while you seem to 
have indicated that these are anomalies that don’t occur very 
often, I’ve indicated to you two examples where they could not 
be admitted. This was an emergency care system and we’ll 
discuss the individual case some other time so that maybe you 
can check into why this young lad was not admitted. And the 
doctors in Canora said there were no beds. Those are concerns. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to make another suggestion and I want to 
hear your comments about the fact as you’ve indicated in our 
area, 3 of those 52 hospitals closed — in Norquay, and in 
Invermay, and in Theodore. And in some of those instances 
there are full-time doctors who live in the communities and 
provide medical care on a full-time basis. In the case of 
Invermay that’s not true. 
 
You’ve indicated that there’s a need to address how we can 
improve and how we can become more efficient so that 
Yorkton hospital can indeed do all of the things that it can do 
before the people move on to the city systems and actually rely 
on Saskatoon or Regina to complete the final health 
requirements that are necessary that Yorkton could not provide. 
 
And I’m wondering if you’ve given any thought to this, Mr. 
Minister. A number of times, as the example that I’ve indicated 
to you with Mr. Hanchuk, serious surgery on a Friday and he’s 
told the doctor doesn’t want to have him discharged, but he 
needs the bed so he is sent home on a Sunday. Is there any 
consideration to some of the clinics or emergency health clinics 
as I think they’re called now, for instance, Norquay? 
 
Whether or not there would be a possibility of having patients 
come back from, not only Yorkton but Saskatoon, Regina, 
where they’ve had serious surgery that requires a hospital stay 
of five days, six days, seven days. But the critical days are of 
course the day of surgery and maybe the next day or two after 
the surgery. But the final three or four days, the best thing for 
that patient is good, loving care. Tender care that’s necessary to 
bring that patient to the point of allowing him to go home 
without complications, without infections, where he’s 
monitored carefully at a clinic. 
 
I’m wondering if there’s any thought in your department to 
allowing patients to be transferred back to a Norquay where it’s 
a provision of care. It’s not an acute care, but it’s a provision — 
I think you used the word convalescent care — where we can 
have these patients come back to alleviate the stress on the 
regional hospitals, the ones where surgeries are . . . that do 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

conduct the surgeries, the hospitals in Regina and Saskatoon, to 
transfer them back to the Theodores and Norquays of this 
world. 
 
So that the care can be given back in a home setting where 
there, you know, statistics have shown that people will improve 
faster in that kind of an environment. Has your department 
looked at that possibility? And have any tests or any surveys 
been done as to whether or not that’s something that you might 
be looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the issue as it relates to the 
closures — because you’ve now used that term twice and I tend 
to use a different one, Mr. Deputy Chair — I want to say to you 
that in Saskatchewan we have converted these facilities. We 
have not closed the facilities; they still exist. 
 
As you know, in my little old home community from where I 
come and you represent, they had a brand-new hospital. They 
had a brand-new hospital that was built in 1989. And it was 
built by the administration of which you now support. And you 
know and you know as well I do that . . . you know as well as I 
know that within that facility there was underutilization of those 
beds. And you and I both know that. 
 
And so what they did is they took that facility, as you can well 
appreciate, and they’ve converted it and they’ve made it now 
one that provides a broad range of services for some of your 
family and some of our friends who are still in those areas of 
the province. Today they have a range of services that they 
hadn’t had before in some aspects. They have some range of 
services today that they haven’t had before. 
 
So I think it’s a bit disconcerting when you say that these 
facilities have been closed, because they’re still there today and 
are providing a broad range of services. 
 
I want to say that your comments about how we in fact can 
move people across the province more efficiently and get better 
utilization of some of those facilities, it requires some ability for 
the districts to work together. And I say that to you with a great 
deal of interest and concern. 
 
I gave you the case of someone who recently ended up in 
Canora, who was from Langenburg, whose family was in 
Langenburg who expected that they would find this person at 
the end of the day in the community of Yorkton because that’s 
where in fact he had the procedure completed. But in order to 
get the best utilization of the beds that are in the region, they 
sent this person on to Canora. And so when the family travelled 
from Langenburg and they arrived in Yorkton, they found out 
that this individual was now in Canora and had to make the 
extra, you know, 30 miles in order to visit. 
 
Now I think there can be probably a smarter process of how you 
do that, to ensure that you get best utilization of all of those 
facilities that are in that part of the province. And that isn’t. 
We’re not unique, from where you and I come, we’re not 
unique to the way in which some of this works. So a real need, I 
think, to enhance the partnerships of the districts and for them 
to work closer together. 
 
Is there an opportunity for people to come back to their 

communities and convalesce in a much broader way, earlier and 
more fully? The answer to that is absolutely there is. And when 
you look at the investment in home care that this province has 
made and what’s happening across the country, I mean, you 
only need to look at the change in the way in which all 
provinces are making decisions — all provinces are making 
decisions — not only in Saskatchewan. 
 
But when you look at the investment that has been made in 
home care across the nation today, it’s significant. Because 
you’re right — when people return back to their own 
communities, they far quicker convalesce and certainly achieve 
a better quality of health and life in their environment. 
 
So we are doing more in terms of making sure that your home 
care programs are enriched; there’s more funding that goes into 
the home care program. And to a large degree, many of those 
people don’t need to be in a hospital bed; they can be in their 
own communities. 
 
And the recent report that HSURC (Health Services Utilization 
and Research Commission) just completed on institutions, they 
took 780 beds across the province and they found when they 
completed their work that 25 per cent of those beds were 
occupied by people who didn’t need to be in a hospital bed. 
They in fact would be well served in their own community. 
They’d be well served in their own home where you would 
have a home care nurse that could come there. You could have 
a personal care aide that could come to their home and provide 
many of those same services. 
 
And the other piece that they said is that the recidivism rate of 
returning back to the institution is not any larger than it would 
be if they were in the hospital. Because there’s a view here, and 
I think some of it you may hold yourself, is that hospitals make 
people well. Well hospitals don’t make people well. Okay. And 
across the country our role is to move people from institution 
back to community as quickly as you can and where they will 
convalesce and certainly be in a lot better state of mind and 
healthier in a shorter period of time. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the hon. member from Estevan 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Ward: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and to the Assembly a couple of gentlemen in 
the government gallery, Mr. Neil Collins, a constituent of mine, 
and his associate, Mr. Pat Therrien, two IBEW negotiators who 
are in town today for some meetings, looking for some 
progress, as are we all, in their little dispute. So I wish the 
Assembly would bid them welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the hon. member for Humboldt 
on her feet? 
 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

Ms. Julé: — To address the Minister of Health, Deputy Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Ms. Julé: — My apologies, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
I’m pleased to welcome your officials today and I’ll thank you 
beforehand for the assistance that you will be providing in 
answering some of my questions. 
 
As you well know, Mr. Minister, the town of Humboldt is 
awaiting some decision from your department on whether or not 
the redevelopment project in Humboldt will be able to move 
ahead. In order for that to be done, the departmental officials 
and yourself have to complete a review of that redevelopment 
project. And I know that the town council in Humboldt put 
forward a resolution to yourself and the department outlining 
the urgent need to modernize St. Elizabeth’s Hospital so that it 
might more adequately serve the needs of people within the 
district. 
 
Within a part of the resolution states that the Humboldt Town 
Council affirms its support for the St. Elizabeth’s Hospital 
redevelopment project, and that they also urge the Minister of 
Health, whom is yourself, and department officials to complete 
the review of the redevelopment project with all dispatch in 
order to provide all interested parties with a decision as soon as 
possible in this calendar year. 
 
This calendar year, Mr. Minister, particularly because there has 
been a great deal of money put in through a special capital levy 
by urban and rural governments towards this project. And this 
project must go ahead and a decision must be put forward on 
this, because if not, in 1999 those monies will go back to the 
urban and rural municipalities and that would be terribly 
unfortunate. 
 
Could you please give us some reassurance, Mr. Minister, that 
you have made a decision on this, and if not, when will you be 
able to inform Humboldt and the interested parties on this 
decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to thank the 
member from Humboldt for the question. You’re now, I think, 
the last person from Humboldt who’s come to me in the last 
several weeks asking the question that you’ve raised today and 
that is, when will there be a decision made on the reconstruction 
for the St. Elizabeth’s Hospital. 
 
And I want to say to you we’re within probably a week to 10 
days of making our announcement on all of the capital projects 
across the province, of which of course we’re very aware of the 
needs of the community of Humboldt and the people who are 
served in that part of Saskatchewan. 
 
I know as well, I’ve met now with some of the town council 
members, I’ve met with some of the R.M.’s (rural municipality) 
at the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
convention, who reminded me of the point that you make, of the 
sunset period on the funding. I think it’s 1999 where we 

absolutely need to have a final decision on the future capital 
investment in Humboldt. So I say to you that we’re within a few 
days of making that announcement in terms of the capital piece. 
 
And thank you for sort of bringing to our attention one more 
time the time frame that’s tight in terms of making that 
decision. 
 
(1615) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, while 
we’re on the topic of facility renewals, improvements, 
conversions, etc., I wonder if you could give me an indication 
of the status of the conversion of the hospital in Cudworth with 
the nursing home. And I’d like to know a couple of things: what 
services will be extended to the people in that district; and when 
will the completion date of that facility be something we can 
celebrate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — My understanding is is that we’re nearing 
the completion of that project of the community health centre. 
And of course we’ll be celebrating that occasion with you when 
that occasion certainly arrives, and we’re hoping that’s not very 
far from today’s date. 
 
As you can appreciate, there are a number of health centres 
across the province that have now been formed. I think there is 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of 30 or 32. And I know that 
you’ll find on your experience when you go to your health 
centre and visit the people at Cudworth, that they will have a 
strong appreciation for the level of services that they’ve had, 
not unlike some of what we’ve experienced in my recent trips to 
Wawota or to Grenfell. There’s certainly those communities 
today are very pleased with the level of service that they’re 
getting in their communities. And I know that you’ll accept and 
feel that when you visit there at the opening and I hope that’s 
fairly short. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the Provincial Secretary wanting 
attention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — With leave, to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. We are 
honoured today by some very distinguished visitors. I will ask 
them to stand and then say a word about them when they stand 
— that is if I can come close enough to a proper pronunciation 
of their name so that they recognize them. I’ll do my best here. 
 
Robert Ssebunya, if you’d rise please; Irene Kiyimba; 
Alexander Ndawula; and Dorcas Kimbwarata. These are people 
who are here; they’re guests of Rotary International. Mr. 
Ssebunya is the Minister of Health in Uganda. Ms. Kiyimba and 
Mr. Ndawula are also from Uganda. Ms. Kimbwarata is from 
Kenya. These people are here observing our system. 
 
I had the occasion to exchange some common concerns with 
Mr. Ssebunya. I think he probably felt better about the Ugandan 
health system when I told him about our problems here. 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

I’d like all members to join with me in welcoming these 
distinguished visitors to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, there are some good things happening with health. But 
there are also some problems, as you well know and everyone 
well knows. 
 
Now a moment ago I was talking about the renovations at St. 
Elizabeth’s Hospital. And so we are going to hopefully have the 
building in adequate condition to serve the residents of that 
area, of that district, very well. But at the same time, we also 
read in our local newspapers and in talking to people 
responsible in those areas, we recognize that there’s going to be 
deficits at the hospital as far as the funding goes for running the 
place and also at Saint Mary’s Villa. 
 
And so this is going to be a major, major problem for people. Is 
there some way that possibly you can reassure them that there 
will be a little more of an infusion of funding into the services 
needed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think how I might 
respond to you is by indicating that this year, what we did 
again, is that we provided some additional funding for health 
districts across the piece. So we injected approximately $30 
million directly for district health boards in terms of their ability 
then to provide a variety of services in each of their 
communities, in each of their areas. 
 
And of course the . . . Central Plains is no exception to some of 
the contributions that we’ve provided to them. I don’t have that 
specific number available to me but maybe one of my officials 
will find it for me as I go along and then I can provide you with 
what that exact number was for your district. I think our focus 
will be to continue to provide the sufficient resources for 
districts to do their work. 
 
And that the assurances that we provide to communities — 
particularly ones like yours which are larger in magnitude, 
serve a fairly large population — is that we want to see you 
know, continued enhancements and growth in the health care 
delivery system. You only need to look at your part of the 
province today and recognize the amount of activity and energy 
that’s invested in that part of Saskatchewan to recognize how 
important the health care system is to the continued growth and 
expansion of your community and area. 
 
And we recognize that and we’ll continue to provide the 
resources that we can to ensure that we can grow that. This 
year’s increase to your health district is $271,052, working on a 
population base of about 21,067. 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in spite of 
the infusion of money, which never seems to be quite enough, 
there are obviously some problems with how money is used. 
Okay. It has come to my attention that, for instance, the Central 
Plains District administration has received a total 30 per cent 
increase in their salary in five years time. It has also come to 
my attention that that salary increase and the salary is taken off 
the top of the budget immediately before any other 
considerations are given for services needed. 
 
Now I do believe in community and regional autonomy. I really 
believe in it. But I believe that there’s also a need, when this 
kind of an exorbitant increase happens, that there is a need to 
put in place a cap or somewhat of a cap at least on salary so that 
funding can go to the services that are needed. I think this is a 
big part of the problem and I wonder if you could address this 
for me today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — First, Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to say to 
the member that I’m not aware of the kind of increases that you 
talk about, but certainly they are of concern to me and we will 
give our undertaking that we will do a review of at least what 
some of those numbers that you’ve indicated are. An increase of 
30 per cent would be certainly not the norm. 
 
It’s not the norm that we’re used to seeing in the submission of 
the budget plans, and we’re within about five weeks now from 
receiving the district plans from across the province. And we’ll 
certainly pay particular attention to the question that you raise 
here today as it relates to the administrative costs, and we’ll 
report that to you on the basis of you having asked the question 
specifically. 
 
I want to reiterate that I very much appreciate your comment 
about the value of district health boards and the people who 
make a commitment to serve on them. These are by and large 
volunteers initially. There’s some very small remuneration. 
There are people who have been involved in this process from 
the very first day of health reform. 
 
And the process has been very difficult in our province. And I 
know across the world today, and we have another example this 
afternoon, Mr. Deputy Chair, where we have people who come 
and pay attention to what we’re doing in Saskatchewan in terms 
of our health care system and how we deliver it in this province. 
And we welcome those occasions. 
 
And I say to you that we in Saskatchewan are very proud of the 
men and women who serve in our district health boards, the 
contributions that they make to ensure that community needs 
are in fact defined and enriched to make our Saskatchewan 
communities healthier and better for your children and mine. 
And so I want to say to you that I very much appreciate your 
comment and your support as it relates to the work of district 
health boards. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I must 
make an added comment on that — that I said I believe in true 
autonomy of the district health boards and communities. That 
means that there . . . I believe there should be sort of a global 
funding rather than pressuring districts into funding, specific 
funding, for different services. 
 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

For instance, you do laud home care. Home care in itself is a 
good idea, but people that are convalescing, as you had just 
spoken to the member of the Saskatchewan Party about, people 
that are convalescing and having to come home to receive home 
care are not . . . they are not receiving the adequate number of 
hours and the attention they need through home care. And that 
is simply all there is to it. 
 
Some are, but a good majority are not. What happens then is 
people that are surrounding those patients are forced to try to 
get them into a nursing home or into some sort of a personal 
care facility. My concern is personal care facilities. The 
operators of those facilities aren’t necessarily medically trained 
in order to look at those patients to recognize when they are in 
distress or when they’re not. 
 
And on top of it that causes a burden for a number of our senior 
people financially, because as you well know, getting into a 
nursing home maybe would cost them their pensions. 
 
Personal care homes now are costing them anywhere from 11 to 
1,500 to $2,000 a month and sometimes more. How are these 
people expected certainly to pay for those kind of expenses 
when they don’t have the money to do it? It puts people in a 
major quandary. 
 
So I’ve mentioned a couple of issues here and I’ll let you 
respond on those. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, I 
want to say to you that I couldn’t agree more that as we move 
along in this province and in this country, that there is a need to 
advance and grow the home care program and the home care 
system. And in this province, when you look at the contribution 
and the investment that we’ve made in home care over the last 
four or five years, you’ll see that that’s increased by almost 116 
per cent. 
 
And when you ask the question or make the comment that there 
is an important need to grow that even more, we concur with 
that, because we believe — not only here in Saskatchewan but 
across the nation, Health ministers and departments will tell you 
— that we need to move from the institutional setting to the 
community base. And the only way that you can reach that or 
achieve that is that you need to put more investment into the 
home care side. 
 
Now I think it’s important here to also recognize that as much 
as we talk about the increases in home care over the last several 
years to 116 per cent, we’ve achieved that in Saskatchewan on 
our own. There hasn’t been any contribution on the part of the 
federal government to help advance the home care programs. 
By and large their funding has remained stagnant and stable. 
 
And I very much admire today you, you know, standing on your 
feet and talking about how important it is to grow the home care 
program in Saskatchewan. But remember that these reductions 
and cuts that the federal government has administered on 
provinces across the country really began a couple of years ago. 
And so as much as I appreciate and admire you today standing 
up and lobbying, which I think is important for home care 
programs and support you in that, but there was a time when I 
think your voice could have been a lot stronger in this area. 

And today we advance that notion of course to some of the 
colleagues across who have been less than supportive in 
advancing our notion. So I say to you that you’re right when 
you make the statement that it’s important for us to grow the 
home care piece. We are growing it as quickly as we can. We 
know there’s more we need to do in that area and we’ll be 
looking for your support along the way then to advance the 
growth in home care across the province. 
 
(1630) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to just 
make a quick comment in response to some remarks that you 
had made a little bit earlier regarding first responders. I happen 
to have a sister who took the first responders course and so I 
questioned her fairly thoroughly and I guess what we need to 
have if we’re going to have first responders is the insurance . . . 
the assurance that when first responders are called that they in 
fact will be there. 
 
Now from what my sister told me, there is no obligation on the 
part of first responders to go to the site of an accident or to 
where they are needed, all right. The other thing that is . . . so 
that’s a problem of course. I mean how many phone calls you 
know would one have to make in due time in order to ensure 
that people’s lives aren’t at risk. 
 
The other concern surrounds the safety of first responders when 
they are called to possibly someone’s home where there is an 
emergency case of people under distress mentally and they have 
to go to try to calm the situation. First responders seem to have 
a broad range of services they have to provide and I have heard 
first responders mentioning that should they get the feeling or 
the sense that they may be in danger that they won’t respond. If 
they don’t respond the situation in that home could grow 
volatile and someone will be hurt. So it’s a whole area of 
concern for me and again I’d ask you to respond to those 
comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Deputy Chair, to the member, 
I want to say that clearly there’s a need here to look at 
advancing and enriching the level of training that today first 
responders have access to; although we talk a lot about how 
valuable that training is today and how advanced many of those 
first responders are in terms of their ability to respond to an 
emergency situation. 
 
Our effort is to continue to put more resources into that side, so 
that particularly where they’re found of course is in rural 
Saskatchewan, and because distances are so large, that we want 
to try to advance the notion that you can have more specialized 
people, if I might use that term a bit loosely, in our 
communities or in our areas that might provide some of those 
services. And so training is very much a part of that. 
 
Educational development is another part of it because when you 
make the comment that these people are really responsible for 
covering the waterfront, they really are. There’s a whole host of 
different situations that they find themselves in, and as much as 
you try to train from a broad perspective how to deal with those 
issues, you can’t always touch on all of them. So our objective 
will be to continue to enhance those educational programs, 
those training programs, so that we can better equip people to 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

provide those front-line services when they’re needed. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to just refer you 
to some of the concerns that I had brought forward in the House 
regarding the waiting-list for ultrasounds at the Plains hospital. 
It was brought to my attention, and I pose that to you, that there 
are approximately 670 on the waiting-list for carotid 
ultrasounds. I also know that there are about 200 on the 
waiting-list for venous doppler ultrasounds, which is the lower 
part of the body. 
 
Now physicians, doctors, order these because they have very 
good reason to believe that there is an impending stroke that 
may be happening, and so from some of my query with people 
at the hospitals, I understand that the technicians are lacking; 
that there are two and a half technicians — and I’m not sure if 
it’s at the Plains or in the whole city. And I’m wondering if you 
could give me an idea of how many ultrasound technicians we 
have in the three hospitals in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think part of the issue that was identified 
when we did our physician needs survey is that we are lacking 
— for a better term — in particularly this part of the province. 
And I think when you raised the question with me you’re 
specifically addressing it as it relates to this part of the 
province, Regina, and how southern Saskatchewan people in 
particular are being served today. 
 
In our evaluation and assessments that were done on physician 
needs in the province, one of them that was identified is for 
enriched specialties in Regina, and for some of the regional 
centres or larger communities. And we think that if we had 
access and were able to recruit more people who were providing 
these kinds of services directly, that we would be able to reduce 
those waiting-lists significantly from what they are today. 
 
They’re a concern for us as well. And our hope is through the 
recent agreement that we signed with physicians in the 
province, that we’re going to be better equipped in the next 
several months to attract more people that will come and 
practise here. And then hopefully address this issue that you 
talk about. Because some of it is clearly to do with the 
manpower issue and resourcing up is what we need to do. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Mr. Minister, what I would like to ask you 
directly is why are there a lack of ultrasound technicians in the 
southern area, here especially? I have a concern about this 
because I have many friends and relatives in this part of the 
province who may be in need of that. And so why aren’t there 
enough technicians? 
 
My understanding is that technicians are burning out — they 
are simply burning out. And some of them are going on 
indefinite stress leave. And so this needs to be addressed. Why 
can’t we recruit more technicians, and do we have the number 
of ultrasound machines here that we need to serve the people 
that need them? Obviously not, with waiting-lists like this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well part of the issue I’ve identified as it 
relates to the importance of, and you raised the question, and 
that is the ability to have more specialists on stream, more 
specialists that can provide the services for us. You’re really 
addressing the issue of prevention here, to a large degree. 

And certainly it’s an important piece, so that if you could do 
some of this testing in advance, then you may in fact prevent 
people from accessing or coming into the system itself and 
taking out what we are considering or concerned about, which 
is certainly beds and utilization of the system. 
 
And our work will continue. I think in Regina today, we’ve 
identified I think nine people who we have providing some of 
this work. And our effort and role will be to continue to work to 
providing some of those enhancements in the future in the way 
in which I suggested. 
 
But this exercise is one that will require that kind of attention 
and we give that commitment to you. It’s part of us wanting to 
do more work in the preventive side. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, could you 
tell me how many technicians are employed working with 
ultrasound machines in the city of Regina, and which hospitals 
are they at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There are nine technicians currently 
employed. There are two at the Pasqua, there are four at the 
General and three at the Plains. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Okay, my understanding was, at the Plains 
specifically, that there are 2.5 employed, that there is one 
person who is off on an indefinite stress leave. And so he or she 
may be coming back, but I would certainly urge you to make 
sure that we have the technicians in place so that burn-out like 
this doesn’t happen. 
 
Mr. Minister, earlier you made reference also to the fact that 
you didn’t believe that anyone that was in need of emergencies 
died in the province — emergency services. Again I would like 
to refer you to what we were just talking about. How can you 
assess that people are not dying of stroke if in fact there’s a 
one-year waiting-list for carotid ultrasounds? Who knows how 
many people have died because of this, because they could not 
get in for an ultrasound and subsequent service that they need? 
 
That is what I think the opposition parties talk about, partly 
what they talk about, when they’re talking about emergencies 
— people in need of emergency service that are not getting it. 
So I just want you to sort of digest that a bit. 
 
And the other issue that I must bring forward, Mr. Minister, is 
the number of people having to go out of the province for MRI 
services. Now I had sent you a letter from a Mr. Howard Lees 
in Humboldt, whose doctor referred him to have an MRI. She 
tried to book him for the MRI in Saskatoon and they wouldn’t 
even put him on the waiting-list. They said that they were not 
taking any further appointments. 
 
And so there was no choice for Mr. Lees, but to go to Alberta to 
have this done, to Calgary. As a result of the test in Calgary, 
Mr. Lees had been referred to a neurosurgeon. Now he came 
back with a bill of $750 for the MRI. The results were quite 
crucial. And subsequently I sent a letter to you asking for 
reimbursement, and your answer was that had he received 
pre-approval from his doctor to go and get this MRI out of the 
province, that he may have been reimbursed. However, because 
he did not get pre-approval he would not be reimbursed. 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

Now if in fact there was another way of looking at this and you 
received from him all documentation even after the MRI in 
Calgary, that in fact the MRI was in desperate need and he 
provided your department with those documents, is it not 
reasonable to expect then that he should be reimbursed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Deputy Deputy Chair, to the 
member, I say to you that first and foremost I hope that I didn’t 
leave the impression that from time to time when people are in 
a serious emergent state, that they don’t die. Because in fact 
from time to time when people are in a severe emergent state en 
route to a health facility or while they’re waiting for an 
emergency unit to arrive, people in fact have died. 
 
And it’s unfortunate, but the reality is is that sometimes the 
health care system fails us. And on a daily basis, when you look 
at the kinds of activity that the health care system provides 
services to people across the province, it’s enormous. And so I 
want to clarify, to make sure that you and I don’t have a 
misinterpretation of what I mean by emergency services. 
 
What I am saying about emergency services is that I don’t know 
that a facility or a physician has ever turned away an individual 
who is en route or actually arrives, that are in emergent state. 
And I guess I said that since I’ve been in this chair, and 
certainly since we’ve had administration of this operation, I’ve 
not had or heard of a situation where somebody has in fact been 
denied services because they’re of an emergency nature. 
 
I want to say to you that in respect to the MRI, we’re happy in 
Saskatchewan to announce or have announced that soon, by the 
new year we hope, that we’ll have a second MRI that will be 
operating here out of Regina. 
 
And in the interim we’ve provided, on a number of occasions, 
opportunities for people to go out of the province to receive 
MRI services and I expect that into the future that still may be 
the case. I don’t expect that with two units in Saskatchewan that 
we will never have an occasion where we don’t have to send 
someone out. 
 
But the receipt of the prior approval is very important here. And 
the definition of who is actually able to receive approval to go 
outside the province is done in a fairly logistic process, in my 
opinion . . . where it really is a responsibility of the family 
physician or the practising physician whom you are attending to 
really make the request on your behalf. And to ensure that that 
approval is provided. 
 
And I want to say to you that from time to time in my short 
tenure in this position, that isn’t always the case. That in fact, 
physicians have not got that approval in time. And it’s not that 
they don’t know, okay. Because I’ve learned now too that 
physicians across the province have a full appreciation that in 
order to refer somebody outside the province they need to get 
that prior approval. 
 
Now in some instances it’s very, very difficult for the physician 
to say to the person who’s standing beside you or, who you’ve 
just completed the examination, that you need to wait for a 
period of time. It’s very difficult to do that and so sometimes 
they hope for the best. And that is that they refer the person on 
and then the individual gets stuck in the kind of situation that 

you’re talking about, that you’re constituent faces because that 
prior approval was not obtained. 
 
Now the decision about whether or not somebody requires an 
MRI and the level on which they need to retain that service, 
how long they can wait, really is determined by the physician, 
in my opinion. They determine that. 
 
(1645) 
 
And the Department of Health, through the people who are 
responsible for providing out-of-province coverage, in my 
opinion are fairly flexible. But they have to receive that 
information in advance in order for the department to make the 
appropriate recommendation. 
 
And so I say to you, when we look at the MRIs themselves in 
the province, I mean seven years ago we didn’t even have one, 
we didn’t have one MRI in this province, and people were sent 
out. Today we have one. Soon we’re going to have two and 
hopefully that will alleviate some of the difficulties that you 
speak about into the future. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, I just 
have one additional comment to make to you. And I make it to 
you because I believe that the Department of Health has an 
obligation and a responsibility in the area of the fight against 
child prostitution, as much as any other department does. 
 
Now we have major, major health problems resulting from 
children that are sexually and physically abused on the streets. 
Not only are they picking up communicable diseases, HIV 
(human immunodeficiency virus), etc., that is being transmitted 
rapidly around the province, but their health and the subsequent 
sort of needs they have and the detriment to society, the overall 
picture of this is extremely, extremely, not only financially 
costly to every one in this province, but the human cost is 
immeasureable. 
 
And so I am just standing today, Mr. Minister, to put in a plea 
to you to please put your head together with the Minister of 
Social Services and the Minister of Justice to see that we can 
effect every possible measure, concrete measures, that will 
address this issue as soon as possible. I can’t wait and neither 
can the children on the streets wait. 
 
I think of us sitting here, Mr. Minister, and I think within less 
than one mile from where we are sitting today, children are 
going through this atrocity. They cannot wait June, July, 
August, September, October, November, December, January, 
February, and March, and April until next year when the House 
reconvenes, the legislation to come to pass that are going to 
assist them. So I ask you to impress on the ministers you work 
with and on your entire caucus, the immediacy of the need to do 
something, to take measures that will certainly help to fight this 
awful crime as soon as possible. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of 
committees. I’d like to welcome the minister and his officials 
here this late afternoon. I’d like to deal with a couple of issues 
that involve not totally but partially health care and that’s the 
911 system. Ambulances will be dispatched or called and 
dispatched through the 911 system. Just how far along the road 



May 25, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

has that gone, Mr. Minister, in providing that service and what 
kind of service can we expect once 911 service becomes 
available throughout the province? I know that it’s been 
available now for a year or so in Swift Current area. It’s 
available to a lesser degree, in other areas such as Estevan 
which is dealt with locally right now . . . but when the 
implementation comes in and when will that implementation 
come in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think some of the work . . . Mr. Deputy 
Chair, welcome back. First I want to say that throughout the 
province today there has been some consolidation as you can 
appreciate of some of the emergency dispatch services. And so 
you have larger networks today that are in place that are serving 
broader parts of the province to ensure that you have that kind 
of cover-off that 911 eventually will accommodate in the 
province. 
 
There has been now a designation, I believe, of four regions 
across the province that will serve as our regional sites to 
enhance and ensure that the 911 system is well designed and 
that the accessibility to communities across the province can be 
provided. So those regions I think are now in place. 
 
And we’re not sure yet — I’m not sure — how in fact the 
existing consolidated districts today that are using a . . . and I 
forget the number that they’re using, it’s a one-line number that 
four or five districts can buy into today, and several districts can 
access the services of that dispatch unit. 
 
I say that when the 911 regional services are in place, which I 
expect will happen — and I don’t know the date on that but 
likely in short order because now the regional sites have been 
designed, they’re in place, they’ve been announced — and the 
work is ongoing today to develop their work and how the 
current existing services will be integrated or rolled into those. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
what are the regions going to be? Where are those centres of 
dispatch going to be out of? Is there one or two communities 
across the province? Is there a large number of communities 
that are going to be doing the dispatch work? How is that going 
to work, and where are those regions going to be for the 
dispatch of ambulances through 911? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the regions I believe are Prince 
Albert, Saskatoon, Regina, and Swift Current are the ones 
currently that are being proposed. And I think those are the ones 
that you’ll see as the regional sites. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. Which areas will each of 
those communities be serving? Will the south-east’s call centre 
be Regina? Will it be Swift Current? What is the plans in that 
direction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, those are the standards 
that are currently . . . They’re developing the standards right 
now and the level of involvement. Which districts will be 
reporting to which area, which call centres will be covering that 
off are currently in the process of being designed across the 
province, as I understand it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, there’s been 

some concerns expressed to me if those call centres are placed 
too far out of the geographic region that they’re actually 
serving. It was suggested to me that for service in the 
south-east, that that would be delivered out of Swift Current. 
 
Now a person sitting in Swift Current receiving a 911 call from 
Glen Ewen, in all likelihood isn’t going to have any idea where 
Glen Ewen is at, although I have to admit probably somebody 
in Regina doesn’t know where Glen Ewen’s at either. But 
people who are somewhat more local in the area do know where 
the communities are. 
 
And I understand that you’re going to have some sort of a list 
you can pull up on the computer to say, well here’s the first 
responder in Glen Ewen to go out and . . . But the kind of call 
you’re going to get is that, well I’m at Henry’s farm. Well 
who’s Henry? And is that call going to provide any more 
information than simply the telephone number for the 911 call 
or is it going to give a land location or what kind of 
information? 
 
The concern was expressed that it’s going to be difficult for the 
person transmitting the information from the 911 centre to the 
local ambulance service to provide the exact location where the 
ambulance is needed. If it was integrated through a more local 
system with police and fire, in a lot of cases police . . . In a lot 
of cases police are on the road already, they have cruisers in 
that area available, they know the area because they patrol it 
every day, they can then assist in the dispatch of the ambulance 
when they’re going to an accident or something in a domestic 
home or a business. 
 
So the police can then inform them, well come this route, these 
particular roads or streets whatever the case may be, because of 
certain things that are happening at the present time — traffic is 
heavy, there’s been another accident or something, or there’s 
road construction, whatever the case may be — that would 
assist in getting the ambulance to the proper location. 
 
If you get it too far away from the location then there’s no 
information outside of the system that people can rely on. 
They’re simply looking at their maps and really don’t know 
what’s happening. Road construction in a municipality or on a 
highway and that, I would suspect, would be difficult to keep 
track of that at all times on the 911 system. 
 
So is any consideration being given to having that provided on a 
more local regional basis rather than simply more locations 
across the province — in particular, Swift Current serving the 
south-east? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the question that the member 
raises are ones that are still being sorted out. But I want to 
suggest that part of the vision of course and the envisioning is 
that, what you will have is a central dispatch system. Not unlike 
today what you have with the RCMP. 
 
So that if you happen to be in a rural Saskatchewan today, you 
make a call, that call might actually go to Regina — as a 
Yorkton guy — that call may actually go to Regina, dispatched 
back out of Regina, back to the local detachments in my 
community, who will then go out and provide the service. So 
keep in mind that the call centres are really going to be central 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 1998 

dispatching centres. 
 
Your on the ground community emergency services will be the 
ones which the information will flow back to, is how I see it. 
Now within the system today they’re designing a very complex, 
and have the ability to do that and it’s well on its way, in terms 
of the GIS (geographic information systems), are today you can 
track very nicely on the computer system. 
 
And, as in my opinion, as SHIN (Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network) makes itself more prominent in the 
scheme of delivering health services in this province, what you 
could see through the GIS system is that farm that you talk 
about where somebody might need some help, it would be 
tracked and plotted so that the people at the other end who are 
providing direct emergency services would know exactly where 
to go, because that information would make its way right back 
to the community core of people who are providing the 
emergency services. 
 
And I expect that it could be a team. It could be a team of 
individuals who are providing that. It could be your police and 
your health system or your education system that would be 
available or on deck to provide those emergency services in the 
local communities. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — One of the other areas of concern that 
was expressed to me was that on a 911 call, you’d be calling 
one location to get the information passed along for ambulance; 
you’d be phoning another location to pass along information for 
police; you could be phoning a third location for fire-fighting, 
rescue services. You’re going to have to make a lot of calls. 
 
Now in the small rural communities in some of those locations 
you don’t have all of the services in one community and 
centrally located. In some of the larger communities such as 
Estevan and Weyburn, probably Yorkton, one single call is 
presently serving that purpose. But when you go to a 911 
centralized system serving out of Swift Current or Regina, those 
people will then in all likelihood now all of a sudden have to 
phone three different locations to pass that information along. 
 
And that seems to be a time-consuming effort, Mr. Minister, 
one in which people can get confused and in which information 
can be lost. Also it’s more difficult for them to funnel that 
information back in if it’s at a more centralized location than a 
more localized service. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the point that you make is 
exactly the one that we hope that 911 or we know that 911 will 
work at addressing. And that’s that they will coordinate those 
services because today in the province you only have four 
communities that really are on-line for 911. I mean P.A. (Prince 
Albert), Saskatoon, Regina, and I think Swift Current, are the 
only communities that have that kind of accessibility. 
 
So as much as you raise the issue about the importance of 
coordination, that’s exactly what those central dispatch systems 
will provide, will ensure that that coordination occurs, and that 
they can then redirect that call back to the community. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1317 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1318 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1318 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Shillington......................................................................................................................................................................1318, 1342 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1318 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1319 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1319 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1319 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1340 
  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................1341 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Regional Economic Development Authority Network 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1319 
 Anniversary of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1319 
 Caring Canadian Award Recipient 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1319 
 Channel Lake Inquiry 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1320 
 National Missing Children’s Day 
  Murray.....................................................................................................................................................................................1320 
 Residents of Buffalo Narrows Recognized 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1320 
 Constituent Chosen for Sask-Cam Team 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1320 
 Globe Theatre Artistic Director Leaves Regina 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1321 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Highways Funding 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1321 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1321 
 Memo to Regina Health District Employees 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1322 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1322 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1323 
 Environmental Concerns 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1324 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1324 
 Crown Corporation Foreign Investments 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1325 
 SaskPower Advertising 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1325 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Health — Vote 32 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1332 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1335 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1338 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1342 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1346 
 
 
 


