





























































Hansard: April 22, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 701 
 April 22, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
petition is from people in the Carlyle, Redvers area. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis which we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre to conduct a 
comprehensive review of the health crisis that we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Saskatoon area, Mr. Speaker. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions, but with a little regret, noting the presence of the 
former Speaker and the fact we’re limited to one, but I’ll 
present the petition I have today. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health centre crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
Redvers, Weyburn, Carnduff, Oxbow areas, and Arcola area of 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Carnduff, Glen 
Ewen, and Alida. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I too rise to present a petition. And I read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And these are signed by the good people from all over 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of people concerned about the closure of the Plains 
hospital. The petition calls for a moratorium on the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a comprehensive 
review of the health care crisis we’re experiencing. 
 
People on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities 
of Carnduff and Oxbow. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to put a moratorium on the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre until they conduct a 
comprehensive review into the health crisis we are 
currently experiencing. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

People that have signed this petition are from Carnduff, 
Alameda, and Oxbow. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again to 
present a petition. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people that signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Weyburn. And I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the community of Weyburn. I so present. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the 
Plains Health Centre closure: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from Francis and 
Weyburn. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so work can begin in 1998, and 
to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of the 
project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These all come from the community of Hazlet, Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’m happy to present them on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
for the first time to present petitions on behalf of 
disenfranchised widows and widowers of Saskatchewan, and I 
shall read into the record the entire prayer, pardon me, the entire 
petition: 
 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It’s only in order to read into the 
record the prayer itself and I’ll invite the hon. member to 
proceed directly to that part of the petition. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, I shall read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have The Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows/widowers of Saskatchewan whereby their pensions 
are reinstated and the revoked pensions reimbursed to them 
retroactively and with interest, as requested by the 
statement of entitlement presented to the Workers’ 

Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And these petitioners today are from the Regina district, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan and 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains hospital 
may be continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has signatures on it from, mostly 
from Weyburn, Estevan, and Fillmore. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I have petitions this afternoon 
from citizens of the province concerned about our crumbling 
health care system and it’s particularly about the loss of the 
Plains hospital. These petitions have been signed by the good 
people of Weyburn and Goodwater. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in bringing forth petitions in efforts to stop the 
closure of the Plains hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains hospital by 
enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are mostly 
from the Weyburn area, but also the MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) from Moosomin. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; saving the Plains Health Centre; calling an 
independent public inquiry into Channel Lake; and the 
placing of a moratorium on the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
 

Clerk: — Mr. Johnson, as Chair of the Standing Committee on 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

Private Members’ Bills presents the fifth report of the said 
committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned 
petition for a private Bill and finds that the provisions of 
rules 64, 65, and 68 have been fully complied with. 
 
Of the Conference of Mennonites in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for An Act respecting the 
Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan. 
 
Your committee has duly examined the following petition 
for a private Bill and finds that rule 64 and 65 have been 
complied with, and your committee is satisfied that the 
publication requirements of rule 68 have been met. 
 
Of the Fondation de la radio Française et l’Association 
Culturelle Franco-Canadienne de la Saskatchewan, in the 
province of Saskatchewan praying for An Act respecting 
the Fondation fransaskois, 1998. 
 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 35 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: how do you plan on getting the federal 
government to join with the provinces in formulating a 
national transportation policy which would bring more 
federal money to the rural road structure; in view of your 
recent statement that you have no more money for 
members of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and as the problem is largely, in your view, 
the results of rail-line abandonment and the abdication of 
federal government responsibilities to an interprovincial or 
national highway systems, how do you plan to achieve 
your goals; do you plan to be a bell-wether on this process? 

 
I have another short question that I shall ask on day 35 of the 
Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker: 
 

What position is your office and the government taking 
with regards to the issues raised in the letter to Mr. George 
Thomson, deputy minister of Justice and deputy attorney 
general of Canada, written by J.P.R. Murray of the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) as per copy of letter 
attached and tabled herewith? 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 35 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

(1) Prior to the formation of the Living Sky Health District 
in 1994, what was the ratio of management staff to primary 
care-givers in 1993 at the Lanigan Hospital, the Watrous 

Hospital, and the Wynyard Hospital; (2) what is the current 
ratio of management staff to primary care-givers in the 
Living Sky health care district which takes in the Lanigan 
Hospital, the Watrous Hospital, the Wynyard Hospital, the 
Central Parkland Lodge, home care for the district, and 
other long-term facilities for the district; (3) what is 
considered to be an optimum ratio of management staff to 
primary care-givers in Saskatchewan hospitals and other 
health facilities housing patients; (4) what is the current 
average ratio of management staff to primary care at 
Saskatchewan hospitals and other health facilities housing 
patients? 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 35 ask the government the following question: 
 

(1) How many individuals were asked to submit medical 
reports from physicians or medical specialists in 1996 as a 
requirement to maintain a driver’s licence; (2) how many 
of the aforementioned individuals were required to cover 
the cost of obtaining these medical reports themselves for 
the purpose of maintaining their licence in 1996? 
 

I have the same questions for 1997. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great 
privilege for me to introduce to you a member in our . . . a guest 
in our gallery. Her name is Vanessa Jack. She’s from the White 
Calf Collegiate in Lebret. Vanessa is part of the cooperative 
education program at the White Calf Collegiate. A number of 
students are participating in this program. 
 
She’s been job-shadowing myself and people in my office for 
the last number of months, and I want to say what a delight it 
has been to have her as a regular participant in the work of my 
office. I wish her all the best as she proceeds with her education 
in her school and beyond. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming Vanessa to the 
House this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to the other members of the 
House, seated in your gallery are three very important people: 
John Brockelbank, former Speaker of this House and also a 
former MLA of mine; Bill McLean, a former employee of the 
city of Regina; and another former Speaker of the House, and I 
don’t know if I should say a friend of mine, Herman Rolfes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that today I will behave. And I’d 
ask the other members to welcome these people today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 50 grade 4 students from St. Marguerite 
Bourgeoys School. St. Marguerite is located in the south-east 
area of the city, a rapidly growing area, and you can understand 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

with 50 students in grade 4 why they look forward to expanding 
to a new school in that area. They’re accompanied today, Mr. 
Speaker, by Betty-Ann Faber and Kathy Achtemichuk. I’m 
looking forward to meeting with them in room 218 following 
question period, after they’ve had a chance to tour. 
 
I’m encouraged, Mr. Speaker, that my colleague says this 
afternoon she’s going to behave. And I’d ask all members to 
join her in that behaviour so I have less to explain when I meet 
with my students. 
 
In the meantime, I ask all members to give them a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce a guest from Melfort, a construction worker. Ray 
Cantelo is here to watch the proceedings of the House. And he 
tells me he’s going to . . . he’s a political person and he’s going 
to be watching the . . . or keep the chickens on the run in 
Melfort. So I want everybody to welcome him here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 
four guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. We have Gene Senft 
from the town of Lemberg — Gene’s a foreman there — his 
wife, Anne Marie Senft; Marshall Hauck, the town councillor in 
Lemberg; and Dale Nelson who is the president of the 
Saskatchewan Water and Wastewater Association. 
 
I’d ask those four individuals to stand up so we can see who 
they are. 
 
I would like to, Mr. Speaker, say a couple of words about Gene. 
He is the first Saskatchewan water and wastewater facility 
operator to receive an unrestricted operator’s certificate. This 
certificate meets the qualifications required by mandatory 
certification programs across North America. Gene, we are 
certainly proud of your achievement and hope that you will be a 
role model for other water and wastewater operators in our 
province. 
 
And I would ask that all hon. members join me in welcoming 
the guests here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add words of 
welcome with the Environment minister to the good people of 
my constituency from Lemberg whom I visit very often. I’d 
also like to welcome Vanessa from Lebret, and I’d particularly 
like to congratulate Wendel Star, who is the program 
coordinator, for allowing young people to work with various 
departments and find out what people do, and perhaps do not do 
on occasion, during the course of day-to-day life. 
 
I’d also like to welcome the former Speaker of the House, Mr. 
Rolfes, and I want to welcome him because I still recall, when 
first elected and he had us on this floor of this Assembly, and 
put the fear of the Lord in us about what the Speaker’s authority 

was. And I remember that to this day, Mr. Speaker. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
draw your attention to a gentleman who’s sitting behind the bar 
on the government side — a good friend of mine and former 
NDP (New Democratic Party) MLA serving in the Shellbrook 
. . . no, the Prince Albert, I think it was Duck Lake area at the 
time. And served also for a brief time, I believe, as Minister of 
Northern Saskatchewan, what was known as the DNS 
(Department of Northern Saskatchewan) in those days, and 
that’s Mr. Jerry Hammersmith. And I ask everybody to 
welcome Jerry to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Attack on Plains Hospital Nurses 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
ugly is the only way to describe what some New Democrat 
MLAs tried to pull off last night. And I say some, because the 
Minister of Health was cringing and not part of this as he 
witnessed his NDP colleagues try and stage a personal attack on 
Darlene Sterling and Lenore Schmelling. 
 
These are two emergency room nurses at the Plains hospital 
who have no political affiliation to any party. They believe the 
Plains should be saved, they believe the decision to close the 
Plains is wrong, and they are fighting for what they believe in. 
 
What was attempted last night was politics at its worst — a 
vicious personal attack against individuals because they dared 
to oppose the decision being made by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you speak often about the importance of 
democracy, yet members of your caucus, those from Regina 
South and Weyburn-Big Muddy, think nothing of attempting a 
hatchet job. 
 
The 500-plus people who attended our Save the Plains meeting 
in Weyburn last night didn’t buy the act. They roundly booed 
the act and proceeded to give a standing ovation to these two 
nurses. 
 
Isn’t it ironic that in the home town of Tommy Douglas, NDP 
members would provide people with a demonstration of politics 
at its absolute worst. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Professional Secretaries Week 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week has been 
proclaimed Professional Secretaries Week and today is 
Secretaries Day. 
 
During this week, those of us that are fortunate enough to have 
support staff have the opportunity to state publicly what we 
should realize all year around, to say thank you to them. 
Without the aid and support and encouragement and tolerance 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

of our secretaries, we would not be the finally honed, 
exceedingly efficient, superbly organized group of members. 
 
One thing we should think about doing for Secretaries Week is 
changing the name. The term “secretary,” with its outmoded 
image of shorthand, typing, errand running, and little else, does 
not begin to do justice to the many complex and difficult tasks 
which our assistants perform. How about this, Mr. Speaker — 
administrative assistants. 
 
As other speakers have said in previous years, it would be 
worthwhile, a humbling experience, if once a year we were 
given an impossible task to perform in an unreasonable time — 
our secretaries do this daily. We might not say it often or loudly 
enough, but we do know how important they are, and on behalf 
of our caucus, we thank them for their service and their 
friendship. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to join with our 
colleague from Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we mark a very important day. Today we honour 
those people who helped all of us be a little more organized, 
remind us of our appointments, and answer our phones, which 
seemingly ring non-stop these days. Of course I speak about our 
secretaries. 
 
Without our administrative assistants, which I know they prefer 
to be called, where would any of us be, Mr. Speaker — 
probably at the bottom of a large pile of unfiled and unanswered 
mail, that’s where. Of course the duties of our assistants go 
much beyond simple filing and typing. They are an integral part 
of our office. More than assistants, more often they are our 
partners in the workplace, and an irreplaceable one at that. 
 
So on this day which we honour these hard-working men and 
women, we should remember that they deserve to be 
remembered and thanked, each and every day of the year. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Earth Day 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is Earth Day, 
a day proclaimed in 1970 during which we should recommit 
ourselves to restoring, renewing, and preserving the 
environment of this planet Earth, our island home, as the 
Anglican prayer book describes it. 
 
I want to congratulate the students of Winston Knoll Collegiate 
in my constituency who yesterday did more than talk about the 
environment; they spent the day cleaning it up around their 
neighbourhood — actions, not words, which is what Earth Day 
should be all about. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Town Meeting on Grain Transportation System 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I was 

fortunate enough to be able to attend one of the meetings that 
Mr. Estey’s holding around the province, held in my home 
town, and it was rather exciting to see some of the events that 
were taking place. 
 
Mr. Estey gave a statement of his understanding and it was very 
impressive to see the knowledge that he has of a very 
complicated system. And I think that bodes well for some hope 
for the report that he is going to give. 
 
RM (rural municipality) reeves were out there in force, Mr. 
Speaker, basically asking for financial help from both the 
provincial and the federal government and also for a highways 
plan. 
 
It was also good that the support there came from . . . the 
member from Carrot River was also there and he had brought 
with him all of his supporters, almost one bus load. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Samuel McLeod Awards 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 
20 in Prince Albert, outstanding businesses were recognized at 
the annual Samuel McLeod Awards Banquet held in the 
Marlboro Inn, and I’d like to take this opportunity to 
acknowledge the coordinating committee, the awards sponsors, 
and of course congratulate the very deserving recipients of the 
Samuel McLeod awards. 
 
In particular, sir, I’d like to recognize the individual who has 
made a very significant impact and contribution to our 
economy, Mr. Jack Matheson of Matheson’s Men’s Wear, who 
was recognized that night. 
 
Other awards that were presented, new product or service was 
presented to Plaza Hobbicrafts; the new business award 
presented to Six Shooters Saloon; service industry award was 
presented to Lakeland Ford Sales; the investment award was 
presented to Malenfant Enterprises; the community 
involvement award was presented to Ashley Cabinets; job 
creation to Provincial Forest Products, as well as the business of 
the year. 
 
I want to congratulate, Mr. Speaker, all of these very fine 
businesses who make our community as positive a place to live 
and to work as it is. 
 
And before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
acknowledge the presence again of our two former MLAs, Mr. 
Brockelbank and Mr. Rolfes. And I want to indicate to them my 
pleasure that they would take this time away from their very 
important schedule of golfing and leisure to share these 
moments with us today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pay Equity for Women 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

today in response to the concerns of the pay equity coalition of 
Saskatchewan. I see a government across from us here today 
that are the masters of smoke and mirrors. They promised pay 
equity in 1991. Seven long years have gone by for the women 
of Saskatchewan and with a few small exceptions, the women 
of Saskatchewan are no closer to any meaningful pay equity 
than they were when this government came to power. 
 
It’s yet another one of their string of broken promises. And 
again, Mr. Speaker, their back-benchers are huddled under their 
cone of silence. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the report, “Economic 
Gender Equality Indicators,” has found the gap is widening in 
Saskatchewan. This just goes to show that the NDP’s so-called 
plans are nothing more than paper dragons. And it’s further 
evidence that this government is losing its ability to care. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I’ll let the House know and everyone 
else across this province, that the Liberals stand strong for the 
principles of equal pay for work of equal value. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drug Abuse Resistance Education Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would 
like to congratulate the RCMP and the students of the Rosetown 
Walter Aseltine School who are the first graduating class of the 
Drug Abuse Resistance Education program, or D.A.R.E., in the 
province of Saskatchewan, introduced to students from the 
Walter Aseltine School in February of this year. 
 
It is a unique, comprehensive, prevention education program 
which is designed to equip elementary school children with 
skills to recognize and resist social pressures to experiment with 
tobacco, alcohol, and other drugs. 
 
The D.A.R.E. program, which was offered to students as an 
initiative of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, teaches 
students about issues like self-esteem and peer pressure as well 
as the detrimental effects of getting involved with drugs, 
smoking, and alcohol. 
 
The program’s ultimate goal is to give our young people the 
courage to say no to drugs and become role models in our 
communities. 
 
In addition, students gain an appreciation for who they are as 
individuals and the important roles they play in their families, 
school, and community. 
 
The program was well received by students, parents, and 
educators alike, and is sure to be used as an effective tool in 
combating drug abuse among teens in our communities. 
 
I want again to congratulate not only the first graduating class 
of D.A.R.E., but also the parents, educators, and RCMP officers 
whose hard work brought this unique program to Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you and best wishes to all of you as you dare to make a 
difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Paralympians 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Monday in 
Saskatoon there was a reception to honour two outstanding and 
inspiring athletes. Between them, Marni Winder and Colette 
Bourgonje claimed five of the twelve medals won by Canada at 
the recent Paralympics in Nagano, Japan. Colette won two 
silver medals in cross-country sit skiing. Marni took a silver and 
two bronze medals in alpine low vision skiing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, skiing is a sport for those more courageous than I. 
These women not only ski, they ignore their physical 
limitations and engage in competition at the highest level. In 
fact Marni did not begin competing until she began to lose her 
peripheral vision. That commitment and that courage is 
admirable. 
 
In addition to Colette’s medals, she is a teacher at Brunskill 
School and on Monday she found out that she’s also being 
honoured by having a street in Saskatoon named after her. This 
is very appropriate since she started her Paralympic career 
racing on Saskatoon streets. I was very proud to be involved in 
organizing some of those early road races for Colette. 
 
With these two athletes in our province, it is also appropriate 
that on Monday it was announced that Saskatchewan will host 
the 1999 World Cup Disabled Ski Competition. We already 
know who two of those medallists will be. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions 
are for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, over the past two 
nights both you and I have attended public meetings about the 
closure of the Plains hospital and you have heard a lot of very 
angry people. A lot of people who feel betrayed by your NDP 
government. A lot of people who have personal stories about 
their experiences at the Plains. Surely this must be starting to 
have some effect on you. Are you going to listen? Are you 
going to step in and reverse this terrible decision and keep the 
Plains hospital open? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to first confirm and 
say to the member opposite that I, like he, have been at the 
public meetings now and I’ve been at three of the public 
meetings across the province. And the Liberal meetings have 
been well organized without any question and the involvement 
of the public has been, in my opinion, well received. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that throughout the 
meetings there has been a great deal of emotion expressed about 
the loss of the facility — about the loss of the facility — and a 
great deal of discussion about the fact that there’s going to be 
significant loss of service, which the member opposite talks 
about and the Liberals talk about. And throughout the last 
meeting, Mr. Speaker, we were able to reaffirm, I say in 
Weyburn, the impact is finally to make sense. 
 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

It’s finally making sense because the people are accepting that 
the services are going to be moved from the Plains to the 
General Hospital, that services are going to be better, that 
physicians will not leave the province, that we’re going to have 
as many hospital beds as in the past. Mr. Speaker, the public is 
understanding what the Liberals and the Tories are saying in 
their fearmongering about what’s happening with health 
services around the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, indeed the attendance at 
these meetings has been very good but the reception for the 
minister’s message has been very poor for him except for his 
hacks that get up to the mike once in awhile but get booed away 
from it. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other night in Indian Head you made a very 
telling comment. You said, I’m not here to talk about the future 
— I’m not here to talk about the future. Well if I were you I 
guess I wouldn’t want to talk about the future of health care 
either. There’s no future for health care under your government. 
I don’t imagine you want to talk about the past either. You 
don’t want to talk about how you’ve broken every NDP 
promise to reduce waiting-lists and to keep hospital beds open. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a lot of people who do want to talk about 
the future of health care and they are giving you an earful. The 
question is, are you listening? Mr. Minister, will you today 
announce that you have heard the message and the Plains 
hospital will remain open? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, every day in this province 
when I get an opportunity, I speak about the future of health 
care in this province. And in no other provincial jurisdiction in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, has there been more accomplished in 
health care than there has been here in Saskatchewan — 
nowhere else in the province. 
 
At the expense, Mr. Speaker, of what the member opposite talks 
about, the past Tory, and I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, about 
what his leader said — and who still I believe is his leader, the 
member from Kindersley — when he said, during his opening 
comments on health care, he said this: 
 

Boyd gave cautious praise to the NDP government for 
closing rural hospitals that needed to be closed. 
 

That’s what he said. And then he goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, 
he goes on to say that: 
 

We have to come to grips with the attitude of health care 
services in this province and that health care services in 
this province are working. 
 

Mr. Speaker — are working. And that comes from the member 
opposite when he was a Tory member, and I say to the members 
opposite that today in Saskatchewan — today in Saskatchewan 
— we have the best health care services anywhere in Canada, 
and we will continue to provide the kinds of funding that’s 
necessary to increase and secure health care services in this 

province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Child Benefit Program 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for Social Services. Mr. 
Minister, there’s a great deal of anticipation about the National 
Child Benefit Program which comes into effect this July. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, the Welfare Rights Centre in Regina is 
concerned that not all of the money will go to the children it is 
supposed to help. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the executive director of 
the centre, Morris Eagles, says that money may be misspent if it 
goes to parents with alcohol, drug, or gambling addictions. 
Under the current system, your department actually has trustees 
to deal with that problem. But that safeguard will be removed 
when the National Child Benefit comes into effect in July. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you concerned about this problem? Have you 
spoken to the federal government about this problem, the 
problem that’s been raised with us today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to the latter 
question is absolutely yes, we have been speaking to the federal 
government about this very issue. But to put the issue in some 
context, I want the member to know that in the current welfare 
system if we believe a family may not have the capacity to 
appropriately provide benefits to their children, we place that 
family under what we describe as trusteeship, where in fact the 
welfare cheque is provided to the trustee who then works with 
the family. 
 
But to put this in a perspective, Mr. Speaker, 1.7 per cent — 1.7 
per cent of all families receiving welfare benefits in 
Saskatchewan — are placed on trusteeship. 
 
Even though it is that small, we are concerned about this issue. 
We have been talking to the federal government. It is the federal 
government which simply will not engage funding to a third 
party of trustees, and we are continuing to talk to them about 
this very important issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, a further question to the Minister of 
Social Services. Mr. Minister, your government is putting 
millions of dollars into this new program and that’s what 
you’ve acknowledged. 
 
If you’re putting all this money in, I think you should really be 
concerned about the fact that it actually gets to children. Morris 
Eagles of the Welfare Rights Centre says, and I quote: 
 

If that money is being delivered into the hands of 
problematic parents and that money is being wasted, it 
means that there is going to be no money in the home for 
food, for clothing, for personal expenses for the children. 
 

Mr. Minister, all the money in the world isn’t going to help the 
child poverty program if it can’t ensure that money is getting to 
the children who need help. 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

Mr. Minister, you say you’re talking to the federal government. 
Well what are you really doing about it? Why aren’t you 
pressing the federal government to allow you to disburse the 
funds if you already have the program and the safeguards in 
place to deal with the concerns that are being raised? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to say initially, Mr. Speaker, point 
number one: the vast, vast, vast majority of parents who receive 
social assistance benefits are true to having those benefits go to 
the needs of their children. Let us not confuse ourselves about 
that. There are a very small percentage. 
 
We have been working over the past number of months with the 
federal government. The federal government is intransigent on 
this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to assure that member that any parents who are 
under trusteeship today will very likely remain under 
trusteeship. We will still have that window into the family, and 
those agencies in our province, including Morris Eagles in 
Regina, the Salvation Army in my own community and other 
communities, will still have continuing work with those 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now I’ve heard that new party’s leader speaking 
about the need to reform welfare. Mr. Speaker, you know what 
he’s saying these days? He’s saying that we should provide 
incentives to people on welfare to move to independence. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m glad we have the support of that party and its 
leader for what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskPower. Mr. 
Minister, yesterday two senior officials presented evidence 
under oath that suggests the final sale agreement for Channel 
Lake may have been fraudulent. In fact Ken Christensen and 
Larry Kram said they have known about this for over a week. 
But you said you only found out about it yesterday. 
 
What’s the matter, Mr. Minister, aren’t you in the loop over 
there at SaskPower? Mr. Minister, what are you going to do 
about this? Have you gone to your lawyers to find out what 
your options are? Have you gone to the police to find out what 
the options are there? What are you doing to protect the 
interests of Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I think the real 
question is which loop you are in, sir, whether you’re a Liberal 
or a Saskatchewan Party or a Tory. There are many people 
asking about your credibility. 
 
And I want to remind you of something that Mr. Ted Priel said 
to you and to your committee members and all the committee 
members this morning. He said, and I quote: 
 

I want to repeat the caution I gave to the committee 
yesterday. Don’t jump to conclusions until you’ve heard 

all of the evidence. In light of new information, it appears 
that some of the conclusions made yesterday were 
irresponsible. 

 
Now I’m not sure he was referring to you or to the member 
from Kindersley or someone in the opposition or in the 
government benches, but what I would urge you is, if you’re 
going to be part of the inquiry, which I know you are, it’s 
impossible to hold an inquiry and jump to the conclusion of 
what’s happening after hearing parts of the evidence and 
listening to part of the witnesses. 
 
You’re going to have to be patient; you’re going to have to do 
the questioning, as I know you are, and then after you’ve heard 
from everyone, hopefully in a calm and reasonable way, come 
to the conclusion as to whether or not action is needed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you now have 
sufficient evidence to have . . . before you to know that the 
whole botched Channel Lake deal, agreement, should be 
declared null and void. Then you could go back to square one. 
You could start over and maybe this time you could get it right. 
Sell the Channel Lake properties through a public tender, award 
the gas supply contract through a public tender, and get a fair 
price for the people of Saskatchewan, assuming that your 
officials would read the documents. 
 
Have you learned anything from this, Mr. Speaker. Will you 
take steps to have this agreement declared null and void? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say one thing to the 
member opposite, that on March 10 in this Assembly I made it 
clear that mistakes had been made. And we went about to set up 
the Crown Corporations Committee, when you refused to call 
Public Accounts, with special powers to do investigations, to 
subpoena people, to bring them and to bring evidence to that 
committee. We released a thousand documents. 
 
So I say to you, sir, we have learned a great deal from the 
mistake that has been made. 
 
But I want to question you, the member from Melfort, on this 
issue. Have you learned anything from the fact that the party 
you now belong to created $15 billion in debt and you and your 
colleagues have never apologized — never apologized. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, I would say this is one of the few times you’ve 
seen a rat swimming to a sinking ship, which is what your party 
is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
 
Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP government released a 
report today on the issue of health information. They are going 
through the motions of getting public input, but privacy is an 
expensive second thought. The NDP has already spent $7 
million to start developing SHIN (Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network) in spite of the fact that major, major 
privacy concerns have yet to be addressed. 
 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

The Saskatchewan Medical Association has raised concerns 
about, and I quote, “the undue haste with which this proposed 
legislation is being pursued.” SHIN chairperson, John 
Grossman, indicates in a February 11 letter to the deputy 
minister of Health that, “the right of the individuals who request 
non-disclosure of portions of a record will create significant 
technical challenges for SHIN.” 
 
I’m asking the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, must it be 
developed . . . it must be developed with privacy in mind or you 
may very well end up starting from scratch after spending 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars. What is the rush, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, in this province more than 
six months ago we indicated to the people of Saskatchewan — 
and to the Liberal Party — that we would be proceeding with 
the development of a Saskatchewan health information package, 
and that it would be complementary to the work that’s being 
done in Alberta and complementary to the work that’s being 
done in Manitoba. And we would be ensuring that we would 
provide to Saskatchewan people the best technology and the 
best linkages across the province in order to ensure high quality 
services, particularly, Mr. Speaker, to the people in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we made the commitment, Mr. Speaker, that we would 
bring to this House and Assembly legislation that would do all 
of the things that the member talks about — ensuring privacy, 
confidentiality, and respecting the information that’s within the 
individual’s files. And today we’re in that consultation process 
and the member’s correct, there have been some issues that 
have been raised by the Saskatchewan Medical Association and 
we continue to speak with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and all of the other stakeholders in preparation for 
bringing that particular piece of legislation to the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one of 
the big problems with health information systems in the United 
States is that laws drafted by legislators aren’t comprehensive 
enough to protect all medical records. To give you a few 
examples, a study found that 35 per cent of Fortune 500 
companies reviewed what is supposed to be private information 
before hiring workers. Direct mail advertisers have obtained 
access to database information containing names of millions of 
people with specific health ailments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: unless this project is done right, 
the ultimate casualty will be our health care system and those 
who depend on the system. 
 
What guarantees can you give the people of Saskatchewan that 
SHIN will be a fail-safe network? And unless you can do that, 
how can you justify sinking $40 million of valuable health care 
dollars into this program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important 

that the member opposite pay some attention to what’s 
happening across the country — should pay some attention to 
what’s happening across the country. 
 
Because today, Mr. Speaker, we are in the technical age and as 
are people across the country — all across the country, Mr. 
Speaker. And in our province today, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
spending $40 million in a very cautious fashion. In a very 
cautious fashion, Mr. Speaker, in comparison to our friends in 
Alberta and our friends in Manitoba, who are spending to the 
tune of $200 million and $300 million over precisely the same 
period of time, we in Saskatchewan are spending $40 million. 
 
And we’re looking at spending $40 million, Mr. Speaker, 
through a very comprehensive process. A very comprehensive 
process. We’re consulting with the public, health providers, 
organizations of health professionals, consumer groups, district 
health boards, Mr. Speaker, health researchers and health 
advocacy groups. 
 
And we advertised that whole process early in February. And 
today, Mr. Speaker, we’re consulting in a very, very broad way 
to ensure that we have the kinds of assurances that protect 
information and confidentiality of the individuals whose health 
records we’ll be expected to ensure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Hillson: — It appears that the cost of Channel Lake is still 
growing. Notes from the Premier’s office filed with the Channel 
Lake inquiry show that the potential purchase price SaskPower 
paid for the initial purchase of the Channel Lake assets and 
Dynex could jump from 25 million to 30 million depending on 
a court case in Alberta. 
 
What does the Premier know about this court case? What do the 
Premier’s advisers tell him about the likelihood that the people 
of Saskatchewan are on the hook for another 5 million bucks to 
clean up the Channel Lake mess? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, again I say I was not 
at the committee this morning, but it’s my understanding, with 
the short time of briefing that I had between when the 
committee adjourned and when we came into the House, that 
you were in the process of asking the officials this very 
question. And in terms of the working of the committee, I 
would urge you to continue that line of discussion. And again, 
take the advice of Mr. Priel. 
 
What I really would urge committee members to do is to 
continue to ask the questions in the committee, but to refrain 
from jumping to conclusions between the time when you jump 
up from your chair downstairs until you sit down in here. 
Because the idea of an inquiry is to listen to all of the evidence 
and then come to conclusions. 
 
And the member from Battleford is a lawyer and he knows this. 
Think what would happen in a courtroom if your people on the 
jury jumped to the conclusion after every witness. It wouldn’t 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

work — and so you know better. You know better than what 
you’re doing right now. Wait till the next session, ask the 
questions, but don’t jump to conclusions after you get that 
answer —wait till all the witnesses appear, because you might 
come to the wrong conclusion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m amused, I’m amused to hear 
the NDP question my credibility. The Premier was quick 
enough to use me as a character witness when it served his 
purposes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — You know the 10-year exclusive supply 
contract with DEML (Direct Energy Marketing Limited) is a 
gift from the people of Saskatchewan to Direct Energy. Senior 
SaskPower officials wrote a year ago that they were not 
prepared to deal with Lawrence Portigal, yet for the next 10 
years we’re going to have to do that. 
 
How can the government be any happier than SaskPower 
officials that we have an ongoing 10-year business relationship 
with the people who may have secretly removed three pages of 
the agreement after it was signed and replaced it with three 
more? How can the government be happy dealing with people 
who may have hoodwinked us out of $5 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I appreciate that the member is now 
qualifying his radical statements by saying “may” as opposed to 
coming to conclusion. That’s a major step forward for the 
member opposite. But seriously I say to the member, if we’ve 
been using you as character reference, I promise we will refrain 
from doing that in the future. That’s over. It’s done. 
 
But on the issue of the 10-year contract, I have said to the 
member opposite that this was a deal arranged with . . . it was 
reported to the House. And I say as far as we have been able to 
determine, the commission paid on that contract, between 1 and 
3 per cent, depending on how much gas is being purchased, that 
in fact it’s within the industry standards. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, as it would relate to the other 
issues — Channel Lake, the severance of Mr. Messer — go to 
the committee, ask the questions, but I urge you not to jump to 
conclusions until you listen to all of the evidence and all the 
witnesses have appeared. Even Mr. Portigal, Mr. Speaker, to his 
defence —I know he won’t need it but the fact is — give the 
gentleman a chance to come to the committee, answer the 
questions, because I think that’s only fair. 
 
Don’t assume guilt until you listen to Mr. Portigal or others. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Benefits 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, like others who took English 
literature in high school, I was taught to memorize such lines as, 
and I quote: “Procrastination is the thief of time.” In the case of 
the wives and husbands killed on the job in Saskatchewan, the 
provincial government’s procrastination to provide pension 

benefits is not only the thief of time but the thief of justice as 
well. 
 
My question for the Minister of Labour is this: will his 
government be introducing amending legislation this session 
which will restore pension benefits to those who have been 
denied them on the grounds of remarriage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, the member asked 
substantially the same question within the last 10 days. And my 
answer now is the same as it was then — I’m awaiting a report 
from the Workers’ Compensation Board, and the actuarial 
experts that are advising the board, as to the implications of the 
request that has been made of the board of the people that the 
member speaks of. We are not going to act until we’re in 
possession of that information and it would be irresponsible for 
us to do so. 
 
What we will do is, when this information is in hand, we will go 
through the normal procedures in government for deciding an 
important question of policy like that, and if that requires 
legislative amendment then that will follow in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I did indeed raise some of these questions, 
not that specific one, a couple of weeks ago. And I went 
through a number of dates at that time, which started in October 
27, 1997, and the most . . . the latest proclamation made by 
people in Workers’ Compensation Board itself was that 
something would be available by April 14. This is week after 
week, month after month, that people are in fact being told to 
wait for something which is not arriving. 
 
I think they have a good feel here that they’re being put off, and 
I simply wish the minister’s personal opinion on the following: 
do you agree, Mr. Minister, that the removal of pensions based 
on remarriage of these people who lost their spouses through 
tragic, work-related accidents was unfair and discriminatory? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, of course it’s not 
appropriate for ministers to give their individual opinions in 
situations like this. In due course I’ll be making an 
announcement on behalf of the government, after the 
government has made a decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Minister, I was informed yesterday 
that the Government of Saskatchewan will be taken to court by 
the end of this month just as your NDP friends in B.C. (British 
Columbia) had to go through because they wouldn’t respond to 
this — and they lost. And this is going to occur if there is no 
clear indication that there is the political will to do right by 
these widows and widowers. 
 
Seriously, Mr. Minister, are these people who have already 
endured so much going to have to go to court to see justice? Or 
are you as the former minister of Justice and the current 
minister in charge of supporting workers in our province going 
to give them hope and give them action today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well I think that the member will 
realize, Mr. Speaker, that I’m not going to give them action 
today because I’ve explained the process by which we will be 
making a decision with respect to this matter. 
 
One of the wonderful parts of living in a country like Canada of 
course, is that if you as an individual citizen feel that your rights 
are being infringed upon, you can go to court, you can sue. That 
frequently happens, and from time to time the government finds 
itself as a defendant in those situations. 
 
If that happens in this case, well it happens. But we certainly 
aren’t going to run in fear of threats of the sort that are indicated 
in the member’s question. We’ll make our decision in this when 
we have all the information available and we’ll do it as 
expeditiously as we possibly can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would ask leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, not to embarrass Ray, 
but I did want to introduce Ray Cantelo, who is a friend; grew 
up, as I understand, in the beautiful province of Prince Edward 
Island, has worked in various provinces, in Saskatchewan. 
Recently, about a year ago I guess, Ray moved from Manitoba 
to the north-east area of the province around Tisdale. 
 
I just wanted to welcome you to the Assembly, Ray. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 29, The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 1998 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 

 
(1430) 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 30, The 
Tobacco Tax Act, 1998 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions 

Act/Loi sur les conventions sur l’exécution de jugements 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 
Bill No. 31, The Enforcement of Judgments Act. Monsieur le 
president, je propose le premier lecture du projet de loi numero 
31, Loi sur les conventions sur l’exécution de jugements. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I table pursuant to 
The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act, the 25th annual 
report of the Provincial Ombudsman. Tabled. 
 
And I also table pursuant with The Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate Act, the third annual report of the Children’s 
Advocate. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Telecommunications Access for all Canadians 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I will at the end of my 
remarks put before the House the following resolution: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government, in 
consultation with the provinces and territories, to create a 
national, universal service fund in order to sustain 
universal, affordable telecommunications access for all 
Canadians, regardless of where they reside. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, affordable, high quality 
telephone service has contributed immensely to Saskatchewan’s 
growth of the province. In fact our ability to communicate over 
the telephone with our neighbours, whether they are in Beauval, 
Fiske, or Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, has helped to knit rural 
Saskatchewan together. 
 
We have come a long way from a collection of rural telephone 
systems sending signals over barbwire fences. Our telephone 
lines now serve as an on-ramp to the information highway, able 
to transmit data at the speed of light. 
 
In the Climax exchange in the south-west corner of the province 
for example, average monthly Internet usage exceeds 
long-distance usage by over 30,000 minutes per month. And in 
the Beauval exchange in the North, Internet usage is quickly 
catching up with long-distance usage. 
 
In Saskatchewan, our population is more spread out than in any 
other province in Canada. At the same time our economy is 
becoming increasingly globalized and dependent upon 
technology that uses our telecommunications infrastructure. 
This makes affordable access to telecommunications more 
important than ever. 
 
In fact advances in electronic commerce give rural and northern 
people opportunities to expand and diversify their economic 
activities, whether it’ll allow producers to check commodity 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

prices, local implement dealers to order inventory, the gas 
station to verify bank credit card payments, or the rural 
entrepreneur to access primary business research. 
 
And just when telecommunication services are the most 
beneficial and the most essential to rural and northern residents, 
whether it’s for running their businesses, connecting to the 
Internet or for calling 911, their access is now being put at risk. 
To simply state our challenge, in the past all Saskatchewan 
residents have had access to affordable, high quality 
telecommunication services because of an internal cost subsidy. 
 
In the emerging competitive environment this system will no 
longer work; therefore we must construct the new system that 
will ensure affordable access for all residents in Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me elaborate. One of the key issues in the area of 
telecommunications is how to balance the goals of universal, 
affordable access and high quality services, and at the same 
time accommodate the federal government’s policy of greater 
competition in the telecommunication sector. 
 
We accept that competition is being introduced; however it is 
absolutely necessary that we maintain universal, affordable, 
high quality service for all Saskatchewan people. This is 
essential to maintaining the social and economic fabric of 
Canada and its regions. 
 
The vast majority of telephone companies have no mandate and 
no incentive to serve high cost, rural and remote Saskatchewan. 
These telecommunication companies will serve rural residents 
only when there are clear profits to be made. 
 
This leaves companies like SaskTel, who have a social 
commitment to provide service to all residents, left to compete 
in the lucrative markets against the big multinationals and 
somehow try to provide services to rural and northern residents 
where the costs are the greatest. These are the residents who 
will be ignored when the multinationals come to Saskatchewan 
to win a share of the lucrative markets where profits are easily 
made. 
 
The model that has been used in the past to ensure affordable 
telephone service to all was cross-subsidization. This allowed 
companies to use profits from long-distance service to subsidize 
the cost of maintaining affordable local service for all. And by 
charging uniform rates for local telephone service, whether you 
were in Saskatoon or Stony Lake, the high cost of delivering 
local telephone service to Stony Lake was taken into account in 
the whole system. 
 
Now with the advent of competition in the long-distance 
markets and with competition for local service soon to be upon 
us, this cross-subsidization is no longer tenable. Competitors 
are either skimming the cream in lucrative markets or prices are 
being driven down to the point where no subsidy room remains. 
If cross-subsidies were fully withdrawn from Saskatchewan, 
rates for rural customers could climb on average five or six 
times current levels. 
 
Presently in Saskatchewan, a $59 million subsidy ensures 
affordable local access. A further $25 million subsidy ensures 
that Internet and long-distance service is available. Without 

these subsidies, some households could pay over $100 per 
month just for basic service. 
 
Just as importantly, in the absence of these subsidies, telephone 
companies will invest less and less in rural or remote areas 
which will ultimately deny these residents the full benefits of an 
advanced telecommunications system. Clearly we have a severe 
affordability problem in the making for the majority of residents 
in the rural and remote areas. 
 
More importantly though, this development could endanger the 
very fabric of Saskatchewan, because you cannot remove the 
contribution of rural and northern areas without radically 
changing Saskatchewan. 
 
This affordability problem is the result of the structural change 
that has been implemented in telecommunications regulation. 
Having opened the national telecommunications system to 
competition, it is now incumbent upon the federal government 
and its agencies to create a regulatory environment that will 
ensure universal access. 
 
Specifically, we are advocating the creation of a universal 
service fund. Contributions to such a fund would be based on 
the total amount of revenue generated from all 
telecommunications transactions that rely on an integrated, 
national telephone network. This fund could then be used to 
ensure that quality services are available to all users at 
affordable rates. 
 
It is important to be clear on this point. A universal service fund 
is required to allow any telephone company — not just SaskTel 
— any telephone company to provide universal, affordable, 
high quality service to people in rural and northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
For those who are concerned that a universal service fund 
cannot exist in a competitive environment, I believe the United 
States experience is informative. The United States of America, 
the supposed champion of competition, was the first to 
introduce a universal service fund and continues to support its 
use as a mechanism to ensure both universality and 
affordability. 
 
In developing their national policies, the Americans have found 
that a need for a universal service fund flowed automatically out 
of the introduction of a fully competitive market-place. 
 
In Canada, the creation of such a fund will allow us to sustain 
universal service in a competitive environment. It would ensure 
that technology development and infrastructure in rural and 
northern areas would not lag behind more densely populated 
areas. And finally, the creation of a universal service fund 
provides a national solution to a national problem. 
 
In 1996, the federal government stated that it would, and I 
quote: 
 

Develop a national access strategy . . . to ensure affordable 
access by all Canadians to essential communications. 
 

It further stated that: 
 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

Where market forces cannot provide such services, the 
strategy will identify the means — regulatory, financial or 
otherwise — of providing them to people living in rural, 
remote and northern communities. 

 
We must hold the federal government to its word. The 
Government of Saskatchewan has already taken steps to make 
rural and northern people aware of this important issue. 
Saskatchewan will be making our case before the CRTC 
(Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission) on June 2 in Prince Albert. We will be joined by 
many organizations who recognize that this is a critical issue 
for their constituents and for the future of rural and northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I urge my fellow members to support this resolution. It is 
vitally important to the people of rural and northern 
Saskatchewan, and as such it is vitally important to all of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the 
hon. member from Lloydminster: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government, in 
consultation with the provinces and territories, to create a 
universal service fund in order to sustain universal, 
affordable telecommunications access for all Canadians 
regardless of where they reside. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure that I rise and second this motion today, this 
government motion, because one of the reasons is that I am 
finally happy that we are getting to discuss some of the things 
that are really, really important to my constituents and to rural 
Saskatchewan — so important that if we do not do something, it 
won’t be a sort of a mystical 5 million, it will be millions of 
dollars to people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to commend the independent member for raising 
this issue and I want to commend the minister for bringing it as 
a motion to the Assembly, because I, like I say, I’m finally glad 
to get up and speak on some of the things that are really 
important to people that represent rural people. And telephones 
and communications in Saskatchewan have been vital links that 
bind us together as a province. 
 
This is a great province that has created infrastructures across it 
from one end to the other, extensive infrastructure like power 
lines, telephone lines, health, infrastructure in health, 
infrastructure in roads — an incredible achievement by the 
people of this province since 1905. 
 
Saskatchewan is the most rural of all provinces. About 30 per 
cent of our residents live outside of our urban centres and are 
widely dispersed over 650,000 square kilometres, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s actually quite amazing. 
 
Extending the telephone network in Saskatchewan has been a 
challenge. Most of our province is what the CRTC calls a 
high-cost service area, which means that we have exceptional 
costs and significant barriers to overcome in providing services. 
And this has not only been true in telecommunications; it’s also 
been true in many other infrastructures, as I mentioned. 

Anyone who lives in rural Saskatchewan knows how diverse 
our population and how dispersed it is. We have fewer than four 
households connected to the telecommunications network per 
kilometre of infrastructure. That’s actually quite amazing. This 
compares with about 10 households in Manitoba and Alberta 
and 20 in Ontario. You can see how long distances between 
communities and subscribers makes Saskatchewan a high cost 
area. 
 
(1445) 
 
Despite these obstacles, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents 
today enjoy a world-class telecommunications system. How did 
we achieve this? Successive governments and people of 
Saskatchewan and decades of taxpayers believed in the utility 
concept —universal, affordable service for all regardless of 
geographic location. And that has been the basis, despite party 
lines, in Saskatchewan, the basis of building the infrastructures 
that we all enjoy today. 
 
We created a publicly owned monopoly company that would 
use cross-subsidies and cross-averaging to deliver services to all 
at comparable, affordable rates. This means that we use extra 
revenue gained from long-distance service and low cost areas to 
subsidize services in high cost, rural and remote areas. 
 
But today we are faced with a set of problems, Mr. Speaker. 
The telecommunications environment is rapidly changing and 
methods used in the past to subsidize high cost areas will no 
longer work in the future. We are here today to talk about how 
we can preserve our collective approach to universal service in 
an uncertain future environment and how we can preserve the 
basic principle of sharing benefits and risks. 
 
We’ve come a long way from the rural telephone companies 
which many of our grandfathers and fathers worked on. We 
have come a long way. We no longer think of communications 
just as making a telephone call. The convergence of telephones 
and computers, along with other technologies, has created the 
information highway. 
 
It is the information highway that enables us to interact with the 
global economy and worldwide markets. There’s some unique 
examples, Mr. Speaker, of how this is used. I’ll give you three 
of them: the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College’s 
agreement with aboriginal people in Mexico, Guatemala, and 
Puerto Rico to deliver distance education — this is one way; the 
Wheat Pool’s network within offices and between elevators — 
another example; credit unions are part of a provincial and 
national ATM (automated teller machine) machine network. In 
fact it was the credit unions in Saskatchewan, because of our 
distances, that first developed the ATM systems, which we can 
be proud of. We live increasingly in a knowledge-based society 
and economy. 
 
Telecommunication networks and technology give us the tools 
to overcome the barriers of time and distance, diversify our 
economy, and sustain the quality of life in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The Internet is important to rural and northern Saskatchewan 
since Internet access is often the on-ramp to the information 
highway. Internet usage is a good indicator of rural and 
northern Saskatchewan’s interaction with the information 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

highway. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to quote from a woman that 
wrote in to our minister when we put the on-line for women’s 
organizations . . . that our minister of the Status of Women has 
contributed a hundred and forty-four thousand, and we heard 
some disparaging remarks about this yesterday in the House. 
 
But this is what people are actually saying about this, aboriginal 
people and other people in the North: “Access . . .” and I quote: 
 

Access to the Internet will revolutionize our organization 
by making it possible for our members to speak together 
. . . (and) our concerns — the alienation and victimization 
of Aboriginal . . . (people) in Saskatchewan. We are 
scattered across the province, many in isolated pockets, 
lacking the access to resources other women take for 
granted. We are most often the victims of poverty, violence 
and social problems we have been powerless to overcome. 
We cannot . . . (meet regularly). 
 

I mean this has been the case for years in this province because 
of our remoteness and on our large distances. 
 

We cannot economically reach out to each other or form 
concerted efforts to overcome pressing problems because 
of the physical distances among us . . . The Internet can 
change that. 
 

So that’s just another, isolated example of how important 
telecommunications is to us. Across the province, schools, 
libraries, businesses, and individuals are going on-line. In rural 
Saskatchewan alone we’ve gone from almost no Internet usage 
in 1995 to over 100.7 million minutes of Internet usage during 
an eight-month period in 1997. 
 
And I’ll just repeat what the minister has said because I think it 
bears repeating. We can learn from the U.S. (United States) 
experience where competition in telecommunications has been 
a reality for several years. As competition in the United States 
evolved, they recognized that market forces alone would not 
ensure that all areas of the country had affordable access to 
telecommunication services. As a result, they’ve put in place a 
universal service subsidy mechanism. 
 
Can you imagine — in that great country of the United States of 
America. But you know the thing is that they do use their heads. 
They are not dogmatic. In fact when I think of some of the most 
wonderful examples of community-based decision making, it 
has come out of states like Minnesota. This might be a country 
that is free enterprise, but at least, but at least . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Good, left-wing democrats. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Quit heckling me. My own members are 
heckling me. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sorry, I was supporting you. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Yes, I know. I know. 
 
Anyway I think we can go with the U.S. example, Mr. Speaker. 
As a result, the U.S. put in a universal service subsidy 

mechanism. We believe that such a mechanism could work in 
Canada to replace traditional subsidies. 
 
A made-in-Canada universal service fund would have these 
characteristics — something the minister didn’t share, but I 
think is worth noting — all telecommunications companies 
which earn revenue from interacting with the telephone system 
would contribute. And that’s only reasonable. Why should they 
use the lines that the taxpayers paid for, millions and millions of 
dollars, without contributing something. The fund would be 
explicit and competitively neutral and an independent third 
party would administer the fund. A good idea I think, Mr. 
Speaker, and why I’m supporting this motion. 
 
I think that as the . . . I think as the government motion says, we 
should, as provincial and federal and territorial governments, 
create a national, universal service fund in order to sustain 
universal, affordable telecommunications access for all 
Canadians regardless of where they reside. 
 
And maybe some of the members opposite think this is a joke; I 
don’t think it’s a joke. I am sick and tired of this session where 
we are not discussing the things that concern my rural residents 
— and this happens to be one of them and I will be supporting 
this motion, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say at the outset 
that I think there’s a good idea here. I think that the suggestion 
that has been brought forward certainly has some merit; 
however I also have to add that the hypocrisy behind it takes 
my breath away. 
 
Saskatchewan is the only province not to submit to CRTC 
regulations of our telephone and telecommunications network. 
The government sought and received that exemption. They are 
now angling for a further moratorium on accepting national 
jurisdiction. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand the members 
of the NDP today saying they want national standards because 
they have fought tooth and nail against national standards in so 
many areas of our province’s life. 
 
You will recall, you will recall earlier this session, I was 
embarrassed as a citizen of this province that the Premier was 
critical of the federal government for taking the initiatives it did 
in the education of our young people in post-secondary 
education. He called that an intrusion by our federal 
government. 
 
I believe in the importance of national standards, Mr. Speaker, 
and I think that it is important for the federal government to 
enforce national standards that will force the Government of 
Saskatchewan to bring up our basic services to that level and 
join in other provinces, rather than to allow our basic services to 
crumble to the way they are. So I have no hesitation in saying 
that national standards are something which I, as a Liberal, and 
my Liberal colleagues, certainly endorse. 
 
Well you know these people, they criticize national standards; 
they criticize the federal government; they don’t believe in 
national standards except where it suits their purposes. It’s a 
little bit, Mr. Speaker, I guess like my credibility. You know if 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

they get themselves in a spot, they may use my testimony to 
bolster them; the rest of the time they will actually — if you can 
believe this, Mr. Speaker — they will actually make comments 
that my credibility is up to question. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our roads are crumbling; they say, blame 
Ottawa. Our health care is closing down, and they say, blame 
Ottawa. 
 
Well we have no hesitation in saying that national standards are 
important, and we wonder why these people now arguing for 
national standards in the telecommunications field want to 
continue to be the only telecommunications network in Canada 
that does not subscribe to national standards. 
 
Well it strikes me that our New Democratic friends in this, and 
in so many other issues, suffer from schizophrenia. They no 
longer know what they believe. They no longer know what they 
want. They want national standards one moment, the next 
moment they don’t want national standards — and I’m glad that 
we do have national standards in areas like post-secondary 
education and the new National Child Benefit Program. 
 
But I say, our friends opposite, I see an advanced case of 
schizophrenia. They don’t know what they believe; they don’t 
know what they want; they don’t know which side of the fence 
they stand on. And what is more serious, Mr. Speaker, what is 
more serious, Mr. Speaker, is that with this advancing case of 
schizophrenia I see over there, I don’t know where I can suggest 
in Saskatchewan they can go for treatment because our 
treatment facilities are being so seriously cut back as another 
field of health care. 
 
However, I have no hesitation in saying though, the 
enforcement of national standards is not something which we as 
Liberals have a difficulty endorsing. In fact we can do that 
without hypocrisy, without contradiction. That is a Liberal 
principle. And while I’m disappointed to say that sometimes the 
NDP are on board, sometimes they aren’t, this time they appear 
to be on board with saying national standards are important. 
 
We want our people to have the same opportunity here in 
Saskatchewan as people in Ontario and Alberta and British 
Columbia have. That is a cornerstone of Liberal philosophy and 
I guess it is one example . . . The Premier says he wants to give 
large “L” Liberal government to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And so if they are now moving towards Liberal philosophy, I’m 
not going to criticize them for that. 
 
I’m not going to lower myself to pointing out that they are 
recent converts because it seems to me even a recent convert is 
better than no converts at all. And in my party of course, I’ve 
had experience of converts and they don’t always go in the right 
direction. 
 
But having said that, we as Liberals support the concept of 
national standards; we support a telecommunications network 
that offers the people of Saskatchewan the same opportunities 
as citizens in other provinces have. 
 
I just am still wondering why the NDP came up with this 
motion today while they still seek to be the only 
telecommunications network in the province — in the nation — 

that is not under national jurisdiction. They still seek to be the 
only telecommunications network on the continent that is not 
subject to rate review. 
 
And I don’t understand how they can argue that they ought to 
be the only telecommunications network in the entire continent 
not under rate review. They want to be special. They want to be 
separate. They want to be under different rules than everybody 
else on the continent. And now here they are saying that Ottawa 
should come up with money so that we can be the same as 
everybody else. 
 
Well I suggest to my friends opposite that you can’t have it both 
ways. Let’s try to be consistent. Let’s not half adopt Liberal 
philosophy and Liberal principle. Let’s go the whole way and 
say yes, as the Premier has said yes, I’m a Liberal. I want to 
give this province, Liberal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, the item that we are discussing 
is a motion regarding doing something across the country that is 
fair for everyone. And I see that the member from North 
Battleford, although not directly saying it, has indicated to this 
Assembly that the bands — that the Indian bands that he 
represents in the north end of his constituency — should be 
paying something in the neighbourhood of a hundred dollars a 
month for their telephone service. I don’t think he really took 
the time to look at this or even understand what it’s all about. 
 
Had the federal government not decided to put the telephone 
companies under the CRTC so that they could shift the power 
from the provinces to the federal government, there wouldn’t be 
a need for subsidizing externally to the operations of a 
company, those phones that provide service to people in rural 
Saskatchewan. Or any place in rural Canada as a whole. 
 
But when you have a Conservative government followed by a 
Liberal government that implements policies that allow for 
companies to come in and high grade the telephone usage and 
take the money out of those areas where you can provide it at a 
cheap source and also then cut the funds that were available for 
those companies to provide the cross-subsidy internally to 
provide a subsidy for the phones that are expensive and 
therefore, in the case of a Crown corporation that was owned by 
the people in a province, and apply the uses for this Crown was 
to provide service throughout the province at a reasonable cost. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you have a federal government, and at 
the present time it’s a Liberal government, wanting to have the 
control and the power in order to fill the pockets of somebody 
who wants to high grade the area and take money out of the 
system, then that government should also take the responsibility 
to provide funding so that the service is maintained throughout 
the rural area. 
 
And as the member from North Battleford stated he was 
embarrassed, well I think I would be too if I was related in 
politically to what the federal Liberal government is doing. It is 
an embarrassment to have anyone in this province stand up and 
take that particular line — total embarrassment. 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, it is without any doubt that I’m going to be 
supporting the resolution, and I ask all of the members of this 
Assembly to do the same. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
have the opportunity to speak briefly about the proposition 
being put forward by the government today. 
 
It was of course, Mr. Speaker, a few days back, in fact I guess 
about a week back, that one of my constituents called my office 
bringing this matter to my attention. Denise Willows, of course, 
is the administrator over in the town of Tompkins, and of 
course this memo had come across her desk. She identified it, 
being a rural lady herself who lives on a farm, as being a 
particular problem for herself and of course then transcribed 
that into a reality that it would be a particular problem for all 
rural people. 
 
She brought it to our attention — not that we haven’t heard of 
these things before — but of course she piqued our interest 
because we hadn’t really done the mathematics on it that she 
had. So I give her full credit for bringing this issue to the 
attention of myself, and through myself to you, and through you 
to the rest of the Assembly, and we are happy that she has done 
that. 
 
I want to, after listening to some of the comments made here 
today though, to add a few words of caution to all members in 
terms of describing when you go to the CRTC and people like 
that, of describing Saskatchewan not so much in a partisan way, 
but as a province that has unique situations. 
 
It came about I think, Mr. Speaker, and some of you will recall 
who were here through the ’80s, that the Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Company, SaskTel, was threatened in the 
middle ’80s and late ’80s by a similar kind of problem. The 
government of the day of course was considered to be a 
right-wing government, and considered to be in favour of 
privatization of things like SaskTel. 
 
But I recall, rather to my surprise, that when push came to 
shove at the end of the day that government said, we cannot 
allow Ottawa and federal ideals to push Saskatchewan around. 
We cannot allow partisan politics — left-wing politics, 
right-wing politics — we cannot allow that to destroy a 
telecommunication system that has to be unique for 
Saskatchewan to serve Saskatchewan needs. Because in 
Saskatchewan we are a vast province with vast numbers of 
miles and miles of miles and miles between everybody else. 
 
And all you can do with that is to deal with it on a 
Saskatchewan basis and decide which program will best suit the 
people of Saskatchewan and then, regardless of whether you’re 
accused of supporting a left-wing philosophy or a right-wing 
philosophy, you support the philosophy that will support the 
needs of Saskatchewan people. That’s what that government 
had to do. 
 
They bit the bullet and were accused of all of a sudden having 
become left-wing thinkers, they were called turncoats by the 
right-wingers, they were called all kinds of things because they 

changed their minds about how they had to deal with this issue. 
And they took what has been described today in the heckling as 
a left-wing Minnesota idea and they put it to work in 
Saskatchewan because it’s not wrong to have a left-wing idea if 
it serves the needs of Saskatchewan. 
 
We don’t have to call it that. We can call it a common sense 
approach based on Saskatchewan’s reality and I think that’s 
more what it is. Now, Mr. Speaker, having said that we need to 
support this kind of approach, I was surprised when I heard the 
Liberal member get up and say that we should take a particular 
view that coincides with an Ottawa view. 
 
The reality is that people in the government in Ottawa suffer 
from illusions of grandeur. And I am surprised that the 
members in the Liberal Party today seem to suffer from that 
same affliction. They seem to think that they are the only ones 
that know anything about anything and from Ottawa, they 
believe that they can dictate to Saskatchewan what is best for 
us. 
 
The reality is they have no concept of where Saskatchewan 
even is, let alone what we need to serve our people. And not 
just being political, that’s being reality . . . very real about the 
realities, Mr. Speaker, of the fact that most people that are in 
Ottawa at government come from great urban centres where 
thousands of people live closely together and they have no 
concept of the vastness or the beauty of a province like 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I’m simply going to say, Mr. Speaker, that I 
congratulate the government for taking on this issue. I support 
the minister for his representation to the CRTC on June 2. I 
hope that he is successful. I don’t know if his plan for a 
universal program with a universal fund is something that he’ll 
be able to sell to anybody in Ottawa or to anybody else in the 
other provinces. I don’t know if it can possibly work. I only 
know we have to try. 
 
We cannot give up. We cannot allow our phone bills to go so 
high in Saskatchewan that we end up forcing people either to 
buy FM radios or to go back to fence-line telephones. 
 
And certainly when you start to talk about constituents like one 
of mine who said you will be charged $250 per month just for 
the basic equipment without ever having made a phone call, if 
you think about that kind of cost over a year’s time, there’s 
absolutely no question that a group of people would very soon 
say whoa, we can easily put that telephone down the fence line 
and talk to ourselves and we don’t want anything more to do 
with any kind of telephone schemes. That would be absolutely 
ridiculous to drive people to that kind of extreme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the members to think in terms 
of this being a Saskatchewan problem that needs a 
Saskatchewan solution, and I support the government on this 
issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments in regards to the motion that we have 
before us as well. And while I recognize what the government 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

is attempting to do, it would have . . . we would have 
appreciated as well just a little more notice so we could have at 
least perused the motion and did a little bit of consultation in 
regards to having a better understanding. 
 
I hear where the minister is coming from. I’ve been listening to 
some of the debate in the Assembly. And as I follow the debate 
and follow the motion, follow the different suggestions that 
have come from other party members, I do have some concerns 
in regards to the motion before us. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day my colleagues and 
I will look at it very carefully and no doubt recognizing what 
the intent of the motion is doing in creating a national universal 
service fund in order to sustain universal affordable 
telecommunications across the country. 
 
We’re talking here in the province of Saskatchewan for the past 
number of years no doubt, we have noted the fact that certainly 
long distance has been utilized to support local phone rates, and 
I think local subscribers certainly appreciate that. But when we 
look at Saskatchewan, I think there are some issues that we 
need to take a look at. 
 
And while the government has moved in the right direction in a 
number of these issues, and I specifically relate to the recent 
announcement back in the late fall of the intention to expand 
telephone exchanges. And then most recently, I know, Mr. 
Speaker, that in my constituency a number of communities are 
pleased with some of the initiatives the province has taken in 
addressing the fact that many small communities have such 
small phone exchange areas that they’re basically paying 
through the nose as a result of always being on long distance 
versus having the ability to have the local exchange to work 
with. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I look at some of the exchanges that 
have changed, and as I’ve indicated earlier, I certainly 
commend SaskTel for recognizing the concern that’s been 
brought forward by many of its customers. I know that the 
announcement back in December when it was announced that 
Welwyn, the little village of Welwyn and the surrounding area, 
would be amalgamated with Moosomin. While people were 
pleased to see the move to Moosomin, there were a number of 
concerned individuals who felt that they still had areas where 
they were on long distance — just a few miles down the road to 
the community of Rocanville where their children attended 
school. 
 
And they appreciated the fact that being amalgamated with 
Moosomin gave them a larger exchange, but it still had some 
limitations. So the recent announcement that moves Rocanville 
phone exchange area into the Moosomin area I think is certainly 
something that’s positive. And I certainly commend SaskTel 
and SaskTel board of directors for looking at the concerns. 
 
My guess, Mr. Speaker, is that when we talk about universal 
access to phone service or communication services, that 
SaskTel directors looked at a number of letters, obviously had a 
number of letters and a number of phone calls from people not 
only in my area but across the province in regards to phone 
exchanges, and took a look. 
 

And rather than waiting, have come out with a proposal that is 
now expanding some of the phone exchange areas, such as the 
Moosomin exchange where Rocanville moves in with Welwyn 
and Wapella and allows, certainly as most people in that area 
will suggest, and would certainly let everyone know about the 
fact that that’s their trading area. Their trading area is in the 
Moosomin area and most of the calls go to the Moosomin area, 
and so it’s appropriate that they be amalgamated into the 
Moosomin phone exchange. 
 
Same with Kipling. We saw the community, or the village of 
Windthorst and the surrounding area being amalgamated with 
Kipling. Now we have under the new proposal the communities 
and the exchanges of Glenavon and Kennedy. 
 
There again, Mr. Speaker, while some people on fringe areas 
and the fringe areas might feel they would have been better 
served by going to other districts, the fact that they have a larger 
phone exchange to deal with is certainly something that people 
welcome, welcome very readily. Especially as we get into the 
spring activities, and coming from rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And we see, Mr. Speaker, the rural communities and the 
involvement of talking to businesses such as equipment dealers; 
and having, in most cases, always being on the phone and 
paying long-distance bills. Mr. Speaker, this certainly addresses 
a number of the concerns that have been raised with the 
residents and constituents of mine in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some members talked about national standards. 
And we addressed the concern this afternoon in regards to 
social services and the fact that the child benefit program is 
going to be banished by the federal government. And at that 
time I brought to the attention to the Minister of Social . . . 
responsible for Social Services that while maybe it was the 
appropriate means to go in addressing that concern and 
allowing the federal government to manage this program, in our 
opinion as we look at some of the concerns that have been 
raised by individuals, there was a situation where Saskatchewan 
maybe needed to take control and encourage the federal 
government to . . . (inaudible) . . . them that opportunity in 
managing the program because they’ve already got a 
mechanism that’s in place to deal with abuses. 
 
(1515) 
 
In regards to the province’s . . . the Assembly urging the federal 
government to establish this national universal service fund, I 
guess it would be appropriate to take some time to really 
discuss how we would be going about this. And I’m not sure 
what the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or his 
government has done in how we’re going to proceed with this 
as far as moving this motion forward. 
 
It would seem to me that there should be some further 
discussion. I would certainly like to have more of an indication 
as to what we’re talking about here, what the responses are, 
how the government envisions moving forward with this 
motion, and what its intent is. 
 
And I think giving leadership, certainly from the province of 
Saskatchewan, is appropriate. But I would . . . before I think 
we’re ready to move on a motion and move forward with this 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

motion, we would like to have clarification of some of the 
initiatives and the reasons for the motion we have before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our concern is . . . and I believe the Liberal 
colleague from North Battleford raised the concern . . . 
(inaudible) . . . fact that we’re sending it, would ask the federal 
government . . . Our concern is, and I reiterate some of the 
comments made by the member from Maple Creek, I’m not 
exactly sure if the federal government really cares or is really 
that concerned. 
 
I think we need to speak with firmer language. And whether it’s 
a federal government issue or whether it’s an issue that we as a 
province can certainly really push forward or move forward or 
initiate, it is something that I think we need to take a careful and 
more close look at, especially in view of the fact that in rural 
Saskatchewan there are such large distances between 
communities, and communication is such a vital link for so 
many individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in general I certainly can agree with the motion 
that is established before me today and brought before this 
Assembly. I would like to . . . in fact, Mr. Speaker, before I’m 
prepared to move forward, I would like to have some more 
clarification in regards to some of the items before us. 
 
And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to take my 
seat and give government members other opportunities to 
address the question. Or at this time, ask the government if we 
could move to an adjournment and bring it forward and respond 
in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would at this time then move to adjourn debate. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:19 p.m. until 3:29 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 9 
 

Bjornerud Toth D’Autremont 
Draude Gantefoer Heppner 
Osika Hillson McLane 
 

Nays — 25 
 

Van Mulligen Wiens Shillington 
Tchorzewski Johnson Goulet 
Lautermilch Kowalsky Calvert 
Teichrob Bradley Koenker 
Trew Lorje Sonntag 
Cline Serby Hamilton 
Stanger Jess Ward 
Langford Murrell Thomson 
Goohsen   
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I hadn’t planned to enter 
into this debate, but by force of circumstances I find myself so 
doing. 
 
It is most unusual to deny an adjournment to the opposition for 
a motion on the first day, particularly when they have not been 
given any notice of it. This is most unusual. And I make these 

comments by way of an apology. 
 
We had, I am told — I don’t attend House leaders these days 
because I am otherwise occupied in the Crown Corporations 
Committee — but I am told that our House leaders committee 
instructed that both opposition parties be informed of this, and 
somehow the instructions weren’t carried out. So I apologize 
for whatever may have happened. 
 
We want to pass this today, Mr. Speaker, because we have 
meetings lined up, some key meetings with federal ministers. 
And if this is not passed, then they won’t be able to take this in 
hand to meet the federal ministers, and I think they want this in 
their pockets. And that’s really why we’re denying the 
adjournment. 
 
And that is why, all the more reason why we should have given 
notice — we should have given notice anyway, given its 
importance but particularly since we were going . . . needed it 
passed today. 
 
I just want to make a very brief comment on the subject matter 
itself. The idea was first floated when I was minister in charge 
of communications, about four years ago actually. We floated 
this before the CRTC. I appeared as an intervener in a hearing 
in Winnipeg. And we floated this idea and it’s just now — the 
mills of the gods do indeed grind slowly — it’s just now being 
seriously proposed by the CRTC. 
 
I think members are aware of the basic background to this. We 
have heretofore subsidized rural service and northern service 
with long distance. And we have . . . and the subsidy has been 
fairly marketed. I think we were charging rural people 
something like 70 per cent, around 70 per cent of the cost of 
their service. And with respect to northern people it was much 
. . . it was only a fraction of the cost. 
 
In an era of competition we can no longer, Mr. Speaker, use 
long-distance profits to subsidize local service, because long 
distance is not competitive and the margins are razor thin. And 
we really do fear the effect that a move to full competition will 
have on rural people and northern people. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I practised law for some 10 
years and I had a branch office in Coronach. And members may 
or may not know that Coronach is about 8 miles from the 
Montana border. I had some clients who were American, 
because they owned land in Canada. And so I had some 
American clients. And they would tell me their phone bills. 
 
At a time when the people of Coronach, the farmers in 
Coronach would pay 15, $20 for basic service, folks in Montana 
would pay 80, $90 for service which — I’m sure the folks in 
Montana would not be insulted if I said, because they used to 
tell me that — the service was much, much poorer than what we 
got in Canada. They really used to marvel at our ability to 
provide telephone service to Saskatchewan farmers for the cost 
we did. It was a fraction of what they were paying. 
 
And that’s what we have to go to if, if competition . . . we 
proceed with competition without some limits. And so what we 
proposed . . . what was proposed, and what I think the CRTC is 
proposing, is that everyone divvy up a very small sum for urban 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

users. It would be an unnoticeably small sum. That then would 
be available to anyone who wants to provide service to rural 
and northern areas. I think it’s unlikely that anyone but the 
Stentor telephone companies will actually provide the service. I 
think it’s most unlikely anyone else would be interested, but the 
option’s open to them. 
 
The idea was borrowed . . . this is not a . . . I want to assure the 
member from Maple Creek that this is not a left-wing idea 
which we ought to flee from. We borrowed the idea straight 
from the U.S. U.S. have in fact such a system that they use to 
subsidize rural service. They don’t have northern service, they 
have rural service. I think the point that the minister in moving 
it, I’m not sure if he mentioned this but one thing that is . . . one 
problem with the U.S. system is the subsidy isn’t high enough. 
And the good folks in Montana don’t get enough money and so 
they get poor service at an exorbitant cost. 
 
What we are trying to do is to ensure that the subsidy is enough 
that rural people will basically get the same service at 
approximately the cost they do now. They’ll get as good a 
service as they do in urban areas so that’s why we’re moving 
the motion. And again I apologize for the haste, but in the best 
run governments things don’t always go smoothly, so we 
should have notified them. 
 
That however, Mr. Speaker, is why we denied adjournment. 
That’s why we feel so strongly about the motion and we want 
our members of our Executive Council to go with this motion in 
their hip pockets when they deal with the federal ministers. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
somewhat disappointed by the members opposite today for not 
giving us a little more forewarning on what we’re talking about 
here. At first glance from what I see today it’s maybe not all 
that bad of an idea, but I’m somewhat concerned that what all 
goes along with what we’re talking about today, and as I 
believe the minister has mentioned here, but I think we would 
need a little more time to take a look at this. 
 
For an example, that I believe they want to be exempt within 
SaskTel of the CRTC being over SaskTel, where they are over 
every other telecommunications company in Canada. And I 
have a problem with that. I think the long-distance market has 
proven that competition brings out the best in everything and I 
think our long-distance rates have shown that. We saw a 
dramatic decrease in our long-distance rates in this province 
after competition having come in. 
 
Now I understand what the minister’s talking about when we 
come to the local rates because I’m from a rural constituency 
and I have very many of the same concerns I believe the 
minister does. I guess where my concern is here is what other 
things are tied to what we’re talking about today. 
 
I think I would feel much more relaxed if I knew if we’re 
specifically talking about one thing, and that’s a subsidy by all 
the companies in the telephone industry that are going to take 
part, putting into a pool. My own personal view — and we 
haven’t talked about this, Mr. Speaker, as a group because we 

haven’t been given enough forewarning of what’s going on — I 
don’t think I would have a problem with that. 
 
Where I have the problem with the meetings that the 
government members are going to have tomorrow with the 
federal government is what else is going to be tied to this? And 
I would hate to have us today come along and say yes, we as a 
Saskatchewan Party agree what the minister’s put forward 
today, find out tomorrow that part and parcel of what we’re 
dealing with tomorrow is far more extensive than what we’ve 
actually been led to believe today. 
 
I would have really liked to have seen this in paper form, I 
guess for lack of a better word, Mr. Speaker, so that we saw all 
of the ramifications of what may be discussed tomorrow. As 
I’ve said before, Mr. Speaker, competition to me, and I believe 
to our whole party here, is probably the spice of life and we’ve 
saw what it has done for all over the province in long-distance 
rates. 
 
The minister I believe has insinuated that our local rates will go 
up, and I’m inclined to agree with him that they have to go up if 
our long-distance rates come down. I guess where we disagree, 
probably on the extent of that, should all the companies being 
involved in the program here have to put money into a pool? 
Actually I don’t think I can see anything wrong with that 
concept. I feel that if they’re going to take the good part of the 
system, then I agree — they should also be expected to pay for 
the part that maybe is not so lucrative for them. 
 
I do like to add though, Mr. Speaker, that our SaskTel rates 
have increased somewhat dramatically in the last while and I 
believe the excuse used is for larger regional telephone 
exchanges, which I don’t think . . . very few have seen the 
benefit of. In phase 2 there’s a few more seeing that benefit but 
we’re all being charged, I believe it’s another $4 from February 
on, another $2 next February, Mr. Speaker, with the warning 
that there’ll be another dollar added on for 911 which we also 
don’t have at this point. 
 
So I guess it would be hard for the members opposite to say that 
we all are crying wolf here when really we’ve saw a lot of these 
things happen. The increased revenue for SaskTel, if you add 
up the $4 now, the $2 next February, the $1 for 911, works out 
to in excess of $50 million a year for SaskTel, and the benefits 
that the public, especially out there in rural Saskatchewan have 
seen, are minimal at best. Very few telephone exchanges have 
changed. 
 
In my area I believe in phase 2 we have the town of Bredenbury 
included with the town of Saltcoats, which might and a lot of 
. . . on average mean about a dollar a month. So what my 
ratepayers out there and telephone users are actually going to 
have to pay in the end, is about another $6 a month that they’re 
not benefiting from unless phase 3 includes a lot bigger areas 
than we’ve saw now. 
 
I also have a bit of a problem, Mr. Speaker, and this is part and 
parcel of what we’re talking about in the CRTC’s exemption for 
Saskatchewan, is that SaskTel is in the process of trying to get 
into the cable business in Saskatchewan. Where I have a 
problem with this, Mr. Speaker, is that what I believe is 
happening is SaskTel is going to end up competing with our 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

small cable companies with their own money — because that’s 
what it amounts to — because the people that own these cable 
companies and work there are also shareholders in SaskTel. 
And there is no way on earth these little companies can compete 
in the cable business with someone the size of SaskTel if 
SaskTel decides to squeeze them out. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of concerns. I feel that 
probably SaskTel in the long run, I think would be better off 
and we would be better off if they had to play by the same rules 
as everyone else in the province. As I have said, Mr. Speaker, I 
would really like for us to have a lot more time to have looked 
at what we’re talking about today and I’m not sure really we 
can go along with this at this point until we see exactly what 
we’re talking about and this isn’t snuck right up on us. 
 
I do believe, Mr. Speaker, as I think everyone in our party here 
has talked about, we’re not in for running right out and 
privatizing the Crowns, but, Mr. Speaker, I think things like this 
has to be looked at when we see what competition does and 
brings it in. The kind of fees for service that have happened 
within long distance and the kind of things that we’re looking at 
in the local rates, I think that probably we are on the same 
wavelength as what the minister is talking about today but are 
somewhat worried of what we’re getting ourself into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of questions I think we have on 
this issue but I don’t think we’re going to be able to, in this 
format and forum be able to, you know, Mr. Speaker, be able to 
get the answers we need to make the decision that the minister 
wants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of areas that just keeps going on 
and on where our SaskTel rates have climbed and climbed and 
climbed. 911 is a prime example, I think, that the Premier 
announced at the SARM, and I don’t believe it went over real 
well. 
 
(1545) 
 
911, yes it’s important to this province, but I’ve . . . my honest 
feeling, Mr. Speaker, is that unless it’s an enhanced 911 system 
we really gain very little out there. We see . . . I like to use the 
example of my Kamsack area where you could be a block from 
the RCMP but you have to phone Regina to get RCMP service, 
which is totally ridiculous, because the time it takes to have a 
person on the other end answer the phone here, get a hold of the 
Kamsack RCMP, and get someone to respond to the complaint 
is really . . . slows down the process. 
 
So I guess what I’m saying, that dollar I’m not sure is well 
spent unless we put enough time into the issue to have someone 
on the other end of the line that is very well versed on what they 
were doing and can help you through each situation. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a number of concerns for what is going on 
here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know that SaskTel is involved in a number of 
communication systems around the world. And I guess what we 
are talking about today and probably in a long way around 
comes into that, with the amount of dollars that we are losing in 
such things as the NST deal, and possibly some of the things 
we’re into now like New Zealand and other areas over there, the 

$16 million that we really, for lack of a better word, threw away 
of taxpayers money there would have gone a long way to help 
lower our local rates. 
 
And it seems that that’s what the minister is asking us today, is 
to deal with these, the increase in the local rates out there and 
asking for every company involved to put their share in. And I 
guess our problem being, is I don’t really, honestly believe we 
really have enough information today to make an intelligent 
decision, Mr. Speaker, and it’s regrettable. Because I think 
maybe we could have supported the minister on this one and 
may have if we had all the information. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will . . . I think I voiced my 
concerns and I will take my seat. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe this is an 
issue that we need to address and we need to look at very 
closely. As people who’ve almost all of us have grown up in 
rural Saskatchewan, some of us remember the old phone wires 
still hanging on poles; remember the old crank phone that was 
out there and was probably called a crank phone for two 
reasons, partly because it was cranky. 
 
And so we remember some of those old situations where the 
small districts went ahead and put their own phones in and they 
put their own poles in and there wasn’t any SaskTel to do it. It 
was just a group of farmers getting together and ensuring that 
they had that service. And I remember those days quite well. 
And I remember the telephone coming into my home when I 
was a little tyke and being quite impressed with it. 
 
And I guess one of the things that came up as soon as the phone 
system came in, I remember the group coming down to our 
home and one of the first questions my father asked was, what’s 
going to be the cost on that. And I think here we are some many 
decades later and we were discussing the same sort of thing 
again — what cost is it, how much good is it going to do? 
 
I think the concept that’s been presented here is probably a very 
valid concept. Because if we find that our telephone rates in 
rural Saskatchewan are going to go up five and ten times, it’s an 
item that our rural population just can’t bear. Whether we’re 
talking about people living on acreages and being wage-earners 
and having other expenses that acreages already provide — 
whether it’s the sewer and water and the transportation they 
have to do to get to their jobs — or we’re talking about people 
who are actively involved in farming, it’s a cost that just can’t 
be hiked too much more. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen in the past year or two how 
SaskTel has hiked many of those particular costs in the past, 
and that hiking of costs has caused a great concern among our 
farmer friends. 
 
And I recall last fall going on to the individual that rents my 
land, and one of the things we just talked about at that particular 
time happened to be the cost of his particular phone bill and 
how it had gone up. Basically in his perception it had gone up 
leaps and bounds. 
 
And I think when we deal with this long-distance issue and the 
rural rates, and those two are always tied very close together, 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

we’re going to have to look at that closely. And I think 
particularly in my area where we’ve had two or three groups 
that have in the past worked with SaskTel to try and get some of 
the districts changed, we’ve seen a veritable intransigence on 
the part of the telephone company. They didn’t listen. None of 
the advice that was given was taken. And I think that the people 
in my district are very frustrated with what’s going on. 
 
And so we do need more time to deal with this. And to that end, 
Mr. Speaker, I make a motion. I move: 
 

That the motion be amended by adding the following to the 
end of the motion: 
 
And that the matter be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Communication for consideration and report. 

 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member opposite for the amendment. In discussions with the 
members opposite they have conveyed to us that they would 
like another day at least to work on this motion, so we propose 
that our members defeat the motion in order that we can move 
an adjournment motion and allow the opposition time to look at 
this and bring it back up on the order paper tomorrow. And we 
propose that we will adjourn the motion immediately after 
voting this motion. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that debate 
on the motion now be adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — I am afraid that the hon. member is not 
eligible to enter into debate. The hon. member has . . . and 
therefore I cannot recognize him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that debate on the 
motion now be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 13 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take a few 
minutes today to add to some of the comments made by the 
member from Saltcoats the other day, and to reiterate some of 
the points he made because I think they were very important. 
 
To begin with, let me say that we are supportive of the changes 
that are proposed in this legislation for the most part. As the 
member from Saltcoats stated a few days ago, we have to find 
the proper regulations for bars and lounges. Obviously we can’t 

let the sale or consumption of alcohol go totally unregulated; 
but as well we have to make sure that the rules and regulations 
we do have in place are not so onerous, so cumbersome, that 
it’s difficult for an owner to make a go of their own business, 
and it’s a tough business to succeed with in the first place. 
 
Under the current rules, a simple infraction of the rules may 
result in the closure of the bar for a period of time. Yes, this 
harms a bar owner who breaks the rules financially, but it also 
hurts those people, all of them, who work there to make a 
living. We are supportive of the general move to fine bar 
owners for infractions of the rules instead of closing the venues; 
although there may be times, Mr. Speaker, when closure is the 
only option. If rules are broken over and over again the option 
of closure should still be at the disposal of the Liquor Authority. 
I’ll get to this in a few minutes, but I want to make a few other 
comments briefly. 
 
While some of these comments aren’t tied directly to the Bill 
that’s before us today, nonetheless I think they’re important 
because whenever we are talking about liquor, and particularly 
gaming, I think we should take time to remind the members 
opposite of their track record since 1991. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
government that’s become seriously addicted — very seriously 
addicted — to the revenue they collect from gaming. While 
taxes and levies and profits from liquor sales have been around 
for as long as I have, and that’s a long time, gaming is new — 
at least the level of gaming we’ve seen in this province since 
1991. 
 
The revenues collected, Mr. Speaker, by the government prior 
to this massive expansion of gambling was negligible. Now 
however, the NDP’s gambling program has grown to the point 
where the government is now absolutely dependent on it. They 
wouldn’t know what to do with their budget if they didn’t have 
those dollars coming in. 
 
The government’s yearly take on gambling now stands at 130 
million, Mr. Speaker. That’s 130 million taken out of pockets 
that usually couldn’t afford it. And the vast majority of this 
comes from VLTs. Today in Saskatchewan we have around 
3,600 video lottery terminals — VLTs. We also have Casino 
Regina and the four Indian-run casinos throughout the province. 
 
Five years ago — and those figures are exact, for the people 
opposite who seemed rather astounded by that — five years ago 
we had none of this. I suppose some may consider this progress, 
but I know a great many people who don’t, and who wouldn’t 
consider that progress. 
 
While the VLT has been a huge financial peach for the 
government opposite — and they’ve picked it many a time — 
this has simply not been the case for the communities where 
VLTs are located. We acknowledge for the bar owners 
themselves, VLTs have brought some extra revenue and some 
new customers. This has aided in the ongoing struggle for many 
of these bars, particularly in smaller communities, to keep the 
doors open. So that would be opposite. 
 
Meanwhile the members on the other side seem to say that’s 
worth all the hardships that that causes to the families. I suggest 
they should meet with some of those families and weigh those 
two situations and see where they ought to be at, if they have 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

any smidgen of a social conscience, and I doubt that. 
 
However, what I don’t consider positive has been the effect on 
the rest of the community. And this is where the people need to 
listen — the rest of the community. When you take $10 million 
out of individual communities in this province you are doing 
harm. There’s no doubt about it. There’s no question on that. 
The members opposite may not want to believe it because it 
would affect their ability to manage — or mismanage, as they 
are doing presently. 
 
To make matters worse, the NDP even broke their promise to 
return some of this money to the communities. And everyone 
out there in Saskatchewan is very aware of the promises that 
were made. And this government suddenly said, well if you 
can’t come to the exact conclusion how to do it, you’ll get 
nothing. Doesn’t seem like the kind of government that’s there 
that should be taking care of people. 
 
This has made a huge difference to many small centres in the 
province. But the members opposite again don’t care. We’re not 
just talking about money that has been removed directly from 
the community, Mr. Speaker, we’re also talking about the effect 
of the government’s gambling policies on local fund-raisers for 
charities and other for-profit organizations and other 
organizations that are not for profit, such as minor sports, youth 
organizations and those sorts of things. Those have all 
experienced, Mr. Speaker, a very serious shortfall in funding 
because of the money that’s been taken out to fund this 
government’s plan. 
 
Meanwhile those programs in our communities throughout this 
province are suffering — programs that provide opportunities 
for our youth, for our seniors, for everyone across the spectrum. 
In the last five years many of these organizations have seen 
their local fund-raising efforts dry up. Money that was once 
raised at community bingos, are now be thrown in large 
measure into the VLTs down the street, and this government 
takes a big piece of that. 
 
And the local governments are in no position to aid these 
not-for-profit community organizations, because the 
municipalities themselves are stretched to the limit because of 
the serious cut-backs inflicted by the members opposite as the 
NDP continues its program of downloading. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we are most definitely in need of 
regulation in the area of liquor and gaming, perhaps the 
government should stand back and think whether it should 
control its own thirst for revenues garnered by liquor revenues, 
and especially gaming revenues. They should take 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker, for the damage they’ve caused in 
communities across Saskatchewan in many different forms. At 
the very least they could acknowledge the damage that’s been 
done, but I won’t hold my breath on that one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At any rate I think that for the most part we can support this 
piece of legislation with a few reservations. The maximum fine 
under this Bill that can be levelled against a bar owner for 
breaking the rules is $10,000. However the legislation doesn’t 
set out what the fines are for the various infractions and that’s a 
rather scary situation for everyone to get into, not to know 
which infraction is going to have a particular fine levied against 

it. The legislation doesn’t set that out. 
 
Over in Alberta, I understand that the maximum fine is much 
larger. It happens to be $100,000. However at the same time, 
the province has a definite schedule of fines laid out so that 
people know exactly what the fines are for the different 
infractions. This government has chosen not to do that and 
leaving it all up to guesswork. I think we would like to see a 
similar schedule laid out in detail here as well, Mr. Speaker. 
Perhaps that’s going to be done in the regulations, and as so 
much else is done in regulations I guess we wouldn’t be 
surprised when that happens. 
 
As well, the three-year statute of limitations for liquor 
consumption, to take action against an establishment for 
infractions, seems to me to be a little excessive. Many more 
serious crimes in Saskatchewan don’t have a statute of 
limitations of that length of time, so we want to ask the minister 
why that happens to be in place. It seems to me just to be a 
heavy-handed tool that the Liquor Commission has to hang over 
the heads of business people. Some clarification is definitely 
needed in those regards. 
 
(1600) 
 
But like I said, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re supportive of the 
general thrust of this Bill and I think most of our concerns and 
questions can be addressed in a Committee of the Whole when 
we get to that stage. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 22 — The 
Electronic Filing of Information Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
as all members of this House know, we’re living in an age 
where technology has become so integral in our lives and it 
seems to be changing and advancing every year. That may be 
one exception too; that may be the year 2000 when everything 
may just come to a sudden halt for a period of time. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we sit back and think about the 
technological advances we’ve seen in just this last decade, it’s 
rather mind-boggling. How many people had access to a 
personal computer a decade ago, had the access, and now we 
find many homes have them there and have some very 
advanced ones as well. 
 
Ten or fifteen years ago, how many members here today had 
not even used a fax machine or knew what a modem was? And 
when we look at the situation happening throughout the 
province, I guess we need that all over. How many of us had 
heard of the Internet or e-mail five years ago? 
 
When you just sit back and think about it, the changes we have 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

all seen in our relatively short lifetime — it’s amazing. Now for 
some, it may also be a little scary. And it’s interesting that as 
I’m talking about this, I seem to be hearing something that 
sounds electronic running around the Chamber. I think most 
members here would agree that most of the time our children or 
grandchildren are far more up on the computer age than we are, 
and they feel so at home with it. 
 
I guess it’s hard to teach an old dog new tricks, and there’s no 
older dog than this government. It’s no secret, Mr. Speaker, that 
governments usually take a little bit longer to catch up with the 
rest of the world when it comes to technology. The old ways of 
doing things die hard in an entrenched bureaucracy. But 
eventually change must come. Out with the Underwood and in 
with Windows 95 or 98, or wherever we are as we happen to be 
speaking today. 
 
The government cannot be immune, Mr. Speaker, to the 
changes that are taking place. So many more things are being 
done with computers today than even two years ago. 
Fortunately for us, I believe most things that they are doing in 
our society are to our benefit. But we’ve also seen very recently 
on one of the television programs where a lot of the electronic 
information that’s out there has been used to duplicate credit 
cards and other cards that give access to bank accounts, and so 
that area is becoming much more frightening. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan took a step not too long ago 
when its web site was set up. It was the web site of the 
legislature. While not many of us have heard of a web site even 
that recently, the Internet has become an important tool for 
conveying information to people, Mr. Speaker. We’re living in 
an age of instant access to informal and material things. And 
these web sites are a must today not just a novelty. 
 
I was glad to hear the Provincial Secretary state in his estimates 
on Friday that the government’s web site will be expanded and 
improved. That’s absolutely necessary because compared to the 
types of information that’s available on other government web 
sites, our page is not very impressive or very helpful especially 
when we consider ourselves a province that relies heavily on 
tourism. It needs to be a top-class affair. 
 
So when governments do tend to move slowly in this area, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re forced to move. And the government appears 
to be moving ahead with the times with this Bill, Bill 22. We’re 
moving very quickly to a paperless society for the most part, 
and I can’t think of a bigger user of paper than government — 
any government. 
 
It would begin to move even a tiny portion of government 
business away from paper hard copies and into the electronic 
world, this will save an untold number of trees and hopefully a 
few bucks in the process as well. Of course, as with any change 
made by government, this one comes accompanied with a pilot 
project. Like I say, Mr. Speaker, things never move quickly in 
the world of government. 
 
On the whole though, we support this legislation. The 
Government of Saskatchewan cannot afford to fall behind the 
people of the province in terms of technology, the exchange of 
information. According to the minister in his brief remarks, 
these changes are being made as a result of a growing demand 

by the public to be allowed to send pertinent information to the 
government agencies through electronic means. 
 
This should be as no surprise to anyone because they do that 
with their business associates across the world. Even in our 
office, the proportion of e-mails we receive compared to the 
number of traditional letters has shifted dramatically. It only 
stands to reason, Mr. Speaker, then that people would also be 
interested in sending official information as far as registrations, 
applications, and other forms to the government electronically 
as well. And this will only increase in the coming years. 
 
I guess one of my concerns in all this is that we’re only making 
these changes now, a third way into 1998. It seems to me 
private organizations have been on this track a lot longer. And, 
Mr. Speaker, from the looks of the Bill and the minister’s 
statements from the other day, we’re still quite a way from a 
day when all departments of government accept electronically 
filed information from the citizens of this province. 
 
Obviously it’s got to be a transitional process since not 
everyone in the province has the ability to file electronically so 
the traditional way of doing things can’t be swept aside 
immediately. But I would think the government would be 
further along in the process than they appear to be from this 
particular piece of legislation. 
 
Another area of concern I have is that everything we see in this 
Bill regards the people who need to send information to the 
government. We haven’t heard much at all about the paper that 
the government sends out on a daily basis. I do acknowledge 
that it does appear that some progress has been made in this 
area — even right here in this building, Mr. Speaker. With the 
legislative home page we are, I hope, saving a lot of paper with 
the declining need for hard copies of sessional papers, 
documents, things such as Hansard and others. 
 
Yet right here in this House we continue to see a massive 
quantity of paper handed out on a daily basis. I can only 
imagine the paper usage by the entire government on a daily 
situation. So I thinks it’s incumbent on the government to tell us 
and to tell the people of Saskatchewan its plans for reducing 
this waste. As I say, right now we’re in a transitional phase in 
many ways. 
 
More and more is available electronically and becomes 
available electronically every single day. Yet the traditional 
paper copies are handed out as we get our heads around new 
ways of doing things. But I think we have to recognize as well 
that there are many people in this province who are way ahead 
of us on this account. 
 
So while it appears progress is being made with this Bill in 
terms of accepting current technologies, I think we’re going to 
need some assurances from the minister that the government is 
indeed doing all it can in making use of the technology of the 
late 1990s as it possibly can and should. The question is: how 
long is it going to take to get all the departments on line? Are 
we talking months or are we talking years? 
 
I think if the government is trying to keep up this is going to 
have to be a fairly quick process, Mr. Speaker, and of course 
it’s going to have to be an ongoing process as well. 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

Will the government implement an ongoing plan for adapting 
new technologies as far as collecting information is concerned? 
What exactly are we talking about in terms of what kind of 
information the government is considering for this? In the 
legislation there is reference to certified documents. What is 
going to be the exact procedure for this type of important 
information? 
 
And of course, old questions remain as well, Mr. Speaker. In 
committee we’re going to be asking the minister for some cost 
breakdowns for this change-over. Will government departments 
need massive infusions of cash to update software or to get up 
and running as far as electronic filing is concerned? 
 
Is the current computer equipment that the government 
departments are using adequate and how long will it be 
adequate? I do recognize that this is a very hard question to 
answer given the technology is changing so quickly, but I think 
it has to be considered. 
 
There is also the question of verification of documents and the 
question of privacy. Who will have access to the electronic 
files? What safeguards will be in place to ensure that 
information is seen only by those who should be seeing it? 
 
The minister did not speak to these issues in great deal in his 
brief remarks on Friday, and the legislation is pretty sketchy as 
well. And there are still more questions about the Bill that we’ll 
need to have answered. But overall this legislation is a small 
step in the right direction as the government moves further into 
the computer age. 
 
Once again, it’s important that this government and the new 
government which will take over in just a year keeps these 
issues in mind. Governments cannot remain idle forever in this 
changing world, although the members opposite are going out 
of their way to disprove this. But that idleness will pay off and 
you’ll have lots of time to be idle soon. 
 
Overall I think we’ll be able to support this legislation once the 
minister has answered the question we have posed to our 
satisfaction. But let me reiterate. It has got to be only the first 
step in getting this government fully in touch with the 
information age and to aid that process. I see no reason to hold 
up this Bill any longer. We are willing to proceed to Committee 
of the Whole and have our various questions and concerns dealt 
with at that time. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1615) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 18  The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1998 
 
The Deputy Chair: — As we begin, I’ll invite the minister to 
introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I have with me today Mr. Drew 
Johnston, who is the senior health professional analyst with the 

Department of Health. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. As I note from 
some of the opening comments made by the minister a few days 
ago when this piece of legislation was brought before the 
Assembly — and the reasons for it — the minister did mention 
that a new pharmacy Act was passed in 1996, passed to better 
regulate pharmacists and retail pharmacies in Saskatchewan. I 
find it interesting that we have another piece of legislation 
before us. 
 
And I guess the reason being as it, as the minister indicated, 
became apparent that the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 
Association and Saskatchewan Health, that there was deficiency 
in the original Act, a deficiency. While The Pharmacy Act 
allowed for drug schedules to be established in regulations, it 
did not allow for changes to those schedules to be made 
automatically. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, maybe you could just clarify a little bit what 
was meant by that statement and why the current Act is before 
us at this time, and the areas that it’s going to specifically 
address. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. As the 
member rightly identifies that when the Act was proclaimed in 
1996, there was a section of the Act that needed some further 
enrichment that was overlooked, I would suspect. And what we 
want to do today as the member’s identified, is to provide the 
automatic capture, through regulation, of the changes that are 
made to federal regulations. 
 
And so what will happen with this minor amendment that we’re 
asking here for approval on is that it will ensure that it will 
immediately reflect any changes that are made of course in the 
federal narcotics and food and drug regulations, and that the 
Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association will no longer need 
to file the numerous bylaw amendments that will be able to 
better assign drugs to the most appropriate schedules. 
 
In our bringing forward of the Act in 1996, this particular 
section was, I might say, overlooked or omitted. We’re the only 
province in Canada that doesn’t have this particular piece in 
place, and this amendment would allow for this to occur 
automatically. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Now when you’re talking of automatically 
allowing drugs to be added or changed on the drug schedule, 
exactly what to you mean, Mr. Minister? Is that drugs coming 
on stream as new drugs and being added into the 
pharmaceutical area where they’d be dispersed to the public? Or 
what are we specifically talking about? 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, if the changes weren’t addressed in this 
piece of legislation, what would that mean to the 
pharmaceutical association in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well if we didn’t approve the amendment, 
every time that there was a new drug that would be approved, 
we’d have to send it over to Justice and then it would have to be 
approved on that process. 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

And what this of course . . . when you ask the question about 
what are the drug schedules, I can provide for you a sheet that 
covers that off. There are three schedules — prescription drugs, 
non-prescription restricted access drugs to pharmacies only, and 
then of course the third schedule, which we can provide for you, 
were the non-prescription pharmacy only. 
 
So I can provide that for you. I could read it into the record; it 
would probably be easier for me to just send it over to you and 
have you review it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So, Mr. Minister, in 
some ways this is addressing some areas of red tape if you will, 
some extra paperwork in time that would be required if the 
changes to the legislation weren’t brought forward at this time. 
Is that what you’re suggesting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s correct. It eliminates the process of 
the red tape as you identified. That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, as well, could you define 
automatic? Obviously it would seem when we’re talking about 
reviewing drugs at some point, and you talk about the automatic 
. . . automatically allows for changes, what specifically does 
that mean? Is there still a process that drugs go through or 
discussion goes through before drugs are changed or added on 
the schedule? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Once the new drug is approved by the 
federal department of the narcotic and food drug regulations 
what happens is that it would automatically then appear on our 
schedule, is what the term “automatic” means, as opposed to 
going through the process that I’ve identified earlier. 
 
Mr. Toth: — In your opening . . . Actually I guess it was the 
Government House Leader that had spoken to this at the time, 
but in regards to the comments that were made in second 
reading, it was mentioned in the second reading speech that the 
Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association would have to pass 
bylaw amendments as federal drug law is changed. And I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could just outline how this 
procedure works in regarding bylaw amendments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Okay. Every time that there would be a 
change, what would happen is that the pharmaceutical 
association would have to register those changes, of course, 
with the two schedules, under the drug prescription and under 
the non-prescription restricted access process, and that would be 
filed with the Corporations branch. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Under the changes to the current Act does this 
alter any of the safety that the public might be looking for as far 
as drug administration and adding or deleting or changing drugs 
on the schedules and the drugs that may be coming, added into 
the pharmaceutical Act, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Really what it is is it just provides for a 
better administrative process and ensures that the drug is 
immediately registered onto the schedule, is really what it does. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I note, Mr. Minister, as well that the original Act 
was passed in 1996, and the fact that we’re in 1998 I’m 
wondering exactly, were you aware of the fact that there was 

some deficiencies even back last spring? And if so, could we 
have at that time dealt with those deficiencies? Or were you just 
not prepared at that time to . . . with legislation to bring forward 
to address that concern. 
 
And that’s what I’m wondering, is why it’s taken a couple of 
years to address what seems to be a fairly minor change. And in 
the intervening time what has taken place as far as handling of 
drug changes in regards to the issues that have been brought 
forward and that this particular Bill is addressing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — When we were reviewing the regulations 
and the bylaws last fall is really when this came to our attention, 
and as a result of that, we bring it to the legislature on this date 
recognizing that it was first brought to our attention or when we 
discovered it was last fall. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I would take it from that comment, Mr. Minister, 
that it was probably through the Regulations Review 
Committee that that was brought to your attention, and maybe 
it’s unfortunate that our committee doesn’t meet a little more 
often so that we can be kept up a little more to speed at times. 
 
And recognizing the number of pieces of legislation that are 
brought before the Assembly and addressing some of these 
concerns, I can understand how it might be easy to even just 
miss something like that. And while I think the process of 
officials going through, you’d think you’ve covered it all, I 
know in areas of business that I deal with sometimes you figure 
you’ve got every angle covered and about the time you are 
ready to sign something such as contracts —even Channel 
Lake’s a reminder of that — we all of a sudden find there’s 
other little glitches come. But just taking the time to address it, 
bringing forward the corrections is certainly appropriate. 
 
As a result of this little glitch, would there be a backlog of 
drugs waiting to be added or changed, or was it just a process of 
the extra tedious paperwork that most of that’s been covered in 
the past and the intervening time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There is no backlog. There is only a 
couple of drugs that we need to address around this issue, and 
that can happen fairly quickly. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I take it then that the change is certainly and of 
course following federal guidelines and being automatic, it just 
is going to speed the process up and should, I would think, even 
improve some of the delivery of health services in the area, 
especially of drug-related concerns. 
 
You also mentioned in your speech that changes would involve 
things like delisting a narcotic drug and changing it to an 
alternative area of the schedule. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, is 
this a frequent practice and is it good public policy to make it 
easier to delist narcotics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well the determination of really what the 
status of a drug is, whether it’s a prescription drug or a 
non-prescription drug, would really be determined by the 
federal government under the legislation and regulations under 
which the narcotic and food, drug regulations are established. 
So it would be under that jurisdiction that that decision would 
be made. 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So basically what 
you’re saying, as far as any of the changes, what this Act is 
basically doing is following the federal Act so the 
pharmaceutical association doesn’t have a lot of involvement or 
your department wouldn’t have a lot of involvement prior to 
delisting or adding drugs to the schedules. That indeed it comes 
as a result of federal policy. What this piece of legislation is 
doing is just allowing for a smoother flow of that recognition 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Correct, although from time to time the 
pharmaceutical association does get involved particularly in the 
delisting of a particular drug in the . . . particularly in schedule 
II, I think, is the one that they would be involved in. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, and I guess 
that was the other question I was going to, question I was going 
to ask. Is there consultation ongoing with all provincial 
pharmaceutical associations in regards to drugs, new drugs 
coming on, or drugs that should be delisted on schedules? 
Would even the provincial Health department be contacted in 
regards to some of the concerns that may arise? Or does your 
department kind of keep up and come up with suggestions as to 
areas where changes could be made and passing those on to the 
federal regulatory body in order to make sure that any concerns 
provincially that we may have would be addressed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well we have, of course, the 
pharmaceutical associations do belong to what might be called a 
National Drug Scheduling Advisory Committee. And their task 
and their role, of course, is to look at harmonizing the drugs 
across the country on schedules so that’s . . . through that 
process in which there’s the national participation in terms of 
scheduling by the pharmaceuticals. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as I see 
it, certainly the piece of legislation is correcting an area that was 
just missed as far as simplifying the process of identifying 
drugs and allowing for them to be recognized based on the 
federal recommendations and federal jurisdictions. Certainly it 
isn’t a large piece of legislation but I think it’s appropriate that 
these corrections are made. 
 
Because it’s only fair that we follow a lot of the 
recommendations and guidelines and that we have clarification 
in our legislation rather than being, I think you said this is the 
only province that really hasn’t changed . . . got the changes 
made to update the Act. And so in that regard I think it’s 
appropriate that it’s done. 
 
I guess one . . . and I guess the concern and the question that 
does come forward, when we talk about automatic and just 
automatically changing, is the fact that someone in general who 
really doesn’t understand the process — and I’m not saying I 
do, I admit that — but I think when we hear just an automatic 
change, it leaves the person with the impression that are we 
being better served by automatically changing and allowing for 
change here. 
 
And especially when we talk about drugs, I think the concern 
that is raised is do we allow the process of drug-related change 
to take place too quickly, which may put the consumer at risk. 
And I just want to ask you, Mr. Minister, whether or not the 

guidelines are in place. And I guess here again we’re dealing 
with a federal issue because we’re basically following the 
federal recommendations. Do you feel, or are you quite 
comfortable with the fact that we do have a process in place that 
indeed addresses concerns and makes sure that there is a 
process followed, that we’re not moving drugs forward into the 
area where they’re available for consumer use before they have 
been properly looked at or channelled? 
 
Are you quite pleased that the federal regulations are indeed 
addressing those concerns that maybe come forward or may 
arise as a result of people just seeing the word automatic in a 
piece of legislation such as this one? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I appreciate the question and 
certainly the commentary that you make. And it’s absolutely 
correct that there is a very comprehensive extensive process in 
terms of the federal consultation process in terms of adding or 
deleting drugs to the schedule. 
 
So there’s a Canadian advertising program that is included in 
that process, the pharmaceuticals are involved in it, and it really 
is a very process-driven exercise by the federal committee. And 
so we’re comfortable with the way in which it’s determined 
today and so we support the process, as you know. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. And I just want to 
thank you and your officials for having taken the time just to 
bring this forward, and recognizing the need for the changes in 
falling in line with other jurisdictions and certainly allowing for 
a more smoother process of transition. And at this time, allow 
the . . . more than prepared to allow this Bill to move through. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’d like to take a moment, Mr. Chair, to 
thank the member opposite for the questions as they relate to 
this Bill. We know that sometimes when we don’t have Bills 
that are long and extensive, we often don’t take a long time to 
go through them. But I appreciate the time that the member has 
taken to review this piece of legislation and to ensure that it 
provides the kind of safety that Saskatchewan people will be 
looking for. 
 
So I appreciate your questions, and to thank my official this 
afternoon for being here with me, Mr. Speaker. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 18  The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Deputy Chair: — This being the first time Health has 
appeared, I will invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
have seated beside me Mr. Neil Yeates, who is the associate 
deputy minister; next to Neil on the floor is Mr. Wiley, who is 
currently acting in the capacity of executive director of finance 
management and services; and right behind me is Mr. Dale 
Bloom, who is the assistant to the deputy minister; and seated 
next to Mr. Bloom is Mr. Lawrence Krahn, who is also the 
associate deputy minister. 
 
I want to, Mr. Chair, just make a couple of comments as it 
relates to the 1998-99 budget and to highlight I think some of 
the issues that are important to us in the deliberations as we go 
over the next, I expect, maybe two or three days to complete the 
work of the estimates on Health. And want to just recognize 
some of the significant work, Mr. Chair, that has been done by 
this department and the officials, and in particular the district 
health boards across the province. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget is in the 
neighbourhood of $1.72 billion which is the largest budget that 
we’ve had in Saskatchewan’s history, which is our signal on 
this side of the House, Mr. Chair, that Health continues to be 
the number one priority for Saskatchewan people and certainly 
this government. And this year’s injection of the $88 million — 
which I know we’ll have some discussion about over the next 
few days that we’re in estimates — is a major achievement 
again in terms of ensuring that in Saskatchewan we have a solid 
health care system. 
 
As I’ve travelled the province over the last several weeks and 
months, I’ve met with many, many of the district health boards. 
I’ve talked with the district health boards about what some of 
their priorities are. And clearly, Mr. Speaker, we think . . . or 
Mr. Chair, we think that this budget reflects a number of the 
priorities in which the districts have been looking for us to 
achieve, to grow, and enhance health care services across the 
province. 
 
I am extremely pleased, this being my first occasion to report to 
the House on the work of the Department of Health, the 
excellent working group of men and women who we have 
working within the department who dedicate many long hours 
in some very difficult times, of course, to meet the many, many 
expectations that are in this very large portfolio. And I want to 
pay a tribute this afternoon, Mr. Chair, to those people who 
serve the people of Saskatchewan throughout the department in 
accomplishing the tasks that are before us and ensuring that we 
have a health care system that addresses the needs of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
I want to also acknowledge the excellent working relationship 
that I say that the Department of Health has with many of the 
many, many stakeholders across the province in the health 
service field. In particular the close working relationship the 

department and I personally have with the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations, which are the 32 districts 
across the province today, and with Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses of course, who are essential in the delivery of health 
care services within our facilities and our communities. And our 
physicians in this province that are critical in helping us to meet 
the primary care needs of all of the people across the province. 
 
I know that there has been some discussion about whether or 
not we’ve been meeting as best we can, the priorities across the 
province in Health, and I want to say to you that we try to 
achieve that in a balanced fashion. And today we’ll have some 
discussion, and into the future, about how we’re meeting that 
balance on the expenditures of the 1.72 billion. 
 
And today we’re in a different place in terms of what we’re 
doing with health. We believe that the governance piece is 
behind us, and today we’re developing of course a very 
important process in the delivery of services across the 
province. 
 
And I’m pleased of course to be part of a process where we 
have public ownership of the needs because district boards 
today are developing those needs at the local level, and of 
course, have in place men and women across this province 
who’ve been both elected and appointed who serve us very well 
in setting the priorities in this stage to what the future of health 
care will continue to be and grow. And I am very pleased to 
have the ability to be part of that process in the months and 
weeks to come. 
 
I also want to indicate that when people talk about the direction 
of health care into the future, clearly our plan has always been 
that we needed to do a number of things. One is consistent to 
what's happening across the country, and that of course is that 
we’re moving more to community-based services. In this 
province today we see a major, major injection of health 
funding and resources to the community-based side. 
 
We’re moving from institution to community, and as I sit 
around the table with my provincial counterparts from across 
the country, this is exactly the direction that they’re taking as 
well. And although we’ve taken many steps in advance of 
what’s happening across the country, Saskatchewan continues 
to be a leader in the process of moving from institution to 
community-based services. 
 
I also want to highlight that in this budget we’ve added 
additional funding of course to home care which is clearly the 
direction in which we’re going to be moving, as are other 
provinces across the country. 
 
The further priority that our health plan has always talked 
about, Mr. Chair, is that we want to bring services closer to 
home, and there are many, many good examples of work that 
we’re doing across the province today. We’ve had the CT 
scanner, as an example, that we opened in Prince Albert just 
this past winter, I think in January, which again provides for 
people to receive that kind of diagnostic testing right within 
their own communities. 
 
The renal dialysis services that are now in Lloydminster and 
Prince Albert; just recently announced the services in Tisdale 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

and of course in Yorkton; the new MRI (magnetic resonance 
imaging) that’s going to be here in Regina; and the injection of 
money — new money — to ambulatory services across the 
province are some of the things that we’re doing today to bring 
services closer to home. 
 
And we recognize the value of course as I’ve outlined in our 
health professionals with our new doctors’ contract that we 
have in the province. And this budget also addresses itself to the 
front-line employees where you see some additional funding 
going in to the front-line workers in the areas of long-term care 
and home care. 
 
(1645) 
 
And of course at the same time we recognize the sensitivities 
that are out there in Saskatchewan Land around things like the 
capital needs the communities have and recently, as the member 
from Cannington knows, we were in their community at 
Wawota announcing and of course opening the new health care 
facility. Recently I’ve travelled to Ponteix and have opened that 
new facility. I was in Norquay a few months back for the 
opening of their new facility. 
 
I’ve just recently turned the sod in Balcarres for a new health 
care centre in Balcarres, and will be later this summer in 
Meadow Lake for a function that they’ll have in Meadow Lake 
because there’ll be a new health care facility that’s going up in 
Meadow Lake — another example of the many objectives that 
have been set for us by the district health boards our 
government has been responding to in a variety of different 
ways. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that we don’t agree all the 
time with our members across the floor because we have 
philosophical differences of course in the way in which they 
believe we should deliver health care services in this province 
and from what we believe. 
 
We believe that we need to have universal medicare in this 
province and will continue to support that process. We’ll 
continue to have as our first priority, health services and we’ll 
continue that kind of funding into the future. And we’re doing 
this, Mr. Chair, by and large on our own. There are no user fees 
in this province, and we don’t anticipate that we’ll see user fees 
in this province under this administration. 
 
We do not believe in the issue of privatization of health care, 
which I hear on a regular basis from the members opposite, on 
the process of how we might develop that funding schedule, to 
ensure that the people who are sick and ill in this province end 
up making the largest contributions to a privatized health 
system. Because we too on this side of the House, Mr. Chair, do 
not believe in a privatized health care system. 
 
And I said, we’re doing this on our own; that the Saskatchewan 
government is putting in the health care dollars to ensure that 
we can meet the needs of people across the country, and are 
extremely pleased that we can continue to announce to the 
people of Saskatchewan through this process here, that our first 
priority is health care in this province. And we’ll continue to 
fund it in a fashion that will ensure that that remains our priority 
into the future, Mr. Chair. 

So with those opening comments, I would be pleased to respond 
to the questions that my friends and colleagues opposite might 
have of me, Mr. Chair. 
 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
it’s an interesting time to be debating health care. And I want to 
welcome the . . . thank the minister actually for appearing and 
his officials who are with us today, some who I recognize. 
Actually a number have been around for awhile as well and 
have gone through a lot of growing pains I guess you would 
say, in the area of health care. 
 
But I would suggest as we talk about the changes in the future 
and listening to the minister’s opening comments, I’m not 
exactly sure, Mr. Minister, that a lot of people in Saskatchewan 
are going to believe and really adhere to a lot of the comments 
and really feel that with the third, or better than a third — I 
believe it’s about 40 per cent, close to 40 per cent of the 
provincial budget — is actually ending up in health care. 
 
I’m not exactly sure that the people of this province feel that the 
funds that are being directed into health care right now, at 1.72 
billion, are being directed to health care in a manner that really 
suits the needs of the consumer, if I can use that expression, or 
the person who needs and finds himself in a situation where 
they could utilize and must utilize health care services in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you indicated last night . . . And I will certainly 
give you credit for taking the time to attend some meetings that 
haven’t been all that easy. I know what it’s like to go to public 
meetings where you know the crowd isn’t necessarily all that 
enamoured with your presence or really favourable of your 
presence at it, so I commend you for taking the time to attend. 
I’ve found that even if people really aren’t all that pleased to see 
you there, at the same time they will acknowledge the fact that 
you were willing to walk into the lion’s den at times, if you 
will. 
 
Having said that though however, I think, Mr. Minister, you 
would have to acknowledge . . . and what we’ve seen and as a 
Sask Party rep and as an opposition member for the past two 
terms and certainly an opposition member who was here when 
your counterpart, Ms. Simard, basically began to take us down 
the road of change in health care in Saskatchewan, talking about 
a wellness model that was going to provide for us well into the 
future — a wellness model that said we’re going to take away 
services, we’re going to eliminate facilities, we’re going to 
eliminate positions, we’re going to eliminate jobs, and it’s 
going to provide better health care. 
 
And at that time, Mr. Minister, while the minister was making 
those changes, the previous minister, I’m sure people sat back 
and gave some sort of a nod and said, well you know, while 
they didn’t like it immediately, originally they still felt there 
was time to at least give some thought and allow for some of 
the changes and see whether or not the changes might meet the 
need out there. 
 
And when the change to . . . or when the determination to close 
the Plains Health Centre was made back in 1993, and you may 



April 22, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

or may not be aware of the fact that a rally was held on the 
legislative steps at that time, but at that time it didn’t generate a 
lot of interest. 
 
And I find it interesting to date, and I think what it reflects is 
the fact that most people believe when announcements are made 
that there’s enough time, and possibly by the time that process 
takes place — and at that time, it was by the year 1998 rolls 
around — the government’s going to begin to recognize that 
maybe they cannot continue to go through with all the closures 
and that we may see some changes take place. 
 
So while there wasn’t a lot of, I would say, upfront people that 
were speaking out upfront against the closure of the Plains 
health care centre in 1993, certainly in the last two or three 
weeks — actually months in fact, but more so in the last two or 
three weeks as a result of the legislature coming into session — 
it gives people more of an opportunity to have more of a public 
voice. We’re seeing people standing up more and more and 
speaking out on the issue. 
 
And in many ways, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
agree when we look at health care we must look at how we best 
utilize, how we best fund, how we best provide the services. 
And in some cases I can see where some of the arguments in 
regards to the Plains health care centre may be based on 
personal situations. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Minister, I’ve had the privilege of visiting in 
the Plains health care centre on a number of occasions. I’ve 
chatted with individuals who have been admitted to the Plains 
health care centre, and I would have to say that in my 
constituency the Plains tends to be the hospital I tend to go 
through more often than not; very little to the Pasqua and 
certainly somewhat to the General. But in general I find more of 
the constituents that I run to visit or have been informed about 
tend to be in the Plains health care . . . referred to the Plains 
health care centre and of course it has a lot to do with the 
trauma and certainly heart situations that people face. 
 
And so what I find, and I have to reiterate, that and the same 
concern and the issue that’s been raised over the past number of 
days and weeks and months, is the fact that the Plains does play 
a vital role in the area of health delivery and the area of service 
delivery to the constituents of southern Saskatchewan. 
 
As I look at the Plains health care centre, and I look at the 
original intention to build the health facility, the health facility 
was based in . . . and some of the arguments that are being 
presented today about the fact that, and I believe you’ve said it, 
Mr. Minister, that studies say that the city of Regina doesn’t 
need more than two facilities. That it doesn’t need more than, I 
believe now you’re using the number of 675 beds, when the 
Plains eventually closes its doors and all of the services are 
moved to the General and the Pasqua; those beds are going to 
remain. 
 
That could be true in the regard that you’ve already eliminated 
so many beds, and it’s just a matter of the fact that what’s left in 
the Plains can easily be accommodated. And I would think I 
would be disappointed if they wouldn’t be accommodated when 
we look at the expenditure that’s been put into refurbishing the 
General and the Pasqua hospitals. 

But one would have to ask, Mr. Minister, if indeed we are 
spending the money as wisely as we can. If indeed the 
expenditures at the General and the Pasqua are being expended 
wisely. If indeed we should not have taken a more careful look 
at the Plains health care centre and the services it can deliver, its 
accessibility to rural Saskatchewan. The fact that in southern 
Saskatchewan, and certainly across the majority of southern 
Saskatchewan, we have had so many acute care beds eliminated 
from the system. The fact that the elimination of beds in rural 
facilities and rural centres, certainly you would have to sit back 
and begin to ask yourself, are 675 beds going to provide the 
adequate care that is needed, given the fact that we have 
eliminated so many beds outside of the city of Regina. 
 
And, Mr, Minister, maybe you do have an argument for the fact 
that we only need so many beds in the city of Regina; I’m not 
disputing that fact. I think having been involved in government, 
some of the decisions were made as well in looking at how you 
rationalize and how you better serve and provide your funding, 
and make sure the funding goes into services. 
 
Bed numbers, so many times, are used as a means of saying this 
is how we justify services but I don’t know by . . . that 
eliminating beds specifically meets the need and the 
requirement out there all the time. And when we come to . . . 
when I talk about elimination of beds, I look to some of the bed 
numbers that . . . eliminations that have taken place in small 
rural centres, such as the ones I represent, of Moosomin and 
Broadview and Kipling and other communities. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, what I’ve found in talking to people that are 
giving the care and giving the service, delivering the service, 
that eliminating beds at some times and has in many occasions 
actually created a problem for hospitals such as we’re seeing 
taking place in the province in the city of Regina right now. 
 
What do I mean by that? I mean like, for an example, when the 
Pipestone Health District eliminated a number of beds and 
decided they weren’t going to fund them anymore and part of 
their argument was, well the average daily census for the 
hospital of Moosomin is — and I forget what the number was, 
and where we’re at right now, but it was a certain number — 
and we have more beds than we’re actually using on an average 
daily basis; therefore we’re going to cut down on the number 
we’re funding and we’re going to physically remove the beds 
out of the facility so that they can’t be utilized to the point that, 
Mr. Minister, on a number of occasions we found — as nurses 
have reiterated to me and brought to my attention — situations 
where in one case — a major traffic accident — there were five 
people in stretchers in hallways right throughout the evening 
because there were not the physical beds in place to meet the 
need of individuals that required them at the time. 
 
And I guess my argument is, Mr. Minister, why are we moving 
beds? Why do we have to physically remove that bed that’s 
already been paid for? It if sits there idle, it’s not costing you 
anything. Now for some reason you seem to think every time a 
bed is sitting in a facility, because the bed is there, it’s costing 
you money to have someone there to look after the bed. If 
they’re not, the bed isn’t being utilized, it’s not costing you 
anything. 
 
And the fact that an average daily census doesn’t necessarily 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1998 

mean that you’ve got, if a hospital has 10 beds, that those 10 
beds are continually being utilized. There are times, Mr. 
Minister, when you don’t have a major problem, you may be 
down to five or six beds being utilized. But there are also times 
when you see there’s an influx as a result of different elements 
that take place due to some of the climatic factors we face; that 
by eliminating and physical removing the beds, you take away 
the ability of that facility to meet the needs that all of a sudden 
they’re left with. 
 
That doesn’t necessarily mean that it’s costing more. You may 
use five more beds but on the other hand there are periods of 
time when you are actually utilizing fewer beds than what 
you’re actually funding. So I guess I have a bit of an argument 
with the fact that we physically remove and take beds out of 
service. And that’s the argument that comes in with the Plains. 
 
When we look at the Plains, I have to ask you, Mr. Minister, 
your argument is 675 beds will meet the need. Now those, as I 
said earlier, those beds were based on a survey and a study that 
was done in the city of Regina. But since the elimination of all 
the acute care services and bed numbers in rural Saskatchewan, 
is 675 going to meet that need? 
 
I believe in the Atkinson study back in 1991, there was some 
suggestions that beds required would be 966 based on 1991 
numbers. The bed-need breakdown, as it talked about and went 
through the Regina General, the Pasqua Hospital, the Plains 
Health Centre, and the breakdown of . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order, order. Order. It being 
near 5 o’clock, the committee will rise, report progress, and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................702 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................702 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................703 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................703 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................703 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................703 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................703 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................703 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................703 
  Langford ....................................................................................................................................................................................704 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................704 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................704 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................704 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................711 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Attack on Plains Hospital Nurses 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................704 
 Professional Secretaries Week 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................704 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................705 
 Earth Day 
  Murray.......................................................................................................................................................................................705 
 Town Meeting on Grain Transportation System 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................705 
 Samuel McLeod Awards 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................705 
 Pay Equity for Women 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................705 
 Drug Abuse Resistance Education Program 
  Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................706 
 Saskatoon Paralympians 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................706 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................706 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................706 
 National Child Benefit Program 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................707 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................707 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................708 



 

  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................708 
 Saskatchewan Health Information Network 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................708 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................709 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................709 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................709 
 Workers’ Compensation Board Pension Benefits 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................710 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................710 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 29 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................711 
 Bill No. 30 — The Tobacco Tax Act, 1998 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................711 
 Bill No. 31 — The Enforcement of Judgments Conventions Act/Loi sur les conventions sur l’exécution de jugements 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................711 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................711 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Telecommunications Access for all Canadians 
  Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................711 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................713 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................714 
  Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................715 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................716 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................716 
 Recorded division .........................................................................................................................................................................718 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................718 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................719 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................720 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................721 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................721 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 13 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................721 
 Bill No. 22 — The Electronic Filing of Information Act 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................722 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 18  The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1998 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................724 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................724 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 18  The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 1998 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................726 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Health — Vote 32 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................727 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................728 
 


