





























































Hansard: June 02, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1547 
 June 2, 1998 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your assistants, your officials. 
 
Within the area of Social Services, I just . . . if you could for me 
define the department within Social Services that is particularly 
responsible for young people that are in custodial situations, in 
custody situations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the division or area of the 
department responsible would be family and youth services and 
that division of the department will have responsibility for 
young people who are in conflict with the law — the young 
offenders, and also other young people who may need care and 
guidance. So that’s the area of the department with the 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, within that 
department is there any specific qualifications that are required 
of individuals who serve in that department? Are there any 
people with background in law or the practice of law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there may be someone in the 
department, in employment, who has some experience in the 
law, but it’s not a prerequisite. In terms of the front-line 
workers, they will be social workers or young offenders’ 
workers. Any legal advice that we require will be provided to us 
through the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Osika: — On that note, given some of the recent events 
that I’ve raised in the House with respect to a situation in 
Melville and by the way your intervention, your department’s 
intervention is greatly, greatly appreciated — and we spoke 
about this. Could you give me some idea of your thoughts and 
your views on becoming more involved within your department 
with respect to these types of situations, from the intervention 
aspect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, currently we will find . . . or 
the department will find itself involved, workers within the 
department will find themselves involved in some custody cases 
where there is particular concern for the benefit and well-being 
of the children. That’s been demonstrated in some 
circumstances, the one we’ve discussed being one. Where there 
are some real concerns, our workers will be involved with the 
children . . . may well then appear in the court setting to be 
called upon as witnesses on behalf of the children and to 
provide what advice that the courts may seek or need. 
 
We’ve had a chat, you and I and others, about how that might 
be strengthened. I think that takes a fair bit of working through, 
as we’ve discussed, in terms of what better supports we might 
give children who are caught in circumstances of very . . . very 

difficult circumstances between parents who may be in dispute 
in the court system. 
 
Our focus as a department is first and primarily, to ensure the 
well-being of children. That is our first and important role. Now 
we recognize that the courts will have other issues that they 
must deal with in terms of marital breakdown, and divorce, and 
so on. Our concern must be the well-being of the children. 
 
Now this does not, in my mind, mean that in each and every 
marital break-up or divorce proceeding, where access questions 
and custody questions are being dealt with, not every 
circumstance would require the kind of intervention that the 
department provides. Not every circumstance would require 
that. But wherever there is any risk to the children that, I think, 
is the appropriate place for Social Services and our folks to be 
involved. 
 
Now it does take individuals with some special knowledge and 
some special training and perhaps some special understanding. 
It’s not the kind of work that just any one of us can do — that is 
working with children in those difficult circumstances. And so 
there are, there are certain requirements we apply when hiring 
for those kinds of roles. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. And I know that everyone shares the 
concerns that you have the well-being of young people that find 
themselves in conflict of any kind. 
 
The legislation that we discussed, do you see some merit to that, 
Mr. Minister? And is your department working towards, 
perhaps with a view of enacting some legislation in the not too 
distant future, to allow perhaps some authority from the 
Children’s Advocate’s office to become involved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as we have discussed more 
privately — and I’m certainly happy to do it public because I 
think it’s a very important, it’s a very important subject — I 
would indicate to the member that there is little or no possibility 
that in this session we would have legislation that we would feel 
comfortable in passing without the careful consideration in 
working with the justice system and others in our community. 
 
As the member knows, there are some workshops being held 
across the province just now by our own Department of Justice 
which are concerning themselves with some of the questions of 
access and custody. I am told that there is also a federal joint 
Senate parliament committee. I don’t have a lot of information 
about this, but I understand it’s holding some hearings across 
the country right now, again examining some of these issues 
related to custody and access. My personal view is that there 
may well be merit in having an opportunity for children’s 
voices to be heard in these access and custody circumstances. 
We’re not at a point yet where we think that we’ve got 
sufficient consultation or research or understanding to craft that 
into further legislation. 
 
But the intent that the member brings with the private member’s 
Bill that he has introduced, the intent I believe we share, that’s 
how can we best provide for the children caught in these 
circumstances. Are there better ways to have their voices heard 
through the process or their voices represented in the process? I 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

personally am not yet of the view of whether that should be 
legal representation, or it could come through the advocate’s 
office or there might be some other process by which workers 
are involved. The goals I think we have are the same; we are not 
yet refined on how that process could work itself out. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I do take comfort, and 
I’m sure that the people who are perhaps hearing your 
commitment in that respect will take comfort, that your 
department is actively pursuing this type of legislation. And I 
know that it will not apply to all cases. 
 
And I guess in my mind the reason for considering someone 
with a legal background, if in fact they needed to be involved in 
a hearing, that if there needed to be some further legal processes 
immediately at the termination of the hearing, then they would 
have the means, the wherewithal, and the knowledge as to how 
to initiate. So I appreciate that very much, Mr. Minister, and 
I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan appreciate that as well. 
 
I want to thank you and I’d like to defer to my good friend and 
colleague from Athabasca. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just eight 
quick questions, Mr. Minister. The first question I have is a big, 
big problem in northern Saskatchewan, and it’s senior citizens 
living on a limited income. They should all be eligible to 
receive medical-wide coverage from Social Services but they 
don’t. They have to qualify according to policies and they in 
turn cannot afford to go on medical trips, and they also have . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order, order. Members, I 
appreciate the extra energy we have following supper, but I’m 
having a great deal of difficulty hearing the hon. member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I guess the 
question for the senior citizens, those that live on fixed income, 
on limited income, they have a significant challenge meeting 
some of their medical needs including medicines and trips 
outside of northern Saskatchewan because of the high cost. 
What are you going to do to kind of adjust that situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, from my own experiences in 
the member’s constituency and in his community and in the 
North, he points . . . I think he draws our attention to a reality, 
that we will have individuals in the North who will be living on 
low income, seniors very often on fixed income, and because of 
their geography, the access to health services presents some 
exceptional costs. 
 
Mr. Chair, the Department of Social Services, of course . . . if 
the income is low, seniors or anyone will qualify for social 
assistance. With the social assistance qualification comes the 
health benefits if we reach that level of income. There is the 
seniors income plan that we also provide to low income seniors, 
and I know that the Department of Health and the new health 
districts will be looking at, I think, a variety of options to try 
and assist low income seniors get the medical care they require. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you and we’ll certainly be assessing 
and keeping numbers on the number of senior citizens turned 
down. In the event that the numbers do grow, we’ll certainly 

advise your officials. 
 
The rate for Saskatchewan in general for a single person is $245 
and that includes, of course, rent and some of the water and 
sewer and power and so on and so forth. The benefits are 
province-wide, so in northern Saskatchewan with the high costs 
associated with living in northern Saskatchewan, you have 
compensated an extra $50 for groceries. Do you feel that’s an 
adequate amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’m in some ways always 
wrestling with the basic rates that we pay and provide for 
people under social assistance. Are they sufficient? The 
determination of those rates, of course, is built on the 
assessment of what we believe is required to provide the basic 
necessities of life. They are based and tailored somewhat to 
geographic location. As the member indicates, there is some 
special allowance for food in the North given the cost of food in 
the North. And there will be some adjustments for housing and 
so on. 
 
While we attempt to set rates which meet basic needs, we’re 
also constrained somewhat by resources available to provide 
those basic needs. It’s a constant challenge for us to be sure that 
our rates are trying to meet basic needs, to live within the 
parameters of provincial spending and provincial budgets, and 
to meet as best we can the needs of people wherever they are in 
the province. 
 
At the same time we’re hoping to, through changes in the 
system and through a growing economy, to provide as much 
independence for individuals as we can — as opposed to 
dependence — to give folks as much income as we can into 
their families and households from other than public assistance. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. The other point I had is . . . 
clients that are forced to live under the social assistance 
concept, they sometimes receive an advance, and they have to 
pay back this advance a hundred dollars per month until the 
advance is paid. And some of the clients are living in poverty, 
and yet still have to suffer more in order to buy clothes with an 
advance. So it seems that some of the social services clients are 
penalized for options such as this. Could you comment on that 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, for the information of 
members tonight, there has been a relatively recent change in 
the advance and payback mechanism. The member is correct 
that for families the advance — although we’ve never really 
encouraged the advances, but where they were required they 
would have been provided — they have been $500 per family at 
a recovery rate of $100 per month; 250 was available to 
individuals, again at a substantial recovery rate. 
 
We’ve now lowered the limit of the advance to 240 with a 
recovery of $40 per month, based on the concept that we now 
have the new programs coming into place that we hope will 
bring new benefits into those families, into those homes. And I 
believe that a $40 recovery rate per month is more manageable 
for the families involved. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. And again I’m getting these 
questions from some of the clients and I think it’s very 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

important that we get the answers back to them. 
 
One of the items one of the clients wants to know . . . the 
challenge that he has furthering his education and he wants to 
take a certificate program to qualify for benefits. Yet clients 
who attend the university classes are immediately disqualified 
from receiving assistance. The question he has is, why? 
 
So when the client does quit going to the classes and continues 
to receive social assistance, why are clients discouraged from 
attending post-secondary education classes? Clients should 
deserve to get a better education like everyone else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Again, Mr. Chair, there have been some 
recent changes where we are trying to encourage people and 
provide the means for people to access more educational 
opportunities. 
 
We have now established, as the member knows, the provincial 
training strategy. Part of that is the training allowance . . . the 
training allowance that we’ll provide for basic needs, not from 
welfare, but from the training allowance. 
 
Now in the circumstance that someone is going to school and 
getting student loans that are developed on the basis of 
providing for the needs of those students, all the needs, then we 
consider that to be their income source. 
 
There are, however, circumstances where if the loans do not 
provide for the basic income, the social assistance benefits can 
be continued or partial benefits can be continued to make up the 
difference. It's always based on a concept of need, to meet a 
person’s basic needs. If other sources of income, including 
loans to the student, don’t meet that need then social assistance 
can be made available. 
 
But what we’re trying to do is move people into the provincial 
training allowance, which we believe is a better way to support 
folks off welfare, by providing basic needs through an 
educational program. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. A client commences a job, and 
right away he or she is cut off from assistance, even though he 
or she does not get paid from salary or wages until the end of 
that month. Why are clients discouraged from working in 
full-time, permanent jobs and encouraged to remain dependent 
on social services right from the day they start working to the 
day they receive their first pay cheque? There’s a 30-day lapse, 
Mr. Minister, and there’s concern in reference to that particular 
problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, our understanding is — and if 
the member has some examples where this is not happening, I’d 
appreciate him providing those to us — it’s my understanding 
that we would provide benefits until the first pay cheque is in 
the hands of the individual. That it would . . . that those benefits 
should be there because, exactly as the member says, we want 
to encourage people to get work and if they can do that, we 
want to cover those days or weeks until they’re actually paid. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. One of the other problems too is 
many of the clients that live in northern Saskatchewan are 
people like Gary Tinker and people at the Gary Tinker 

Federation also serve the disabled people. And they indicate 
that they need more than an extra $40 per month for assistance 
because of their particular physical or mental challenges. 
 
Clients who are disabled need equipment services and yet there 
are no extra services for them. There’s very limited opportunity 
for them when you look at the social services system. Could 
you expand a bit on what plans you have and what other 
assistance that they could expect in the event that they are . . . 
have been meeting with you and asking these questions. And 
there are approximately 400 people that are in this particular 
situation, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate it. About a week 
ago now, I had an opportunity to meet with Gary Tinker and 
some other officials from the Gary Tinker foundation, widely 
known in the North, and we discussed some of these issues. It’s 
really an issue of adequacy of benefits for the disabled folks 
living in the North, and like many in the North there are some 
exceptional costs by way of travel, food, and so on. 
 
I had what I thought was a very profitable discussion with Gary 
about the adequacy of benefits for the disabled in the North. I 
committed to him that we are constantly reviewing the 
adequacy of our benefits. But there are some special needs that 
are faced by the disabled, not just in the North but around the 
province. 
 
As I indicated in the House this afternoon, it’s my hope that we 
might move at some point, not perhaps immediately, but at 
some point that we might move to looking at other income 
security programs to support the disabled in our province that 
wouldn’t be seen as social welfare. I think that’s a direction that 
I’d like to take us. 
 
We are establishing in very short order the office of disability 
issues. We expect to have that office staffed and running 
relatively soon. And one of the tasks that they’ll have is to try 
and coordinate a total, provincial approach to disabled issues. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. Some of the clients that are on 
social services receive travel expenses. And the travel expenses 
are 10 cents per kilometre for gas; $15 a day for meals; and 
accommodations at $38 a night. So how can a person eat three 
meals in one day with $15, especially if they’re on a special diet 
like low-fat or a low-salt diet? And where could you find a 
decent room for $38 a night? And that’s some of the concerns 
that we’ve been getting from those people that are travelling 
south for all the medical appointments that they have to attend. 
And there are a great number of people in this particular 
situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in small steps we’re trying to 
address some of these. We were able to increase the mileage 
rate a little bit last year and we’re continually reviewing the 
adequacy of all the benefits. In this case of course these would 
be seen as in addition to other monthly benefits that’ll be paid 
through Social Services. 
 
But I thank the member for drawing this issue to our attention. 
You’re certainly not going to get rich or live high off the hog on 
these kinds of benefits and we recognize that. At the same time 
we know that we’re just trying to meet basic needs — we’re 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

trying to meet the basic needs. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. I have two more questions for 
you, Mr. Minister. The second last question I have is that we in 
northern Saskatchewan certainly want to see as many people off 
the social assistance program as possible. And sometimes 
families that do find work, many times they look at the option 
of working and they find that it is simply impossible to retain 
the same benefits for their family if they are working as 
opposed to being on social assistance. So many times clients do 
turn down low-paying jobs. Clients should be encouraged to 
find employment with a salary of more than $5.60 per hour and 
not be penalized for turning down a five-month, 
minimum-wage job that doesn’t offer any value or benefit to his 
family. 
 
So I would encourage you to comment on that, and secondly, to 
understand that many of them do want to be off social 
assistance. Many of them are trying very hard, but the fact of 
the matter is that there isn’t enough effort being undertaken to 
really recognize the particular challenge of working for a living 
as opposed to simply working and nobody appreciates it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for that 
question. We have yesterday received our first applications for 
the Saskatchewan employment supplement program that will 
begin in July which is designed specifically to address the very 
issue the member raises. So that if a family today who is 
dependent on social assistance — a household dependent on 
social assistance — is able to secure some employment income, 
we are going to turn the system on its head. 
 
Tonight the way the system is, if they secure that income it gets 
deducted from their welfare cheque. As of July 1 for those who 
register and enrol in the program, instead of deducting from 
their income as a result of going out to work, we’re going to 
supplement that income. We’re going to provide that incentive. 
We’re going to make sure that it’s better for families to be 
working than to be on social assistance. We’re going to provide 
it as a supplement knowing that this will encourage . . . and tear 
down that welfare wall . . . encourage families and tear down 
the welfare wall that has entrapped people for so long. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. And my final point, Mr. 
Minister, is . . . The two points I want to emphasize is exactly 
that point I’m talking about. That takes a lot of emphasis and a 
lot of work because people do want their pride back. And 
sometimes when you’re on social assistance, your own family 
and your own self as well as the community kind of look down 
on that and that really discourages people from breaking free of 
that mould. 
 
And the second point is there are many senior citizens in 
northern Saskatchewan that have a lot of tremendous pride as 
well. They need certain medicines and they simply can’t afford 
those medicines on the amount of money that they’re taking in. 
So I’m certainly pleased to see that you’re looking at each case 
individually and that we’ll monitor the situation to make sure 
that senior citizens are taken care of. 
 
And the final point. I want to share a letter with you. It’s from 
one of your employees and I’m going to clip off the name. And 
this is kind of a complaint that they have in reference to the 

tremendous workload that many of your employees are facing 
in northern Saskatchewan. And I’ll just quickly take three or 
four excerpts of the letter and I quote: 
 

Employees in northern communities are often forced to use 
up to three sick days for each medical appointment with a 
specialist. This is because it takes one day to get to 
Saskatoon, another day for the appointment, and yet 
another day to drive home. 

 
Due to the lack of cover-off in Social Services, we return 
to face massive amounts of paperwork that has piled up 
during our absence. 
 

Vacation leave: 
 

The leave should relieve workers of their duties and 
responsibilities while they are away, not simply put 
everything on hold until they return. It is wrong to assume 
that one worker can manage the workload of two people 
when someone is absent. This causes tremendous strain 
physically, mentally, and emotionally. 

 
Another quote, “our northern clients also have high 
expectations of us”. 
 
And the final two quotes, Mr. Minister: 
 

The employer is saving money on the backs of their 
employees. Our employer needs to hire five people, four 
full-time and one on call in each of the two offices to 
ensure workers are in a healthy environment. 
 

And these offices, of course, are Buffalo Narrows and La 
Loche. 
 
So I’ll send this letter over to you, Mr. Minister. I’ll get one of 
the pages to collect it after my presentation. But this is certainly 
evidence that the system is overworked. This is certainly 
evidence that the system needs to have some innovation to it, 
and this is certainly evidence that the people of the North do not 
want to stay on social assistance. So I’ll share all those concerns 
with you, Mr. Minister, and I look forward to some of your 
responses and actions this evening and certainly in the days to 
come. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for his 
question. It’s true, it’s true, across this province our workers are 
very, very pressed. They have just tremendous workloads in 
some cases. We’ve been able in the last few months to secure 
funding for 50 new positions within the department; they’ll be 
spread throughout the province. But we know, and working 
with SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) 
and our own management, we’re hoping to address this even 
further in the future. Thanks for the observation. 
 
Subvote (SS09) agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

Social Services 
Vote 36 

 
Subvote (SS03) agreed to. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Just quickly, Mr. Minister, in my haste I 
forgot to thank your officials for their time, and certainly thank 
yourself as well. Thank you. 
 
Subvotes (SS04), (SS05) agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, just before making that 
motion, I would want to join my colleague from the North and 
my colleagues in the Saskatchewan Party, who have expressed 
their thanks to the officials who have helped us during the 
process of estimates. Through those officials who are in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, I would want to extend our thanks, as 
legislators, for the tremendous work they do on a daily basis 
across Saskatchewan in providing human services to families 
and people everywhere in this province. I want to thank them. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 43  The Queen’s Bench Revision Act/Loi portant 
révision de la Loi sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to have with me 
tonight, Susan Amrud from the legislative services branch, and 
Tom Irvine from the constitutional law branch. 
 
Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedules A, B, C, D inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I would first like to thank the 
officials for coming tonight. We’ve heard them help us on many 
other occasions, but tonight we didn’t need a lot of help. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce the 
officials for this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, Mr. Chair. I’m very pleased to have 
with me tonight Karen Pflanzner who is the deputy 
superintendent of insurance and also the deputy registrar of 
credit unions. And behind her is Jim Hall, who is the 
superintendent of insurance and the registrar of credit unions. 
And right behind me is Brent Prenevost, who is Crown counsel 
and who has been working on this project as well. 
 
Clauses 1 to 41 inclusive agreed to. 
 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Credit Union Act, 1998 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Welcome, 
Minister, and your officials. Briefly, Minister, I think that it has 
been explained to us by the credit union board and individuals 
from the credit union that the purpose of this Act is to make the 
credit union be in a position so — in a world of increased 
competition in finance institutions and insurance institutions — 
that they be in a position to be able to respond to potentially 
changing market-place. Is that the intent of this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The purpose of the legislation is to update 
The Credit Union Act so that they can deal with all of the 
changes in the financial services industry. And, as you know, 
we have worked extensively with the credit unions, but also 
other concerned groups within the community before we have 
proceeded with this legislation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. One of the arguments 
that has been raised in terms of some of the new features is that 
potentially at least credit unions would want to avail themselves 
of some of these. If the federal Bank Act is changed so that 
banks can get into the insurance business then the ability of 
credit unions to do a similar business of selling insurance would 
also be possible. Is that one of the features covered in the 
regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The extent to which credit unions can 
enter into the insurance business as set out in this legislation 
will be the same as under the Bank Act. And as you know some 
of the banks are involved in the insurance business already. But 
at this stage the legislation basically makes it a level playing 
field. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I understand that the changes that were 
requested of the federal Bank Act were not granted in the last 
review of the national Bank Act so that the banks can’t directly 
sell insurance out of their institutions. I think they do it by way 
of purchasing some subsidiaries or things of that nature. But at 
the current moment the banks are not able to have that 
authority. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s correct. And what this legislation 
does is bring the credit unions into a similar position to the 
banks under the 1992 Bank Act. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. One of the concerns 
that has been expressed to us, and I’m sure to yourself in the 
discussion of this Bill, were from the independent insurance 
brokers. In terms of their concern of being placed at a 
disadvantage if the credit unions were able to market a product 
similar to what they’re marketing in advance of the Bank Act 
being changed. Has that concern been expressed to yourself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I understand you have given the 
undertaking that you would not implement regulations that 
would put the independent brokers at a disadvantage and that 



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

the credit unions would not be allowed to move into that field if 
the federal Bank Act was not changed in order to allow the 
commercial banks to get into that field. 
 
Have you given the undertaking to the insurance brokers that 
you would not be doing or enacting these regulations prior to it 
potentially happening on the national level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. What I will 
do for you is quote from a letter that I’ve provided to the 
Insurance Brokers’ Association of Saskatchewan dated April 
21, 1998: 
 

The most obvious and likely circumstance that could lead 
to changes to the business insurance regulations would be 
changes to the rules that apply to federal financial 
institutions. However, this is not to say that this may be the 
only circumstance. Saskatchewan may have cause to 
examine regulations as the role of and policies respecting 
deposit-taking institutions change over time. 
 
What is equally important is that the Insurance Brokers’ 
Association of Saskatchewan and other interested parties 
have the opportunity to review changes in advance and 
provide a contribution to future changes. 
 

And then moving further down in the letter: 
 

I wish to emphasize that the Saskatchewan government is 
committed to consulting with the insurance brokers’ 
association prior to making material changes to the 
insurance business regulations. This commitment includes 
our agreement to give a minimum of 90 days advance 
notice of material changes prior to cabinet consideration. 
 

So that’s the commitment that I’ve made and it’s been 
acknowledged and confirmed by the insurance brokers that this 
is a commitment that will stand them in good stead in dealing 
with this issue. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. I wonder if 
you’d be free to table a copy of that correspondence with us if 
that is possible, Minister. And second of all, I took from your 
comments that the insurance brokers have replied to your 
commitment. I expect that that might be in writing as well and 
would you be able to table that correspondence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d be happy to provide you with a copy. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That addresses a 
concern that we had in this regard. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair, and first of all, 
welcome to the minister and your officials this evening. I do 
want to say that on behalf of the Liberal caucus we have 
reviewed the new legislation, and we are in favour of its general 
thrust. And certainly we acknowledge with gratitude the work 
of the credit union movement in the building of Saskatchewan. 
They have played a significant role in our communities and in 
our province, and they will continue to be a key player in the 
financial strength of Saskatchewan and of our communities. At 
present, I understand that there are over 100 communities in 
Saskatchewan where the credit union is the only financial 

institution available, and so that is certainly important, say, to 
our province and to our smaller communities especially. 
 
And I would like to say to you, Mr. Chairman, if I may, that I 
think that some of the things that we see going on in the 
international and national level with bank mergers may well 
have the affect of strengthening the credit union movement in 
Saskatchewan. Because it seems to me that if the number of 
bank branches in this province effectively is cut in half in the 
next two years, I can see many people feeling a greater affinity 
to their credit union and its commitment to our towns and 
villages than they may feel to banks, if in fact we do get 
mergers and large-scale closures. And I hope that that will not 
be the case, but certainly the news we hear at present suggests 
that that is the direction in which things are moving. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Liberal Party agrees that we need updated 
legislation and that our credit unions have to be on a level 
playing field. However as the member from Melfort-Tisdale has 
already flagged, our concern is that while credit unions on the 
whole strengthen our smaller communities, they will not 
strengthen our smaller communities if they go into the 
insurance-selling field. The insurance-selling field, if given to 
our credit unions, will have the effect, I submit, of shutting 
down our small-town insurance agencies. In many cases this is 
one of the last businesses left in some of our smaller villages. 
And I think it would be most unfortunate if, through bank and 
credit union competition, we lost our small town insurance 
agencies. And it’s for that reason that I will be moving an 
amendment to clause 34. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we often hear the talk about level playing field. 
And I know that one of the things that has led to this legislation 
is fear that — what if the federal government grants our 
chartered banks the right to sell insurance. 
 
Let me say that Liberals are of the view that if our chartered 
banks gain the right to sell insurance there’s absolutely no 
question that that right must immediately be conferred on our 
credit unions. And I think our insurance agents, too, recognize 
that if chartered banks are selling insurance, the credit unions 
must be allowed to sell insurance. 
 
However, having said that, we are extremely disturbed about 
the problem of tied selling. Now by tied selling, Mr. Chairman, 
I mean where in order to get a loan or a mortgage you have to 
get insurance, and in effect you’ll have to get that insurance 
from your financial institution. 
 
Now I know that we have legislation to technically forbid it, but 
I have to tell you, Mr. Chairman, I have talked to many, many 
people in the finance services sector and they all agree that in 
point of fact you can’t police tied selling. There is simply no 
way to prevent it. The blunt reality is that when one enters one’s 
bank or credit union branch asking for a loan, it is very 
important that the person you’re dealing with is happy. And it’s 
going to make him or her happy if they get your insurance 
business, and it might just make him or her unhappy if they 
don’t. And so, in effect, placing your insurance with that 
financial institution becomes a term of the loan. And as I say, 
you can technically make it illegal but the reality is, as bank 
managers and credit union managers and insurance agents all 
agree, it is impossible to police tied selling. It will be 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

impossible to prevent it. 
 
So where the Liberal opposition comes down is that we say that 
this legislation needs an amendment whereby the government 
will commit in writing that there will not be credit union 
insurance selling unless there is insurance selling by the 
chartered banks. So this is not an attempt to unfairly 
disadvantage our credit unions. Let me make that perfectly 
clear. We are committed to making sure that our credit unions 
will have the same rights and powers as the chartered banks in 
regards insurance selling. However I do want to put it on the 
record that from my discussions with federal officials, it is my 
firm conviction that we are not going to see insurance selling by 
our chartered banks in the near future. 
 
The reality is that the political climate is very much against 
enlarging the scope and powers of our chartered banks right 
now. The prospect of massive bank mergers has simply not 
made our chartered banks the favourite recipient of generosity 
from the federal government. And I simply do not expect that 
we are going to see insurance selling by the chartered banks in 
the foreseeable future, and for this reason I don’t want the credit 
unions to be leading on this issue and selling insurance when 
the chartered banks are not. 
 
Indeed I would also go so far as to say, Mr. Chairman, that my 
concern is that if credit unions gain the right to sell insurance 
that in itself could be a trigger to the chartered banks gaining 
the right. Because if the credit unions gain the right to sell 
insurance, of course, we all know what the chartered banks will 
say. 
 
So while we want our credit unions to be on the level playing 
field, we do not want our credit unions leading on this issue. 
We want a strong credit union movement that will strengthen 
our communities, but we do not want a credit union movement 
that has the power to shut down small-town insurance agencies. 
 
The solution therefore is an amendment whereby this 
government commits not merely to consult, but goes the next 
step further to say we will not only consult, we will promise 
that there will not be insurance sales by the credit unions unless 
the chartered banks gain that right. And I assure you, Mr. 
Chairman, that when and if the day comes that our chartered 
banks gain the right to sell, of course the credit unions have to 
have that right. 
 
(2000) 
 
But I say one; the Liberal Party will fight against chartered 
banks gaining the right to sell insurance. We are opposed. We 
are opposed on the provincial level, and I am assured that the 
federal caucus of the Liberal Party is opposed to chartered 
banks gaining the right to sell insurance. We don’t want the 
banks selling insurance. And I think that one way to ensure that 
the chartered banks won’t sell insurance is to hold the line here 
on this credit union Act. 
 
And so, well I want to say on behalf of my colleagues . . . we 
support the new Credit Union Act. We find it modern and 
innovative and certainly we will be voting in favour of it. 
 
We do ask for the one change, whereby selling insurance will 

not occur unless and until the chartered banks gain that right. 
And I hope that will never come. And I hope that the minister 
will be prepared to commit to this House not merely that he will 
consult with the insurance agents, not merely that he will give 
them warning before the execution day, but that he will say this 
isn’t going to happen. 
 
And as I understand it, Mr. Chairman, the only commitment 
that has presently been firmly given to our insurance agents is 
that they get 90 days warning of their execution. And I ask that 
the minister give a firmer commitment this evening. I ask that 
he give the commitment that there will not be credit union 
selling of insurance unless the chartered banks gain that right. 
And I ask him to support our amendment to clause 34. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I’d just like to make a couple 
of comments in response. The whole issue of tied selling is 
dealt with very carefully in the legislation. It’s prohibited in the 
legislation. It’s policed. We have the registrar and the 
superintendent who will review any complaints by any 
customers who have a problem. And if there is a problem, there 
are some very stiff fines for people who breach that. So I think 
that we have the legislative framework to deal with the tied 
selling issue. 
 
The other points that the member makes as support for the 
proposed amendment points out to me that it appears that the 
Liberal Party of Saskatchewan does not have confidence in the 
credit unions as being community-based organizations. These 
organizations are set up in a way that the community controls 
them. 
 
And one of the things that communities want to do is make sure 
that businesses that are locally owned can thrive. And 
practically, in all of our discussions with the credit unions, we 
have heard very clearly from them that it’s not in their best 
interests to do something that would harm some of their 
customers. And as you know and I know, there are many people 
who are independent insurance brokers who are actually board 
members on the credit unions. 
 
So we think that the Act as we’ve set it out provides a proper 
balance to deal with the issue that the member opposite has 
raised. And we are therefore not going to be voting in favour of 
your amendment. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, with all due respect to the 
hon. minister, I have to say that the Liberal Party has enormous 
confidence in the credit union movement. Where we lack 
confidence, where we lack faith is in the cabinet of this 
province. 
 
Now we had in legislation, we have in legislation at present, a 
ban on credit unions selling insurance. This legislation will turn 
that power over to our cabinet. It will take it away from the 
legislature. 
 
Now we’re actually prepared to meet the government halfway. 
We are prepared to say okay, the cabinet can have that right 
because that gives the government the right of flexibility. That 
if by any chance there is ever a change at the federal level that 
means the province of Saskatchewan can move very quickly 
without the reconvening of this legislature. 



1554 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

So we’ve met the government halfway in saying we will 
concede that the power to sell insurance will move from this 
House to the cabinet. 
 
All we are asking for is your commitment that you will not 
exercise this new power we are conferring to you as long as the 
chartered banks are not allowed to sell insurance. As long as 
our federal government holds the line and says chartered banks 
can’t sell insurance, we ask that our provincial cabinet do the 
same for the credit unions. That’s the only thing we have said. 
 
And our lack of faith quite frankly rests solely in you and your 
colleagues. If you are not prepared to stand in your place this 
evening and say yes, if the House grants me and the rest of the 
cabinet this new right, I promise not to invoke this right as long 
as the federal government is holding the line and saying our 
banks can’t sell insurance. 
 
And I say thank heavens for the federal government and the 
federal Liberal caucus that is saying they do not want chartered 
banks in the insurance business. And I hope they will hold the 
line on that. And my colleagues and I on the provincial level 
intend to make sure they do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, it’s our goal as a government 
to provide the flexibility that we need to deal with all of the 
changes that are happening in the financial services industry. 
And I think the important thing to note here is that the 
Insurance Brokers’ Association of Saskatchewan are not 
opposed to the arrangement that’s been set out here. 
 
In a very interesting way, the member opposite is setting out 
that this decision should no longer be made in Saskatchewan. 
He’s saying that this decision should be made by the federal 
Liberals in Ottawa. We don’t agree with that. We’re going to 
maintain the flexibility that we need so that we in Saskatchewan 
can have control over this particular issue. And I think that’s 
much more important than just abdicating and allowing the 
whole decision to be made by the federal government in 
Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
say with deep regret that I think the minister has just put on the 
record that there is a very real danger of the provincial cabinet 
invoking this section even while the chartered banks are denied 
the right to sell insurance. And he’s saying that it’s somehow an 
insult to the province of Saskatchewan that we say we won’t 
move as long as the line is held against our chartered bank. 
 
And I warn the minister that my great fear and the great danger 
is you confer the right to sell insurance on the credit unions and 
you have just given the chartered banks their strongest and most 
powerful argument. You have just given them the weapon to 
deal with the federal government. We don’t want that. We want 
the chartered banks to be denied the right to sell insurance. 
 
And if you get your way tonight, and you I think have now 
served us fair warning that you will exercise this right to start 
the insurance sales, you can shut down our small town 
insurance agents. And you will give the chartered banks the 
weapon they need the weapon they need to go after the federal 
government and say we need the same power to sell insurance. 
 

So I suppose if the minister, if the minister is determined to do 
this, maybe there’s nothing more we can do but vote on our 
amendment. But I say if the insurance agencies in our small 
towns are destroyed because of this amendment, then this 
evening is a sorry time for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well it’s very interesting to listen to this 
discussion. What I would say is that the proposal that we’ve set 
out in this legislation is the same proposal as is set out in the 
federal legislation. It’s the same proposal as set out in the 
Ontario legislation. It’s the same proposal that’s set out in the 
Nova Scotia legislation. And what we are saying is that in 
Saskatchewan we need to maintain some of this flexibility. 
 
Now as the hon. member knows, the changes that were made in 
the Bank Act in 1992 are now being implemented in 1998. I 
don’t think this in any way is setting up a way that we’re going 
to move ahead of whatever the federal government does, but it 
does give us the opportunity to look at the issues and maybe 
have the timing in a way that works in Saskatchewan. And we 
have been working extensively with the credit unions, with the 
insurance brokers, with other people within the financial 
services industry. We do not have opposition from the 
insurance brokers. We think that we’re ready to go ahead with 
this legislation at this time. We thank the member for his 
comments, but we disagree. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 33 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 34 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will not repeat the 
arguments I’ve made. They are before this House. I will simply 
say in moving my amendment though that, when the Minister of 
Justice suggests that he has the support of the insurance agents 
of this province, that . . . I think the fax machine in our caucus 
office is still smoking from the faxes we received from 
insurance agents in Saskatchewan. And they did not indicate 
overwhelming support for the minister or the government. 
 
With that I move an amendment to clause 34: 
 

By adding immediately after subsection (4) thereof the 
following new subsection: 
 
“(4.1) Notwithstanding clause (4)(h), no regulation 
prescribing any services that would permit a credit union to 
undertake the business of insurance shall come into force 
until the Canadian chartered banks are granted the power 
to carry on the business of insurance pursuant to the 
provisions of the Bank Act (Canada) or any regulation or 
Order-in-Council made thereunder.” 

 
Mr. Chairman, I so move. 
 
The division bells rang from 8:14 p.m. until 8:24 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

Yeas — 11 
 
Krawetz Toth D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Gantefoer 
Osika Hillson McPherson 
Belanger McLane  
 

Nays — 20 
 

Wiens MacKinnon Atkinson 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Goulet Calvert Renaud 
Lorje Sonntag Nilson 
Hamilton Jess Kasperski 
Ward Murray Langford 
Murrell Thomson  
 
Clause 34 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 35 to 477 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, before I make that motion I 
would like to thank the officials who are here plus all of the 
other officials within the Department of Justice who have 
worked on this matter. I’d also like to thank all of the people 
within the credit union industry and also the insurance brokers 
of Saskatchewan who have worked with us on this. And I 
would say that we are very pleased that all of these people have 
been able to come and work together with us to bring forward 
legislation that will modernize The Credit Union Act. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1998 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, thank you very much, with 
pleasure. Next to me is the deputy minister of Finance, Bill 
Jones. Behind him is Arun Srinivas, tax policy analyst. And 
behind him is Kirk McGregor, assistant deputy minister. 
 
Clauses 1 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Chair: — I see there’s a new official and I would ask the 
minister to introduce us. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, we have with us Kent Walde, 
who is the director of pension programs for the Public 
Employees Benefits Agency. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
welcome to your officials. I just have a couple of questions. 

With this Bill, can you tell me about the changes, what the 
financial impact will be on municipalities and school boards or 
if there will be any impact on them? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, there will 
be no impact on municipalities or school boards. 
 
Ms. Draude: — What will be the net benefits for the retired 
employees covered by this plan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, it will 
depend of course on the individual’s circumstances what the 
benefit will be. But to the year 2001, $28 million has been set 
aside for various types of pension improvements. So it will 
mean improvement in pensions, but again how much you 
experience the improvement depends on what your individual 
circumstance is. The global number is $28 million. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I have with me Zach Douglas who is the president 
and CEO (chief executive officer). Behind Zach is Glenda 
Bruce who is the director of finance. Behind me is Ladette 
Fuchs who is the assistant to the president and the legislation 
officer. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
welcome to your officials. In 1994 when SOCO (Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation) was created, the minister then in 
charge said that they would not have a property division in 
SOCO. I think most of us see this as backsliding on a promise. 
Can you respond to this please? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, I think the 
point that was being made was that we would not get into 
competing with the private sector in terms of owning facilities 
that the private sector would naturally own. Instead what the 
government is involved in is what I think governments should 
be involved in, which is basically infrastructure, research and 
development infrastructure. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, this Bill doesn’t refer to any 
specific capital projects. It simply states capital construction 
projects. Why is it so general if it’s really only taking into 
account this current project here in Regina? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Actually, to the member opposite, if 
you look at clause 2(a) subsection (a.1), it does try to be 
somewhat more specific than has been the case in the past. In 
the past, it’s just been general that we would finance 



1556 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

infrastructure to assist research and development. So that 
particular clause does try to narrow it down somewhat. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is there any intentions in the future to be 
looking at capital projects outside of Saskatoon and Regina? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Not at this particular point in time. 
We believe that we have two research parks: one 
well-established, one just beginning. And at this particular 
moment, we believe that the research and development 
capability of the province is well met by these two parks. 
 
(2045) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, can you tell us how many 
clients are currently lined up and ready to reside in this complex 
in Regina? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We have between six and eight 
clients, and the member opposite will understand that if the 
clients themselves don’t want to make public the fact that 
they’d like to locate in the park, we don’t make that information 
public until they actually sign the leases. But we have six to 
eight, and of course there is one, SAIC (Science Applications 
International Corporation), which has publicly stated the fact 
that they’re moving to Regina, and they will be a major tenant 
in the park, so we feel comfortable in re-informing the 
legislature about SAIC’s intentions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So can you give us an idea of what percentage 
of this building is already booked up and what you’re doing to 
attract additional tenants to the building. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, to the member opposite, before 
the park could proceed the criteria was that we had to have 80 
per cent occupancy. That is, 80 per cent of the building had to 
be committed to in that we had letters of intent saying we would 
like to move into the building — which we’ve used in the past 
in Innovation Place — and that’s usually a very successful 
indicator that you’re going to at least fill it after it’s built. 
 
Ms. Draude: — This Bill gives SOCO the right to spend up to 
$5 million without cabinet approval. How do you foresee that 
the board will be held accountable for this money that they 
spend without having this type of approval? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, this is in 
fact a limiting clause because up until this time there was no 
need to go to cabinet at all, so it’s saying only up to that limit 
can you make decisions without going to cabinet. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much to your officials. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 43 — The Queen’s Bench Revision Act/Loi portant 

révision de la Loi sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

Hon. Mr. Nilson — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Insurance 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Credit Union Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 

Subvote (EC01) 
 
The Chair: — Would the minister please introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

An Hon. Member: — Just because some of the other Bills 
rolled along very quickly, Mr. Chair . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, we’re moving so fast. On my 
left here I have Fraser Nicholson, who is the deputy minister. 
Behind him I have Dave McQuinn, who is the director of policy 
and coordination. Behind me is Donna Johnson, the director of 
administration. And here we have Bryon Burnett, the executive 
project leader of community economic development. 
 
Subvote (EC01) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to your 
new officials, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I have a 
number of questions. 
 
SOCO, first of all. And I’m wondering with the information 
we’ve been given, can you tell us how many of the loans or the 
monies that were given out last year were straight grants and 
how much of it was repayable loans? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, we’ll bring 
those officials back for you. We let them go because we did the 
Bill, but we’ll bring them back and we’ll answer that question 
in a minute if you want to move on to some others. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Then maybe we 
could discuss REDAs (regional economic development 
authority) for a few minutes. 
 
In the current budget the funds that are given to REDAs are 
doubled, or basically doubled this year. I think many of the 
REDAs last year actually didn’t use all the funding there was 
available to them. I think in a previous discussion you’d 
indicated that there was about six of them. Can you tell me what 
will happen if all the funds aren’t used that are available? And 
how many of them are actually approaching you saying that 
they need this increase in money? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think the first thing is that this 
money is not used for the same purposes as the original money. 
The original money was two kinds of money — start-up money 
to get them kick-started, and then cost-shared dollars, up to 
$60,000 a year to help them manage their ongoing expenses. 
 
The new money is targeted to specific purposes. The major 
announcement that we’ve made is the youth REDA where they 
can hire . . . REDAs can hire young people for a period of up to 
four months with a cap of $10,000. And this is a way to keep 
young people, particularly in rural communities, because if they 
get that first job then often other opportunities follow. 
 
So that’s one example of what will be future announcements 
about new uses for the new money. So the new money is not 
going to be used for the same purposes as the original money. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you give us some idea of what the monies 
will be used for? What will happen with REDAs like Carlton 
Trail that are doing very well in their areas . . . mostly to do 
with the hog industry in that area? Are they going to be able to 
work with that industry and further develop it in that area, or are 

they going to have to meet with the guidelines that your 
department has developed. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — In part, one of the other reasons for 
new formulas is because of REDAs like the one you mention, 
which is very successful. They want to expand, but they’re 
treated the same as every other REDA. That is, if they got 
bigger, they wouldn’t get any more money; they would hit the 
cap. So we want to look at ways to encourage REDAs to 
expand their territory and bring in new members. So we’ll be 
looking at ways to change the formula to give it more 
flexibility. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I take it that means there’s 
no longer a cap as there was last year of $60,000. So does that 
mean that REDAs that are very progressive will be able to 
spend considerably more money? And will they be able to use 
this money to hire personnel to actually make the REDAs more 
progressive? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We’re in the process of reviewing 
that. We still will want to have some sort of cap. We don’t want 
to have it open-ended. But we do want to encourage REDAs 
that are growing to continue to grow and not to hit a ceiling 
that’s an artificial ceiling. So we haven’t made the final 
decision, but we do want to ensure that there isn’t . . . that you 
don’t hit an artificial ceiling when you’re doing really well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Are the REDAs themselves involved in 
determining these guidelines right now? Are all the guidelines 
or the infrastructure or the decisions all going to be made by 
government? I guess what I’m asking you is are the successful 
REDAs going to have an opportunity to help develop the 
policies that will allow them to grow and expand in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, I think that’s really our 
intention. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I look forward to speaking to 
some of the REDAs in my area then to find out what they’re . . . 
how their input will affect the guidelines that will be coming 
forward. 
 
Madam Minister, the small business loans association . . . I 
guess I would ask you what the status of that program is at this 
time. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, nothing 
has changed from last year. It’s $2.5 million in loans that we 
give out. The criteria are the same; the loan amount is the same. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is there consideration being given to allow 
REDAs to handle this program? Because if they actually are 
going to be working in their territory to develop industry, will 
they have the opportunity to take over the small business loans 
association if towns would like . . . would ask them to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, some of 
the REDAs are already taking over the SBLA (small business 
loans association), so it will be a local decision whether or not 
they feel they have capacity and whether they want to do that, 
but some of them are doing it already. 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, the final decisions on the 
loans for these small business loans associations are made at a 
local level but they have to be basically approved in Regina or 
by the department. Has there been a chance that . . . has there 
ever been a time when a loan has been approved at a local level 
and then refused when it gets into Regina? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think the idea is that the general 
guidelines and regulations are set in Regina but the decisions 
are made locally because we believe they make better decisions 
locally than they do centrally. Right? 
 
Ms. Draude: — I believe so, Madam Minister. But my question 
is, has there ever been a loan turned down in Regina that was 
approved at the local level? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Occasionally a local association will 
say: we have lots of concerns; we don’t want to turn it down; 
can you turn it down centrally? But we have no occasions of 
disputes, where they want to give the loan and we say, no, I’m 
sorry, you can’t do that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — In the industry sector development area . . . 
can you give me an idea of how many employees there are in 
that area? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It’s 30.9. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you tell me what areas have been 
identified as industries that should be targeted for expansion? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well the six sectors that have been 
mentioned in the Partnership for Growth document are the key 
ones. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, under the business 
investment program, when I read what this mandate is, I find it 
difficult to understand how it differs from SOCO. Can you 
explain to me how it does? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Renaud: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Renaud: — Thank you. I would like to introduce to the 
Legislative Assembly in the Speaker’s gallery: Amna Afsar, a 
legislative guide; and her friends, David McKillop, and Natasha 
Malik, from Regina. They’re here to watch the pages work and 
to see if they really fulfil all the work that they’re supposed to 
be doing. So I would like the Assembly to please welcome them 
here tonight. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 

Subvote (EC01) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — They’re quite different because for 
example the major component of the investment division in the 
department are the WEPA grants, which are the Western 
Economic Partnership Agreements with the federal government. 
These are cost-shared programs where the two governments 
have to set criteria. And so it’s quite different than SOCO in the 
sense that the purposes are quite separate. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So is the money that is being . . . that we’re 
looking at here under this program, is any of that federal 
money? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, none of 
which would be federal money; it’s just our share of the federal 
money. So we will have agreed with the federal government 
that we’ll sign a WEPA agreement over five years totalling $40 
million. Our half will be 20 so we have our share only in our 
budget. 
 
Ms. Draude: — The transfers from the public service funding 
went from $6,490,000 to $9,675,000. What initiatives have you 
targeted to request that increase? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again what’s new there is the 
WEPA money. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you identify how the money was spent 
under the strategic initiative fund last year. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, we made a number of 
announcements, and it’s actually I think one of our most 
successful funds. Some of the announcements include money 
for the food centre . . . the food processing centre in Saskatoon. 
Money to help create biotechnology training. The strategic 
initiatives fund cannot be used for a specific company; it’s got 
to be for a sector — like a training program that benefits 
everybody or a research facility that everybody can access — it 
can’t be company-specific. 
 
Ms. Draude: — The Economic Partnership Agreement funding 
is increased from $475,000 to $3,750,000. Can you tell me how 
that additional money will be spent? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again that’s the WEPA money 
again. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And why is it in two different areas? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Actually it’s just saying the same 
thing over again in a different way. It’s taking . . . in the first set 
of numbers, you’re taking them individually; then in the second 
set of numbers you’re grouping them together. So they’re 
exactly the same numbers; it’s just that they’re restating them in 
a different form. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, under tourism, I’m 
wondering how regional parks, because they are actually under 
Municipal Government, have any input in this tourism sector of 
Economic Development. Being from rural Saskatchewan, I 
recognize the importance of the parks to the local economy. 
And with the decrease in funding that was given to regional 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

parks in the last couple of years, there’s no opportunities for 
local parks to actually try and attract businesses or people out 
there. How can they get involved with these tourism dollars? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well first of all the Tourism 
Authority doesn’t actually make grants to agencies like parks 
for capital or other projects. But you make a good point because 
we are encouraging the Tourism Authority to work more 
closely with local organizations whether they’re REDAs or 
provincial parks or our regional parks. So that’s a good point 
and we intend to follow up on that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I just hope that many of the regional parks are 
able to maintain the facilities until you are actually able to look 
into it, because with the lack of funding right now there’s been 
considerably less opportunity to actually do any developing. In 
fact in lots of cases, their infrastructures are falling apart 
because they don’t have any funding. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell me out of these tourism dollars, 
how much of the money was spent in Saskatchewan last year, 
or do you break it down that way — in advertising and 
promotion within the province, within Canada, and outside of 
the borders? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We don’t have the breakdown. We 
don’t break it down in that way. Really what we do is we give 
them the money and they have accountability in terms of . . . 
that they’ve spent it properly with the auditor. But we don’t 
actually tell them how to spend it and we don’t dictate that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I have a number of other 
questions, but most of them deal with SOCO. And if you are in 
agreement with answering them fully if I send you written 
questions, then I’m sure that we can agree to get our answers in 
that way. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much. Certainly we 
will agree to written answers to your SOCO questions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thanks, Madam Minister, to your officials for 
coming this evening. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of 
questions, Madam Minister. I have some too that I’d like to ask 
regarding the hog operations with your SOCO organization. I 
wish that your officials were here to do that. I was under the 
understanding they would be. 
 
However, maybe while we’re waiting, Madam Minister, we 
could just talk for a minute. I noticed on page 38 of the 
Estimates under the subvote (EC09), it talks about 
sub-programs. It talks about investment division 1,517; 
development division of 2,204; and loan loss provision of 
2,500. I wonder if you could explain those figures for us please? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, we have Glenda 
Bruce who’s the director of finance for SOCO. 
 
The 1.5 is the administration costs for the investment division, 
cost of running the investment division. The 2.2 is the cost of 

running the research parks, a little bit of R&D (research and 
development) in Regina, but mainly Innovation Place in 
Saskatoon. The loan loss provision is just a standard loan loss 
provision . . . you automatically assume that you should set 
aside a certain amount of money in case you do have loans that 
are not repaid. Now, in fact, all of the loans have been repaid, 
but the auditor says it’s a good idea to do the set aside, so we do 
the set aside. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you. Minister, do you have a list of 
figures of money that has been lent or given to hog projects in 
this province. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What I would refer the member 
opposite to is to the SOCO Investing in Business, Investing in 
People, pages 12 and 13 . . . have them all listed there. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Does that list, Madam Minister, include loans 
as well as grants, any write-offs that may have occurred and to 
whom they went and who the shareholders of the company are? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, SOCO of 
course doesn’t make investments — it just makes loans. None 
of them have gone bad and we’ll be sure that you get a copy of 
this report as soon as we can get it xeroxed or sent. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Madam Minister, I guess . . . Could you 
repeat your last answer please, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Good point to the member opposite 
because you know what, I want to clarify that answer. What I 
meant is SOCO does not make grants — it makes investments 
obviously. We list the companies, but that’s all that we list. We 
don’t list the details of who the directors are. 
 
And to further answer . . . what your last question was, I 
believe, none of these have been problematic in terms of 
repayment. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you. Are the details of such loans 
available and to whom they were made and the shareholders in 
those corporations? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, often this 
information is highly confidential to the clients. But, you know 
if you looked in the public records of the Department of Justice, 
I’m sure that information, you know when the company 
incorporates, that information would be there. But we generally 
do not publish those sorts of details because they are our clients. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I guess when you’re dealing with public 
money, Madam Minister, it’s of interest to all the people in 
Saskatchewan how you’re spending it, and if indeed since you 
do have this loan loss provision there are some concerns of 
whether taxpayers’ money will be lost or not. And of course not 
everybody’s in agreement with whom you give or lend money 
to. Don’t you think it’s in the best interest of the taxpayer that 
some of those names are available to the taxpayers so that they 
can determine if it indeed was a good investment? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — If you look at the annual report, all 
the loans and all the companies are fully listed there and often 
when we make the announcement, they give more details. But 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

again many of these companies are well-known companies to 
the public of Saskatchewan. Heartland, which is a subsidiary of 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool or Sinnett Pork Farms, are 
well-known Saskatchewan companies. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Madam Minister, do you have — since you’re 
reading from that document — do you have an extra copy or do 
your officials have a copy that we could have a look at. We 
don’t have it available at our fingertips. But I do know in some 
of your announcements that you’ve made, there have been press 
releases, news releases with details of the agreement to some 
extent and some names. Do you have a list of those available? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again to the member opposite, a 
similar sort of answer. We have to protect the confidentiality of 
the clients, so we have a list of who the companies are, we have 
a list of the loans, we have a list of the status of the loans, but 
we don’t go into further details. Now some of this information 
is available, as I say, if you wanted to look it up in the 
corporations branch of the Department of Justice. And most of 
the companies, if you look at them, are well-known 
Saskatchewan companies. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Minister, what role did your department play 
in SPUDCO? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — None. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Now a lot of people in the province that I’ve 
talked to, they’ve found it very strange that that is the case, that 
the department responsible for economic development would 
have no role in the setting up of a major company such as a 
potato plant in Saskatchewan. Do you feel slighted that you 
weren’t involved in that or did you not want to be? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No to the member opposite, we 
don’t feel slighted. Now that doesn’t mean that we don’t give 
an assessment of the economic potential of diversifying into 
potatoes. So I mean we would give an assessment of this sector 
and whether or not it fits into the agri-value strategy, which it 
does, but it doesn’t mean that we have to directly participate in 
it. 
 
Mr. McLane: — So you did have something to do with the 
setting up of SPUDCO then? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No we didn’t directly have anything 
to do with the setting up of SPUDCO. We’re not a finance 
agency. The Department of Finance or CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) would do that. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Does your department, Minister, follow this 
program at all — SPUDCO — as it’s developing and what 
they’re doing and how they’re spending money? With the 
expertise that you should have in your department — I assume 
it’s sitting around you there — you’d think they’d be natural 
people that would want to be involved in that program and not 
Sask Water. 
 
And that’s a legitimate concern. That’s not one that I’ve taken 
out of mid-air. It’s a legitimate concern of a lot of people in the 
Lake Diefenbaker area. I think your member sitting next to you 
across the way there would confirm what I’m saying. It would 

make sense that Economic Development would be involved in 
this when you’re setting up a major program like that and 
investing taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What we have in government is 
something called the cabinet committee in Economic 
Development which I chair and it looks at a sector and 
determines the progress and the potential for further progress. 
So we do that. We have a role but we don’t directly participate 
in the running of SPUDCO or the setting up of SPUDCO or the 
financing of SPUDCO. 
 
Mr. McLane: — . . . Not quite. Not quite, Mr. Deputy Premier, 
Mr. Next Premier. 
 
Madam Minister, maybe you could explain to us why it was 
Sask Water that took on this program and not Economic 
Development. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well again what I would say is 
Economic Development isn’t an agency that invests directly or 
sets up programs directly. Sask Water got involved because, as 
you would know seeing as that is in your riding, there was all 
this irrigated land there. It wasn’t being fully utilized. It wasn’t 
that you’re not getting as much value from the use of the land as 
you might. So to add value, moving into potatoes was a natural 
choice. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well I guess, Minister, using that logic then I 
guess the next step would be that Economic Development will 
be watching the flow of water coming down the Saskatchewan 
River. I don’t understand that logical choice. It’s not a logical 
choice and a lot of people don’t believe that it is. 
 
And I’m wondering how much lobbying you did in cabinet to 
get involved in this project and not have the people at Sask 
Water doing it. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I would say to the member opposite, 
Sask Water will be here and then you can ask them these 
detailed questions. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and welcome 
Madam Minister and your staff as well. 
 
I guess first of all could you give me a kind of a brief overview 
of all the REDAs in northern Saskatchewan, what we refer to as 
the northern administration district please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, when 
Northern Affairs are here, they can give you the exact 
breakdown of what they got. They call them CREDOs 
(community regional economic development organization) up 
there, and there are a number of them. But they can give you the 
exact breakdown of them and where they operate, because they 
operate under the Northern Affairs department. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Is there any specific reason why you have 
REDAs in southern Saskatchewan and CREDOs in northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I think, as the member 
opposite knows because of his riding, it’s because the North is 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

different and is special and needs special treatment. And so we 
wanted to recognize that fact and put it into a special category 
in Northern Affairs. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well I’m positive, Madam Minister, that the 
North appreciates the special status. However, I think the key 
point that we keep stressing is northern Saskatchewan certainly 
wants to be treated as equal partners and certainly wants to 
become equal people in terms of the economy of the North. 
 
And one of the statements that one of the mayors of northern 
Saskatchewan made to the press — and that mayor of course 
was the mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse — in which he said . . . and I 
don’t have the exact quote here. Mr. Morin indicated that the 
provincial average for unemployment is between 6 and 7 per 
cent. That’s the type of . . . that’s the rate of unemployment that 
we want in northern Saskatchewan. That was the extent of his 
comment. 
 
So I guess my question to you, Madam Minister, is after 20 
years, people of northern Saskatchewan are quite frankly tired 
of the high unemployment rates. And what are you, as minister 
responsible for Economic Development, going to do to address 
that problem? And what are your comments on the quote that I 
tried to present as fairly as I could in reference to Mr. Morin’s 
statement. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I think we all recognize that 
we would like to see people in northern Saskatchewan and 
aboriginal people participating in the economy in much greater 
numbers than they do now. So not only do we want to grow the 
economy, we want to make it a full-participation economy. 
 
The opportunities that we’ve been pursuing, just to name a few, 
are: tourism, particularly some of our initiatives in ecotourism 
will mean a lot to the North; mining, the expansion of the 
mining industry and the insistence that Northerners not only 
work in the mines but Northerners supply the mines; and many 
of our training initiatives. 
 
So we’ve done some things, but I agree we have to do more and 
we have to keep working. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — I guess the question that you have, and 
certainly the attitude of many people in Saskatchewan, is much 
the same attitude that is shared with the member of Kindersley 
when he yells out, you know, go where the jobs are. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Madam Minister, is that in northern 
Saskatchewan as I’ve said time and time again, is that we’re 
facing a serious problem with depopulation of rural 
Saskatchewan, we’re facing a serious problem of trying to get 
people to leave northern Saskatchewan when that’s where all 
the opportunities are. You have 80 to 90 square kilometres for 
every man, woman, and child and I would suggest, Madam 
Minister, that the attitude that’s so prevalent in southern 
Saskatchewan — to have people depopulate northern 
Saskatchewan — is not an attitude nor is it a belief that we 
share. 
 
So I guess my question goes back to you, as the Minister of 
Economic Development. What is your comment towards the 
statement made by Mr. Morin in terms of his demand of having 

a 6 to 7 per cent unemployment rate in northern Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I think again what we want to 
do is to ensure that people in the North participate and get the 
benefits from the economy on a even basis with the rest of us, 
and I think we all want to keep working toward that goal. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — I think the key point goes back to your other 
question. How well coordinated are you with the Minister of 
Northern Affairs to ensure a very comprehensive and a very 
concise and a very concentrated effort to try and develop an 
economy alongside the people of the North when it comes to 
some of these issues that we speak to you about. Is the 
coordination there? And certainly is the commitment there to 
provide the adequate funding to the northern Saskatchewan 
people? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — As I mentioned before in one of my 
other answers, the cabinet committee in Economic 
Development oversees economic development across 
government, so the coordination does occur but we want to 
continue to work to improve the level of coordination. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well, Madam Minister, let me apprise you of 
some of the challenges facing northern Saskatchewan 
communities. In particular, those communities that don’t have 
as large a population base as smaller centres, those people that 
are trying to break away from the social services sector, and 
those people that have aspirations but have all these challenges 
ahead of them. These include the system of disincentives such 
as the lack of operating dollars, the lack of capital dollars, 
certainly some of the skills needed to set up their own 
businesses, and the list goes on. 
 
I guess the key factor that we always stress in northern 
Saskatchewan is that as long as you continue to base the 
development of any economy on the mining sector alone, then 
that displaces any local effort to try and create jobs at the local 
level. And I share with you, Madam Minister, a couple of 
success stories. 
 
We can talk about the Ile-a-la-Crosse Development Corporation 
and we can talk about the Kitsaki Development Corporation. 
There’s a number of corporations that you can talk about. But 
the fact of the matter is, Madam Minister, when we talk about 
that key point that the mayor made when he talks about the 6 to 
7 per cent unemployment rate, the fact of the matter is is you 
have not concentrated enough effort when you talk about 
economic development in northern Saskatchewan. You have 
not consulted with the local community development 
corporations and you have not talked to the people in the North 
specifically about what they aspire their economy to look like. 
 
Would you care to elaborate on that, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think to the member opposite, 
we’ll continue to pursue all the opportunities that exist in 
mining and forestry and tourism and wild rice and those 
initiatives. And we of course want to work with you as the 
member from that region to make these things happen. 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I guess 
my point I’m trying to make here is that there are a number of 
areas that have to be addressed. And we’re not just talking 
about leaving the mining sector totally alone. They certainly 
contribute a significant amount through the development of the 
North. But also some of the system of disincentives I spoke 
about earlier today in reference to the Social Services 
department. 
 
When a person is trying to go to work, when a person is trying 
to become a self-made person, self-made man or woman, there 
are a number of problems he faces, particularly with housing, 
Madam Minister. 
 
As the Minister of Economic Development you should know, 
the more that people make in northern Saskatchewan from some 
of their jobs or potential jobs, the more they pay for housing. So 
that’s one area that has to be addressed. And when you talk 
about the development of the economy, there are so many 
factors in the North that quite frankly limit our imagination and 
limit our ability to develop an economy alongside of the 
province and certainly create jobs for our own people. 
 
So would you undertake today to guarantee to the people of 
northern Saskatchewan that you will also look at the system of 
disincentives that are associated with living in northern 
Saskatchewan, such as the high cost of transportation and food 
and supplies, the isolation factors, the disincentives associated 
with housing. All these matters have to be looked into. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, I would agree. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Second point, Madam Minister. Some of the 
villages through their municipalities Act aren’t allowed to 
establish community development corporations. That also has 
to be looked into. Would you elaborate as to why some of the 
northern communities cannot develop a development 
corporation and why is it only apparent in northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Okay. What I have for the member 
opposite is I have a list of the CREDOs. There’s the Clearwater 
(La Loche Region) CREDO; the Dazi (Buffalo Narrows 
Region) CREDO; Three Rivers (Beauval/Green 
Lake/Ile-a-la-Crosse) CREDO; La Ronge/Air Ronge CREDO; 
Creighton-Denare Beach CREDO; and the Northeast CREDO, 
which is Sandy Bay, Pelican Narrows, Deschaumbault, 
Cumberland House. 
 
Now as far as your other question, I think that’s a municipal 
restriction. I don’t think that’s an economic development 
restriction because the reason that we created these CREDOs is 
to promote economic development on a regional basis in the 
North. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well exactly my point, Madam Minister. In 
the development of an economy in northern Saskatchewan, 
you’ve got to have the Minister of Economic Development 
involved. And certainly that’s one of the restrictions they talk 
about when the municipality tries to undertake to develop a 
local economy. 
 
And I guess my other question, in terms of the CREDOs, could 

you give us the amount of money that has been allocated to 
them this year to develop an economy as you have indicated 
you wish to do when you talk about northern Saskatchewan 
communities. What dollars are these CREDOs getting to do that 
job? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — About $300,000. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — And if I understand, that’s for about eight 
CREDOs. And what’s the population base of those CREDOs, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — About 25,000 is the population base. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — So in essence you’re indicating that 25,000 is 
the population base, and you have roughly $300,000 allocated 
to those regions. So it’s roughly $10,000 in terms of the . . . am 
I correct? Is it $10 or a $100 per person that you’ve allocated 
per CREDO? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member from the North, 
we’ve increased the northern development fund from $2 million 
to $5 million. And the whole package involved in the CREDO 
and the economic development associated with CREDO has 
gone from half a million to 1 million. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — I guess the other question we have, Madam 
Minister, when you talk about the northern development fund in 
general, how much is spent within the vicinity of Lac La Ronge 
itself compared to the other centres? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — If you look at economic 
development in the North, and I’m using the term broadly, it’s 
quite broadly disbursed. For example, I know in the Athabasca 
riding there is an $8 million road construction project from the 
Points North Landing to Black Lake. Tourism industry brings 
about 15.7 million and 130 jobs into the region and the grants 
are disbursed for housing across the region as well. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess the 
other factor is I want to apprise you of is that some of the 
challenges of the North I talk about is the lack of some of the 
skilled workers, I talk about the isolation factors, the cost of 
transportation, the protectionist attitude of some people that 
have traditionally controlled the northern economy. We’ve 
talked about the system of disincentives with housing, with 
health care, and actually the other problem is certainly with 
training facilities. 
 
We talked about some of the challenges in terms of finding all 
the right factors to establish a business. And certainly there has 
been some efforts being undertaken there, and I want to 
recognize that. But there is largely very little effort being 
undertaken to address the global challenges of developing an 
economy in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ve said it once if not a hundred times in this Assembly to 
the point where I want to scream it out, the fact is that the 
northern Saskatchewan communities do want to be a part of this 
economy. We have aspirations, and we have dreams for our 
children like you have. So the point I’m trying to make, Madam 
Minister, is as Minister of Economic Development, be inclusive 
of northern Saskatchewan with your plans for the province. Be 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

inclusive of some of the challenges we face in terms of doing 
up a plan for the province, and ensure that you have heavy 
coordination with the Northern Affairs minister because there 
are times we wonder whether he’s got the adequate budget to do 
the work we have lined up for this government and the people 
of the North in terms of meeting the general needs. 
 
So there’s a whole question of commitment, Madam Minister, 
and we certainly hope that that isn’t the case here, and we 
certainly hope that there is some genuine effort on your part to 
be inclusive of northern Saskatchewan. And don’t base the 
economic plan that you may have totally on the mining sector, 
totally on the mining sector. 
 
The problem with the mining sector, Madam Minister, is that 
much of the profits go into the mining companies themselves or 
to the government coffers. Certainly many people appreciate the 
employment that is the direct result of some of the mining 
activity; there’s no question about that. But that’s the third level 
of benefits in terms of economic development — the first level 
being revenue sharing, the second level being decision making, 
and of course the third level being employment and training. 
 
So the very important fact, Madam Minister, is I urge you, with 
all honesty and with all urgency, to try at the very least to find it 
in your busy schedule and your busy department to be inclusive 
of northern Saskatchewan, and don’t totally leave it up to the 
Minister of Northern Affairs because his record isn’t all that 
great. 
 
And what I also want to point out, Madam Minister, is in terms 
of the SaskPower northern enterprise fund. What plans have 
you got for that fund, and what’s the stage that it is now, and 
can you give us the history of the fund as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We will provide that information for 
you, especially when Northern Affairs is here, and I agree with 
your comments. We have to be inclusive. We have to work 
together. We have to focus more on the North. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The last 15, 20 
minutes I appreciate the attention of your staff and certainly 
yourself. 
 
I’m going to take my place, but we still haven’t got your 
comment into the reasoning why our mayor in Ile-a-la-Crosse 
would make the statement that the unemployment rate of the 
province is between six and seven per cent. Why isn’t northern 
Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate between six and seven per 
cent? Would you care to elaborate that? And I urge you to give 
me a very clear and concise answer because if not, I’ll be up on 
my feet again to give you that particular answer. Thank you, 
Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think the answer is one that you 
would agree with; that is we want to all work to the goal where 
the employment rates are the same in northern and southern 
Saskatchewan. And so his comment is one that we all agree 
with, and I agree with what you’ve been saying. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Okay just to add to it, Madam Minister. The 

reason why we haven’t got the same unemployment rate is 
because the commitment was never there from day one. In the 
last 20 or 30 years we have gone through the indignation of 
being ignored in northern Saskatchewan. And I’m putting you 
on notice that tonight we’re asking you and urging you to 
finally include northern Saskatchewan in your economic plan, 
to work hand in hand and very hard with the northern people to 
develop that economy — an economy based on fairness, an 
economy that’s based on being inclusive, taking care of the 
disincentives, and working hand in hand with community 
development corporation, and an economy that is 
self-sustaining and certainly involves every aspect of 
developing an economy which includes not just mining but 
certainly involves forestry, tourism, you know, agriculture, 
manufacturing. The list goes on. 
 
That’s the reason why we haven’t got a six, seven per cent 
unemployment rate, Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I 
only have a few questions. They’re related to the sheets that you 
sent across here. And I guess what I would like to know with 
the SOCO loans and equities and guarantees, exactly what is the 
process for getting the loans? You know we often hear out in 
our constituencies that the people are perhaps looking for some 
aid in getting business going. If you could just give us a quick 
step through on the process for the loans and how you 
determine . . . well I’ll leave it at that, and then we’ll get into 
the next question. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well what we do is, an application 
is made. Then we do due diligence and assess the commercial 
viability. If the due diligence test is passed, it’s commercially 
viable, and the loan proceeds. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So what is the . . . do you have a cap on 
the loans? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — There’s no cap, but there’s a limit 
on the overall budget, and there’s a desire not to invest too 
heavily in one sector. So it means that you will not make a huge 
investment because of the cap on the overall borrowing. And 
you’re always looking to see that you’re not too heavily 
involved in one sector so that you’re vulnerable if there’s a 
downturn in that particular sector. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So, Madam Minister, is there a starting 
amount? You’re not going to be part of a loan or an equity 
position — we’ll stay with loan — unless it’s a certain level. Is 
that right? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — If the project is too big, we look for 
other partners because the overall cap is $10 million, so 
obviously you have to be very cautious about getting involved 
in any number of big projects. So if it’s a bigger project we look 
for other partners to participate. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — How small a project would you be 
prepared to get into? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — There’s no floor involved. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, not too many days 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

ago I had a conversation with Zach Douglas. And Zach had told 
me himself that there is no involvement unless you’re talking 
up around the $5 million mark. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well to the member opposite, I 
don’t know about your conversation, but I do know that we 
don’t have a floor and that any project that is commercially 
viable and passes the due diligence tests we'll look at, no matter 
how small. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So when we’re looking at . . . oh, we’ll . . . 
look at the equity. I see here there’s Big Sky Pork Inc., 500,000 
equity, 500,000 loan. Now how did you establish the equity? 
Do the people come in and ask you, Madam Minister, ask your 
department or SOCO if you’ll take an equity position? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think it . . . what the answer is is 
it’s done on an individual basis. It depends on the level of 
development of the company and whether or not equity or a 
loan is more appropriate. So the mix depends on the particular 
circumstances of the company. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So they may well come in for a loan or ask 
for a loan and your department might advise them to allow you 
to take equity in the company. Is that right? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — That’s correct. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So I guess the deciding who you get 
involved with, would that be up to you, Madam Minister? Or do 
you leave that with the SOCO board or the president? Or who 
makes that decision? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Decisions of a minor nature are 
made by the SOCO management. If they’re more major, they 
actually go to the board. But it’s on the basis of management’s 
recommendations. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So, Madam Minister, what would be the 
minor and major? Can you give me some dollar amounts? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — If the project involves more than a 
million dollars in debt and 2 million in equity, it automatically 
has to go to the board. Other ones that may not be that high 
might go to the board for particular reasons. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So we’ll look at the list here and look at 
one for, say Sinnett Pork Farms at Leroy. Now there’s a 
$250,000 equity position. That would’ve just been determined 
by who? Zach Douglas or yourself? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — First of all I would never do them 
by myself or with the CEO. Anything that would be done would 
be done by the board. And so that one would’ve gone to the 
board. 
 
It is a requirement that above 1 million and 2 million they have 
to go to the board. But many of the others here would’ve gone 
to the board. That Sinnett one did go to the board. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Are you saying one for a quarter million 
dollars went to the board? 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What I said to the member opposite 
is that the limit is a million. That is, if it is a million it definitely 
has to but many of the others that are below a million will go to 
the board anyway. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — This particular one, do you have it in your 
notes that it did or didn’t go to the board? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It went to the board. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — The reason I raise this, Madam Minister, 
as we recall the days of the Grant Devine era when in fact 
companies or investments . . . it was all by who you know and 
that’s how government was run at that time. Now the Sinnett 
Pork Farm, I recall seeing that news release some months ago 
come across my desk and that I believe it is owned by the 
McGrath family at Leroy. 
 
And so when you really look at political patronage and using, 
you know, a government department or agency or public funds 
to support patronage for political payback — we’ve got to make 
sure that these types of loans and equities are above that. And 
when I take a look at your list, there’s two pork operations. But 
this one with just $250,000 of equity really sticks out because 
as everyone in this House knows, the McGrath family has for 
years either ran your election campaigns or been on your NDP 
(New Democratic Party) executives. We want to make sure that 
these kind of monies, taxpayers’ monies, aren’t going to reward 
those political friends. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I don’t know about that 
particular company that you’re talking about, but all of the 
decisions that are made are made on the basis of the 
management doing due diligence, the management looking at 
commercial viability, the management making a 
recommendation. And the political background of the 
companies is never a factor, if they don’t come with that sort of 
information. And I’m sure if you looked here you’d find people 
who are involved in a variety of political parties in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, I’m going to send a copy 
of . . . I guess a letter which I think you already have, but I’ll 
send this to you anyways. And it’s from the Frenchman Valley 
Rural Development Co-operative. But this letter of course sets 
out . . . it’s the proposed brief to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. And really it’s a number of the towns and 
municipalities in the south-west that are raising the concerns of 
the transportation — the roads, the highways in the south-west 
— and they’ve made some very good points about problems of 
getting some economic growth in the south-west going because 
of our highway system. 
 
Now I believe they’ve put this forward to the Highways 
minister, but it really does fall in your department more. So 
because if in fact, as they’ve stated out very clearly in here, if 
we can’t get some of these problems resolved with the highway 
and road system down there, how could we ever expect the 
economic development, value-added processing, tourism — 
they make some very good points on tourism — how do you 
expect that to ever go further? And I would like to know have 
you responded to this cooperative or are you going to, or have 
you raised this with the Highways minister? 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Our department has met with them 
as has the Department of Highways, so we obviously take their 
brief very seriously, and are looking into it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Are you going to respond to some of the 
recommendations that they’re making, or concerns? Have you 
in fact got any guarantees from the Department of Highways or 
the minister that some of these concerns will be addressed? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I’m not aware of the level of 
the discussions. Transportation is the main lead on this. But I 
know that we’ve been involved in discussions and we’re 
looking at their brief. 
 
Subvote (EC01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (EC02) and (EC05) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (EC03) 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 
just have one question that’s kind of a burning question up in 
my area. When the Maple Leaf food processing people were 
considering building a state-of-the-art hog processing plant to 
create all kinds of job opportunities, the Economic 
Development department of this province . . . Were there any 
overtures, any enticements or any submissions made to try and 
have those people establish here? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes. We were actively involved in 
pursuing the company. The issue in the end was hogs. Our level 
of hogs wasn’t as great as the province that won it. So it was the 
issue of hogs. But we were actively involved in doing what we 
could to bring these companies to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. The number of hogs? There was in 
fact a study done between Manitoba and Saskatchewan hog 
producers about the amount that was required by Maple Leaf 
Foods. Now I would suspect that Manitoba would also need to 
rely on hogs from Saskatchewan to ensure this project is viable. 
Was there any kind of monetary consideration? What were the 
enticements, if any, given to Maple Leaf Foods to seriously 
consider establishing in Saskatchewan? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We have a set of standards which 
you might call enticements that we use for companies. It was 
used in your riding — for example Babcock & Wilcox — 
which is in your particular riding. When we entice them to 
expand their facility and its training allowances, in order to not 
get into trouble with the Free Trade Agreement, we have to do 
it across the board. So we have training allowances, that if you 
hire a certain number of people, we will provide a certain 
number of dollars to help train them. So it was standard 
enticements like that. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Were there any offers of monies for 
infrastructure or assistance in developing that project. I 
understand that the province of Manitoba . . . one of the reasons 
they were successful was because in fact they did offer some 
assistance financially to become established. And in my mind, 
in my humble opinion, Madam Minister, an investment that’s 

made to create upwards of 2,200 jobs is something that should 
be seriously considered and pursued. 
 
And it just disturbs me a little bit that the question of numbers 
of hogs becomes the issue here because it takes both 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba to produce that amount. And for it 
to have gone to Brandon which is close enough to 
Saskatchewan that surely they must be relying on the hogs 
produced here as well . . . it just really bothers me that there was 
not enough effort by this government, by Economic 
Development in this province, to go after that project which 
would have created a great deal of economic activity in rural 
Saskatchewan and east central Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We went out to the facility but I 
think the numbers that matter in this . . . talked to the McCain's 
myself about what was the deciding factor and they cited access 
to hogs. I think what we have to look at in Saskatchewan, 1.1 
million hogs, 3.2 in Manitoba, 2.8 million in Alberta. That’s 
one of the reasons why we’re trying to up the number of hogs in 
the province. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you for that. Thank you and thank you to 
your officials. 
 
Subvote (EC03) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (EC07), (EC12), (EC06), (EC04), (EC11), (EC09), 
(EC10) agreed to. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Economic and Co-operative Development 
Vote 167 

 
Subvote (EC02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 167 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 
Vote 154 

 
Subvote (SO01) — Statutory. 
 
Vote 154 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 
Subvote (EC10) agreed to. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Lending Activities 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1998 

Economic and Co-operative Development 
Vote 167 

 
Subvote (EC02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 167 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
The Chair: — This department was last before the legislature 
yesterday. Before I call subvote 01, I’ll invite the Minister of 
Education to re-introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Sitting beside me is the deputy 
minister, Craig Dotson; to my right is Michael Littlewood, 
executive director of third party funding and legislative 
services; directly behind me is Ken Horsman, assistant deputy 
minister of Education; and to my left, beside Mr. Horsman, is 
Mae Boa, executive director of finance and operations; as well 
Cal Kirby is here, director of capital facilities planning. 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for recognizing 
me. Madam Minister, when we last talked it was about this time 
last night and I had asked a question of you, but before we got 
an answer the Deputy House Leader adjourned the House for 
the evening. So I guess I’ll ask the question again. It’s regarding 
a school at Central Butte. Can you give me some background 
on when that project started and what originally was intended 
for it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In 1994, the department approved 
phase one of the project to replace the sewer, water, ventilation, 
and shower piping in the elementary section of this school. This 
was a high priority because it was ranked as having 
deficiencies. So the project was ranked as a 1-A — the code 
related to deficiencies. And we were approving the project to 
deal with the critical health and safety issues. The department’s 
contribution was $305,945. 
 
The project was phased in, as we do a number of projects, in 
order to keep the project within the budget that was available to 
us. 
 
In 1997 the department approved phase two to provide a 
renovation in the high school section, similar to that in the 
elementary section. A roof project and a computer room 
renovation was included in the high school and the total 
contribution from the department was $524,432. And this came 
in 1997. 
 
The Herbert School Division has requested a phase three for 
1998 to alleviate additional health and mechanical concerns as 
well as program consolidation and additional space for a 
resource centre. 
 
So in summary the department has contributed approximately 
830,000 to the Central Butte School in the past four years. The 
department has funding of 680,000 in the 1998-99 budget for 
the renovation in the high school section of the school and these 

funds will be focused on resolving the last of the health and 
safety concerns that led to the original project. 
 
The school division has requested additional funds for space 
and this is not a high priority because available space in the 
school is adequate for the current enrolment of 228 students 
according to the school facilities guidelines. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Minister. Did the Minister of 
Finance in this year’s budget make comment and dedicate some 
more funding to the Herbert School Division for the Central 
Butte School? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I just indicated that. That on top of the 
$830,000 that has already been spent by the province on the 
Central Butte School this year, in this year’s budget, is a further 
$680,000. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I understand that, Madam Minister. Do you 
know the exact amount that the Minister of Finance talked 
about? The reason I’m asking you this question is that I’ve had 
some calls from out in that country complaining about a 
substantial amount of money more than that, that was dedicated 
to the Central Butte School by the Minister of Finance. And 
people are wondering where that money is and what it was for, 
if there was a commitment made for a future project. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’re not familiar with that 
commitment. We know that our department received an 
additional $7.4 million and we have given a list of capital 
projects to the opposition and it’s contained in that list. So I’m 
not familiar with any further commitment by our province. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Madam Minister, the additional request that 
was made for space, was there a dollar figure attached to that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don’t have those figures here 
because we have millions of dollars worth of requests. But I can 
say that there was a request made for additional space. And 
according to the school facilities guidelines, given that the 
school has 228 students, it is believed that the available space in 
the school is adequate for those numbers of students. 
 
Mr. McLane: — So you’re not aware of any other dollar 
commitment that may have been made by the Minister of 
Finance in a pre-budget speech or in post-budget comments. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think I’ve answered that question. 
The answer is no, I’m not aware of any other commitment. 
 
(2215) 
 
Subvote (ED01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (ED02), (ED04), (ED03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Education 

Vote 5 



June 2, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

Subvote (ED03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
would like to, on behalf of all members of the legislature, thank 
the civil servants that have joined us for several hours in 
educational estimates. I know that the work that they do in the 
Department of Education is extremely important to citizens of 
this province, so I want to thank them on behalf of all of us here 
tonight. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:24 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1558 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Social Services — Vote 36 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1547 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1548 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
 General Revenue Fund — Budgetary Expense — Social Services — Vote 36 ......................................................................1551 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 43  The Queen’s Bench Revision Act/Loi portant révision de la Loi sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1551 
 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1551 
 Bill No. 46 — The Credit Union Act, 1998 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1551 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1551 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1552 
 Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................1555 
 Bill No. 48 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1555 
 Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1555 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1555 
 Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1555 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1555 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Queen’s Bench Revision Act/Loi portant révision de la Loi sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1556 
 Bill No. 47 — The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1556 
 Bill No. 46 — The Credit Union Act, 1998 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1556 
 Bill No. 48 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1556 
 Bill No. 44 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1556 
 Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1556 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Economic and Co-operative Development — Vote 45 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1556 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1557 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1559 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1560 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1563 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1565 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Lending and Investing Activities — Economic and Co-operative Development — Vote 167..............................................1565 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Lending and Investing Activities — Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation — Vote 154 .............................................1565 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
 General Revenue Fund — Budgetary Expense — Economic and Co-operative Development — Vote 45.........................1565 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending Activities — Economic and Co-operative Development — Vote 167.........................1565 
 General Revenue Fund — Education — Vote 5 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1566 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1566 
 Supplementary Estimates 1997-98 
 General Revenue Fund — Budgetary Expense — Education — Vote 5................................................................................1566 


