





























































Hansard: June 04, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1593 
 June 4, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to rise and present a petition on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure that the required level of 
service in radiology is maintained in the North Central 
Health District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Melfort. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Carievale, Alida, Storthoaks, 
Carnduff, Glen Ewen, and Whitewood areas. Mr. Speaker, I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from a 
number of communities in the province including communities 
such as Hazel Dell, Lintlaw, Okla, Kelvington, Preeceville, 
Invermay, and then a number from my constituency, the 
community of Briercrest, Drinkwater, and Hearne. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition, and I present a petition on behalf of the 
people of the North. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to address the issue of reducing 
the high cost of power rates in the North. 
 

And the people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Canoe Lake, including the famous Clarence 
Iron. I so present. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
again today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to present 
a petition on their behalf. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are all from the city 
of Estevan. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens with respect to the custody of children 
involved in custody battles and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly that your Hon. 
Assembly may take the required action to allow the 
children named to remain in the custody of the maternal 
grandparents and that appropriate amendments be made to 
the justice system. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Melville, Esterhazy, Neudorf, Edmonton, and Red Deer, 
Alberta as well. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition this afternoon on the confusing and dangerous 
intersection leading into North Battleford and the prayer of 
relief reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly that your Hon. Assembly may 
pleased to relocate Highway 40 to east of the David Laird 
Campground in order to alleviate the congestion at the 
entrance to the city of North Battleford. 
 

Your petitioners come from Medstead, Battleford, Denholm, 
and North Battleford. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues here today and thousands around Saskatchewan in 
their efforts to stop the closure of the Plains hospital. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are all 
from the community of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure the required level of service in 
radiology is maintained in the North Central Health 
District and the priorities of its board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
As is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The community involved, Mr. Speaker, are from Melfort, 
Bjorkdale, and Naicam. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present presentations about people concerned about the future 
of the Carrot River Hospital. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate actions to ensure the survival of the Carrot 
River Hospital. 
 

Signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Arborfield, Carrot River, and Zenon Park. Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to ensure the required level of service in 
radiology is maintained in the North Central Health 
District and the priorities of the board be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

People that have signed this petition are from Melfort and 
Kinistino. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition as well 
to present to the Assembly this afternoon dealing with the issue 
of the concern about level of service in the North Central Health 
District. And the petitioners come from the Melfort, Kinistino 
areas, and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — Has the hon. member for Arm River been 
recognized previously for presentation of a petition? 
 
Mr. McLane: — Yes I have. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member can only be recognized 
once during presentation of petitions. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As has become the 
normally expected process, I am happy again today to present 
the following petition: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach the necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these folks come from Calgary, Alberta, 
Tompkins, Saskatchewan, and Maple Creek, Saskatchewan, and 
I’m happy to present them on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very proud to rise once again on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens who are seeking justice for men and women who have 
lost spouses in work-related accidents. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to have the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Act amended for the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers of Saskatchewan, whereby their 
pensions are reinstated and the revoked pensions 
reimbursed to them retroactively and with interest as 
requested by the statement of entitlement presented to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board on October 27, 1997. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people who have signed these petitions today are from 
Saskatoon and Chitek Lake and I’m pleased to present them on 
their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: to change the law to allow 
Saskatchewan citizens to erect a cross on the highway 
where a loved one was killed; to fund the twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway; to have the Workers’ 
Compensation board reinstate pensions for disenfranchised 
widows; and to take action to ensure the required level of 
service in radiology in the North Central Health District. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Communications 
 

Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Communications presents the second report of 
the said committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the recommendations of 
the Public Documents Committee under The Archives Act 
contained in retention and disposal schedules comprising 
session paper no. 185 including schedule no. 335 — 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan; schedule no. 336 — 
Saskatchewan Securities Commission; schedule no. 337 — 
Saskatchewan Gaming, tabled this third session of the 
twenty-third legislature and referred to the committee by 
the Assembly May 5, 1998. 
 
Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the 
recommendations of the Public Documents Committee on 
schedules no. 335, 336, and 337 be accepted. 
 
Your committee also recommends that the Assembly do 
issue an order of reference to the Standing Committee on 
Communications to review the matter of enhancing the use 
of technology to support the parliamentary function of the 
Legislative Assembly. 

 
Your committee also reviewed the report of the Legislative 
Library for the period ending March 31, 1996. 
 
Honourable Glenn Hagel, Committee Chair and Speaker. 

 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
for Cannington: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Communications be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
always a pleasure to introduce students that come from your 
own community. And today I have the great pleasure of 
introducing students from Brunswick School which is across 
the alley from where I live. And I’m particularly pleased to 
introduce them because I haven’t had a baseball or softball 
through my dining room window in a long time so I’m really 
pleased. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, there’s 36 grade 6 students here from 
Melfort, from the Brunswick School. They’re here with Mr. 
Randy Steciuk, Miss Brenda Vickers — their teachers; and Mrs. 
Lynn Selkirk, their chaperon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would everyone in the Assembly please join me in 
welcoming these fine people to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to introduce to you and 
through you another Rosetown delegation. I should begin by 
asking that we give special recognition to Mr. Berezowski, who 
has now led 72 students in two days through a 220-mile, 
two-way trip. And with him is Mrs. Poff and chaperons, Greg 
Carlson, Elaine Harding, and Ruth Livingston. 
 
These are the rest of the grade 8 students from the Rosetown 
Central High School. It is a regular matter that the Rosetown 
school sends students to observe the goings on in the Assembly 
during the session. And I welcome them and ask other members 
to join me in welcoming them. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and to all the members of the Assembly, a young woman 
from Berlin, Germany — Djamila Garten, who’s in the west 
gallery. I’ll ask Djamila to stand. 
 
Djamila is a student at Luther College here in Regina. She came 
to Regina on an exchange program last year, and she enjoyed 
going to Luther College so much that she decided she would 
come on her own accord and finish her grade 12 at Luther 
College in Regina. She’ll be returning to Germany this summer. 
 
Welcome, Djamila. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you two people today who organize my life and make my life 
easier by telling me where I should go and what time I should 
get there. Sitting in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Jean 
Moore, who has been a constituency assistant in our office for 
sometime and who is now currently working here as a sessional 
with our caucus. And beside her is Anna Marie Kowalsky, who 
is her understudy and who came down to Saskatchewan, moved 
to Saskatchewan from the Northwest Territories lately with her 
family. And I want you to welcome them both to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Tourism Week 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. June 1 through 7 is 
Tourism Week in Saskatchewan, and tourism is leading the way 
in growth in jobs in our province. As the fastest growing 
economic sector in the province, tourism employs 42,000 
people — 1 out of every 11 people in Saskatchewan — and 
tourism specific jobs grew by 10 per cent last year. 
 
Clearly tourism is playing a big role in the economic and 
employment growth that Saskatchewan now enjoys, and 
Tourism Saskatchewan is paving the way. It’s an industry-led 
partnership with government and it has an emphasis on 
ecotourism and the clean natural resources that we are blessed 
with in our province. 
 
In the Land of Living Skies, tourism contributes over one 
billion to the provincial economy every year. And that’s why 
dinners and festivals and rodeos and fairs will be held across 
Saskatchewan this week to help celebrate Tourism Awareness 
Week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Concerns 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) member for Regina South continues to 
demonstrate how little he respects the health care concerns of 
people who reside in rural Saskatchewan, or how little he 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

actually knows about health care. 
 
A few weeks ago he indicated that anyone who couldn’t find 
the General Hospital was dumb. Yesterday we received a copy 
of a letter this MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) sent 
to one of his constituents, and it explains that the General 
hospital is easily accessible but rural residents in need of urgent 
care may wish to consider using the Pasqua Hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Plains hospital closes, trauma services will 
be located at the General, not the Pasqua. Expectant mothers 
will be delivering their babies at the General, not the Pasqua. 
And many other services will only be provided at the General 
and not the Pasqua. 
 
What makes this particularly ironic, Mr. Speaker, is that this 
member continually talks about the Liberal opposition 
fearmongering and having its facts wrong. My simple advice to 
the member, Mr. Speaker, is put down the crossword puzzles 
that you do every day, and listen to what we and even your 
Minister of Health has to say about our situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Tourism Awards 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As mentioned by 
the member from Saskatoon Sutherland just a moment ago, 
tourism is growing rapidly in Saskatchewan. And I might say 
it’s growing rapidly also in my city of Prince Albert, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And recently, in recognition of its economic importance, the 
Prince Albert Tourism and Convention Bureau held its fourth 
annual tourism awards banquet. Four years ago this ceremony 
attracted only 90 people. This year 175 attended. Last year 30 
groups or individuals were nominated for awards. This year 
nearly 50 were in the running. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were many winners in several categories. 
And I want to add my congratulations and thanks for their 
contributions. But I do want to single out one individual and 
one attraction for special recognition. Chief Leo Omani of the 
Wahpeton Dakota First Nation was named as tourism individual 
of the year. The Northern Lights Casino which was driven by 
Chief Omani was named tourism business of the year. 
 
This business was nominated because it trained hundreds of 
young people and because it provided excellent customer 
service to the many tourists it helped attract to Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert is still the gateway to the North but 
it’s also the perfect end destination for a discerning tourist. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan’s Population 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
1971 Saskatchewan had a population of roughly 1 million 
people. Alberta had a population of 1,627,900. At the end of 
1997 our population had grown to 1.023 million while Alberta’s 
had grown to 2.847 million, an increase of 1.2 million, an 

amount greater than the entire population of our province. 
 
Alberta’s population increased by 75 per cent; Saskatchewan’s 
by 2.3 per cent. In that 26-year period, this province had the 
misfortune to be governed by the New Democrats for 17 years 
and the Conservatives for 9. This 73 per cent difference in 
population growth rate is directly attributable to Saskatchewan 
people labouring under the highest tax regime in Canada and 
Alberta people enjoying the lowest taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is still losing people. Over 1,700 
more left our province in the first three-quarters of last year 
than arrived from other provinces. It is simply not acceptable 
that Saskatchewan continues to lose its people and its future. 
And these statistics, Mr. Speaker, are a reality that the NDP 
can’t blame on someone else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Apprenticeship Programs 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Further to the 
members’ statements by the member for Saskatoon Sutherland 
and Prince Albert Carlton . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Now the Chair is having some 
difficulty being able to hear the hon. member for Regina 
Coronation Park . . . being able to make his member’s 
statement. And as all hon. members will recognize, the hon. 
member for Regina Coronation Park is not located very far 
from the Chair. 
 
And I will ask for the cooperation of all members of the House 
to enable members’ statements to be provided in an 
uninterrupted manner. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Further to the 
members’ statements of the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland and Prince Albert Carlton, the Saskatchewan 
Tourism Education Council, or STEC, held their Professional 
Recognition by Industry for Development and Excellence, or 
PRIDE, dinners Monday in Regina and Tuesday in Saskatoon. 
 
Leading Canada with another first are two new tourism trades, 
Guest Services Representative and Food and Beverage Person. 
These are both now apprenticeable trades in Saskatchewan. On 
Monday, Aileen Krismer was presented her apprenticeship and 
journeyperson certificates in the Guest Services Representative 
Trade. 
 
On Tuesday, Mary Lynn Paquette was presented her 
apprenticeship and journeyperson certificates in the Food and 
Beverage Person Trade. 
 
Congratulations to STEC for the continued attention to training 
and standards in the growing Saskatchewan tourism industry. 
 
And of course congratulations to Aileen Krismer and Mary 
Lynn Paquette on being the first graduates to hold the new 
apprenticeship and journeyperson trades certificates in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

Surgery Waiting-lists 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, during 
this session the Liberal opposition has revealed that more than 
6,000 people now occupy surgery waiting-lists. We’ve revealed 
that waiting-lists in Regina have increased by 30 per cent in the 
past year. We’ve revealed that people awaiting general 
surgeries in Saskatoon are waiting an average of 370 days. 
 
Well today we read that the University Hospital in Saskatoon 
will not be taking any bookings for elective surgery this 
summer. For the first time, there will be a complete suspension 
of elective surgery bookings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s getting to the point where people requiring 
treatment no longer need a calendar to mark when they’ll get 
their surgery — they need a crystal ball to determine if they’ll 
get their surgery. 
 
At what point is this government going to understand that our 
health districts are underfunded? They need the money to 
provide an appropriate level of health care. 
 
We have one clear message today for the Premier and for this 
government and that is, open your eyes, open your ears, and 
more importantly, open your hearts because there’s people that 
are suffering out there. If you want to portray yourself as the 
saviours of medicare, then start saving medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Agricultural Biotechnology Conference 
 

Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The month of June has 
been declared Agricultural Sciences Month by the Minister of 
Agriculture. The month will be highlighted by the agricultural 
biotechnology international conference in Saskatoon from June 
9 to 12. 
 
Agricultural research contributes to Saskatchewan’s 
international leadership in agriculture to our economy, to our 
lifestyle, plant breeding. Molecular genetics, better vaccines, 
and animal products all continue to expand the agricultural 
industry. 
 
The industry has expanded 300 per cent since 1991 and 
continues to grow. There are 1,100 jobs connected to the 
agricultural research industry and ag biotech sales add $100 
million to the Saskatchewan economy. By the year 2000, this 
amount will grow to over $300 million. 
 
The ag biotech conference will be attended by delegates from 
around the world including a Nobel prize winner in chemistry. 
The theme of the conference is “The Science of Success” and 
the primary focus will be on the strategies for marketing ag 
biotech products. Rest assured, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Saskatchewan Ag and Food, and ag biotech agricultural 
industries will remain the world leader in the application of 
technologies to the many agricultural related industries. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Eighth Annual Sommerfest in Humboldt 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the town of 
Humboldt will be hosting their eighth annual Sommerfest June 
19 to 21. The theme of this year’s Sommerfest is “A 
Celebration of German-Canadian Culture”. The celebration 
includes a parade of Volksmarch, a Bierfest with singing and 
dancing, a car show, and many more community activities. 
 
Not only is Sommerfest a celebration of German culture, it is a 
celebration of all culture as Humboldt hosts the “Mosaic of 
Nations”, a display of ethnic foods, an artisan craft show and 
sale, and multicultural entertainment including Irish, German, 
and Ukrainian dance groups. 
 
Among featured performers, Mr. Speaker, are renowned 
comedian, Brent Butt, originally from Tisdale; yodeller Richard 
Brandl of Landshut, Germany; and Bill Hopson of Calgary, a 
famous Alpenhorn player. 
 
Humboldt is a great community. As the largest town in 
Saskatchewan, Humboldt and area people are known far and 
wide for their determination and their success in making good 
things happen and Sommerfest is a wonderful example of an 
event ingrained with the spirit of the people of the community 
and district. 
 
Many volunteers work long hours under the capable direction of 
Ruth Wilson, Humboldt’s director of tourism and special 
events. 
 
I invite one and all to come to Humboldt to celebrate with us 
June 19 to 21. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Elective Surgery at Royal University Hospital 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, more evidence of the 
complete chaos in the NDP health care system. Waiting-lists are 
already far too long and now we get the news that there’ll be no 
elective surgeries at all this summer at the Royal University 
Hospital. 
 
The vice-president of the district medical association said this 
has never happened before. Dr. Afridi says people have been 
told they’ll be provided with universal health care. Why doesn’t 
this government just tell people to go fend for themselves? 
 
Mr. Minister, waiting-lists are already far too long and this is 
going to make them longer. How can you say that your health 
care system is working when the University Hospital is shutting 
down elective surgeries for the entire summer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that her information is partly informed, and 
most of it needs some additional tuning and additional 
information, which is usual. 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

I say to the member opposite that I have here a series of 
comments that were made to me by the district health board out 
of Saskatoon, and this is what they say: 
 

Like virtually all other health district hospitals in the 
country — implementation of summer surgical schedules 
to accommodate vacations for the hard-working surgeons, 
anaesthetists, nurses, and other staff — is consistent with 
what we’ve been doing for years. There are similar 
schedule adjustments each year at Christmas, at Easter, and 
in the summer. And these decisions are based on staff 
availability and are not driven by financial considerations. 

 
That comes from, Mr. Member, comes from Susan Bazylewski, 
who’s the vice-president, and Dr. Jack Reilly, who’s the Chair 
of Surgical Operations Committee from the Saskatoon district. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you’re partially 
right. One of the reasons being cited for the shut-down of 
elective surgeries is the shortage of available nurses. Where are 
these 90 nurses Saskatoon is supposed to be getting? 
 
People are starting to think that your promise of new nurses is 
nothing more than smoke and mirrors and it’s going to vanish 
into thin air as soon as the Eastview by-election is over — just 
like the elective surgeries at the University Hospital are 
vanishing on June 29th. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you’re hiring more nurses, why is the nursing 
shortage being cited as the reason for shutting down elective 
surgeries? How long do the waiting-lists have to be before you 
are going to address this problem? And when are you going to 
admit this health care system is in total chaos? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to go on and provide 
for the member opposite what else the Saskatoon Health 
District has said because she continues to say that there will not 
be any elective procedures performed in Saskatoon throughout 
the summer. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that they go on to say this: 
they say that this year the period of the summer census is seven 
weeks, from June 29 to August 14. And in 1997 the summer 
census was ten weeks. Thus this summer we’ll have more beds 
available than last summer. 
 
And they go on to say — which wasn’t printed in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix, the article; it wasn’t printed — is that, we will 
continue to be booking elective surgeries in a number of areas, 
especially those that affect children, such as pediatrics, 
pediatrics urology and dental. And we will continue to book in 
these areas because children are available in the summer and we 
can have surgeries to recover without missing school. 
 
So elective surgeries will continue to be performed within the 
Saskatoon Health District. And I want to inform you that that 
continues to be the case as Ms. Bazylewski and Dr. Jack Reilly 
have provided for me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Ombudsman 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier or his designate. Mr. Premier, day 
after day we hear horror stories from people who were failed by 
the NDP’s health reforms. Beds continue to close and hospitals 
continue to be shut down. Royal University Hospital in 
Saskatoon is closing their operating room for elective surgery 
this summer because there’s no funding. Waiting-lists for 
surgery are longer now than they have ever been in 
Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, day after day the Saskatchewan Party brings 
health care concerns of our constituents to the Legislative 
Assembly and we ask the minister to do something about it. But 
all we get is NDP excuses and NDP rhetoric. Mr. Premier, that 
kind of reaction to legitimate health care concerns is not 
helping. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need an independent health care ombudsman 
to investigate public complaints about the health care system 
and find reasonable solutions to the problem. Mr. Premier, will 
you support the Sask Party’s legislation calling for the 
establishment of an independent health care ombudsman? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, for a minute I thought you 
had taken the questions from the member from Kelvington and 
just kept right on reading them or were repeating her’s. But I 
see now that what you’ve done is you’ve taken the question 
from Mr. Mandryk and are now developing a series of questions 
out of the Leader-Post. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, say to the member opposite, 
that Susan Bazylewski and Dr. Jack Reilly have clearly stated, 
have clearly stated, as I’ve read to you . . . to the member 
opposite that there is a slightly different procedure in the way in 
which they’re going to be pre-planning their summer census 
this year — slightly different. But they’re going to reduce that 
census over last year. 
 
They go on to say — this is what Susan Bazylewski goes on to 
say, she says that this “decision will not mean fewer elective 
surgeries will be performed” this year than last year. And those 
are the words of Miss Bazylewski. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Member, that this is not the NDP making 
the statement. This is the Saskatoon Health District who are 
telling you and the people of Saskatchewan what procedures 
will be available to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister is not listening to our question. We’re talking about a 
health care ombudsman. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much more evidence do you need before you 
admit the NDP’s health reforms are failing miserably? Just this 
week we heard about a young woman from Gerald who caught 
her hand in a meat grinder. This young woman was shuffled 
around four hospitals for 10 hours before she had surgery to 
reattach her fingers. 
 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

On Tuesday, we hear about a 59-year-old Yorkton man who 
died of a heart attack because his doctor could not find a bed for 
him in any Regina hospital. And when these issues are raised in 
the legislature, do you know what we got from the NDP Health 
minister, Mr. Speaker? More NDP excuses and more NDP 
rhetoric. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s time to stop the excuses, it’s time to establish 
an independent health ombudsman in Saskatchewan. Will you 
support the passage of our health ombudsman Act in this 
session of the legislature or immediately table your own health 
ombudsman legislation? 
 
Mr. Minister, either way it’s fine with the Saskatchewan Party; 
either pass our legislation or table and pass your own 
legislation, but let’s get it done immediately. Will you do that 
much, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, first to 
the member opposite that today you get on the same path that 
the Liberals were on for a couple of days. 
 
I say to you, the member opposite, that when I stand up in the 
House and I say to you and the people of Saskatchewan that 
under the Act, under the health Act, where it says very clearly 
that the minister may cause to make investigation inquiries 
respecting the cause of disease, death of people in the province, 
and the cause of injuries to such people, the steps may be taken 
to reduce the cause of disease or ill health, the minister has that 
power to do that. 
 
So when I stand up in the House and I say to you that I’m 
asking for an independent review of this case — of where the 
college will be involved, of where the district health boards will 
be involved — that information will be provided to me, what do 
I read, and what do I read, and what do I hear from you is that 
the minister is acting in a political fashion. 
 
And I say to the member opposite and to the media who write 
this: how is it, how is it that information of this nature would be 
coming to the House, would be made public, without disclosure 
of that information by the family? How could that be 
happening? And I say to you and to the media, that when you’re 
providing that kind of information publicly, at least you should 
have the dignity to contact the family first. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fund-raising Efforts by Sheldon Kennedy 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Last year people in Saskatchewan 
and all across Canada and the United States were stunned to 
hear the disturbing story of Sheldon Kennedy and the abuse 
inflicted on him by his former hockey coach. 
 
Sheldon Kennedy showed tremendous courage by coming 
forward to tell his story. He raised public awareness about 
sexual abuse of children. This has resulted in major reforms to 
minor hockey and other organizations where children are placed 
in the care and trust of adults. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sheldon Kennedy’s efforts to help sexually 

abused children are continuing. He has just begun a 
cross-Canada in-line skate to raise awareness about the issue of 
child abuse, and raise funds to build and operate a ranch for 
children who have been victimized by this horrible ordeal. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Party would like to pass a 
resolution of this House supporting the efforts of Sheldon 
Kennedy. Will you support this resolution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we all share the 
concern that the members opposite have about the sexual abuse 
of children. And we all have a great deal of admiration for 
people who have been through this experience and come 
forward and tell in an open and honest way what it has meant to 
them and we are desirous of helping others who have to go 
through that very difficult situation. 
 
So we all have a lot of compassion for Sheldon Kennedy and 
what has happened to him. And of course we all support his 
efforts to ensure that other children are helped, and hopefully 
there’s prevention so these sorts of things don’t happen to 
children in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, Sheldon 
Kennedy has found a way to overcome one of the most terrible 
experiences imaginable and turn it into something positive, first 
by raising awareness of the issue of child abuse, and now by 
embarking on this cross-Canada skate. 
 
Sheldon Kennedy will cross into Saskatchewan on August 12. 
A full day of events is being planned in Swift Current on 
August 21. 
 
Madam Minister, most of us are fortunate enough not to have to 
have suffered this kind of terrible ordeal. But every one of us 
has the responsibility to protect children and help those who 
have been victimized. 
 
Immediately after question period I will be asking leave to 
introduce a motion encouraging all Saskatchewan people to 
support Sheldon Kennedy’s efforts and asking you to proclaim 
August 21 as Sheldon Kennedy Day in Saskatchewan. 
 
Will you support this motion and allow us to pass it today? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I say to the 
member opposite, we all have a lot of respect for people like 
Sheldon Kennedy who are working to deal with a very difficult 
situation — which will help people suffering from this problem, 
who have experienced this problem — and hopefully will 
prevent this sort of thing from happening in the future. 
 
And again this person will be in Saskatchewan August 21 and I 
think it is appropriate that the province recognize the fact that 
he will be coming through the province and that he will be 
doing something that will be of benefit to all of the people in 
the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

Emergency Rescue Equipment 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On December 19, 
1997, Harold Aubichon and Tony Stewart were involved in a 
two-vehicle accident on the Canoe Lake road. This is not the 
first time that this road has claimed lives and sadly as members 
are aware, Mr. Stewart passed away at the hospital in 
Saskatoon. 
 
However, as I noted, it took at least four hours before Tony was 
finally freed. He had to endure four hours trapped in the car 
because the Beauval rescue team did not have the Jaws of Life. 
Now Tony’s wife, Kim Stewart, has donated $13,000 to the 
Beauval fire brigade for the purchase of the Jaws of Life so that 
other accident victims do not have to go through the same pain 
and suffering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Northern Affairs. 
You know that some communities cannot afford to buy 
equipment such as the Jaws of Life. We should take a lesson 
from Mrs. Stewart and provide funding for the Jaws of Life 
needed in our community. Mr. Minister, what is your response? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say first, Mr. Speaker, to the 
member opposite that in the North just recently — with the 
determination of the two new district health boards that are 
going to be serving the northern part of Saskatchewan — a 
good deal of work is now being undertaken in order to ensure 
that there can be additional enrichments in both the facilities 
and the equipment that’s necessary to provide some of the 
emergency-type services. 
 
I say to the member opposite that there has been some 
additional funding that’s been included now to enrich the 
number of first responders, the emergency measures services in 
the area of northern Saskatchewan. Clearly there will be 
continued work with the Department of Health, the district 
health boards that are now in place, and municipal levels of 
government to enrich some of that infrastructure and equipment 
that’s required to provide better enriched services to people of 
the North. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s too easy for words. But for 
the people of the North this is an issue of life and death. 
 
Will the minister ensure that communities like Beauval have the 
proper life-saving equipment such as the Jaws of Life? 
Especially because we have poor roads and we have no road 
ambulance services in that area, at the very least we should have 
this type of equipment with our rescue teams. 
 
And will the minister make a commitment today to match 
public or private donations towards life-saving equipment for 
isolated and northern communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say first to the 
member opposite that these are not hollow words that I make 

because we made a commitment this year. In this year’s budget 
there was an allocation of funding to northern Saskatchewan 
where money will be directed for enrichments in the areas that 
the member speaks of: emergency measure services, emergency 
response teams, and for additional equipment that will be 
purchased in the North to assist in providing some of those 
services. 
 
So those are not hollow words. Those are commitments that 
have already been made and financial resources that are flowing 
to the northern part of Saskatchewan to see that that happens. 
And I say to the member opposite that today, within the 
services that are provided by all levels of municipal government 
across the province, that by and large the purchase of capital 
equipment is undertaken by the municipalities themselves. 
 
In specific instances where municipalities aren’t able to achieve 
that because of their resources, there have been different 
partnerships and we’ll continue to ensure that those 
relationships continue — will be worked through with the levels 
of municipal government and Health and the district health 
boards to ensure that we can meet some of those obligations 
that you speak of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Capital Funding for Health Care Facilities 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Health indicated last week that an announcement on capital 
projects across the province will be forthcoming in a few days. 
The south country district had proposed the construction of an 
integrated facility and had targeted April 1 of this year as a 
starting date for construction at the project. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us if this project will be on your 
capital list of projects for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite we 
have begun our process of announcing the capital projects 
across the province and are continuing to do that over the next 
several weeks. I say to the member opposite that as the projects 
in various parts of the province become fully available we’ll 
disclose them in the same fashion that we have currently. 
 
And I appreciate the member recognizing that across the 
province the government is making an investment in 
infrastructure and facility recently in his community. Just a 
couple of days ago a new hospital facility for the member from 
Melville. And so along with all of the other issues that this 
government responds to, infrastructure and buildings are part of 
what we believe in and we’ll continue to provide enrichments 
across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia 
doesn’t have a sprinkler system. Its fire alarm system is 
inadequate and hallways and doors are too narrow for current 
long-term care standards. 
 
The Fire Commissioner’s office says, and I quote from a project 
brief from that district: 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

Pioneer Lodge presents a fire hazard to residents and 
should be taken out of service as soon as possible. 
 

Even Dale Schmeichel, the CEO (chief executive officer) of 
South Country Health District has called this facility a fire trap. 
Mr. Minister, shouldn’t replacing a fire trap be a priority item 
on your capital project list? What immediate action are you 
taking to ensure that this is going to happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that this year, like every other year, there are 
tremendous pressures within the health budget to try to enhance 
and enrich facilities and equipment and staff all across the 
province. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that this year we’re going to 
be making a commitment to a number of facilities across the 
province in which we’re able to provide some financial 
assistance to ensure that the people are well protected and 
served in their communities. And we’re doing that, Mr. 
Speaker, I say, on our own resources — on our own resources. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that in this province today 
we’ve made a full commitment to ensuring that health services 
are provided across the province. And we’re doing that, as I 
said, on our own resources. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that had we received some 
additional financial support from your cousins in Ottawa, we 
would be able to do a lot more than we’re doing today. And so I 
say to the member opposite, you need to help us to ensure that 
in the future that the federal government helps to provide us 
with the financial resources that we need to enrich the levels of 
community services across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Confidentiality of Health Information 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the NDP 
announced it would be establishing a health information 
network, I thought they would proceed step by step . . . 
(inaudible) . . . with privacy legislation. 
 
(tape malfunction) 
 
A . . . (inaudible) . . . noted the most . . . (inaudible) . . . would 
be to introduce legislation to protect personal health 
information and guide the creation and continued management 
of SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information Network). 
Unfortunately the NDP don’t appear too concerned about 
privacy or wasting money. They’ve yanked their legislation but 
continue to pay their political friend Gordon . . . (inaudible) . . . 
wage. 
 
Mr. Minister, since you don’t appear to . . . (inaudible) . . . 
privacy concerns, I will be introducing the doctor-patient 
confidentiality Act following question period. Mr. Minister, 
will you be supporting this legislation or will you at least look 
for a basis for your own? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting question 
that the member opposite asks because just a couple of weeks 
ago he was on his feet saying to me that we’re moving too fast, 
that there are parts of Saskatchewan that say that they don’t 
support the SHIN project. 
 
He said to me that the legislation wasn’t supported by 
physicians and the public across the province. 
 
And today the member opposite says to me that we’re taking 
too much time. We’re going too slowly in order of moving both 
the legislation and the practical application of the equipment 
across the province, which is common to this member — which 
is common to this member — because one moment he talks 
about a two-tiered health system in the province where we have 
user fees and that we have premiums, and then on the other 
moment he says to us that we should not be making an 
investment and he supports the medicare system. 
 
And today here he is talking about ensuring that we bring better 
legislation and quicker on SHIN. And I say to the member 
opposite we’re going to move slowly with this investment both 
in terms of the capital piece and we’re going to make sure that 
we have full consultation as it relates to the Act and to the 
privacy legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Vehicle Damage Claims 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Liberals have 
passed a number of damage claims onto the Minister of 
Highways in recent weeks. Today I’m advising the minister that 
she can expect a claim from Mr. Ron Bessey whose vehicle 
suffered damages after striking a large chunk of loose pavement 
on Highway No. 44 just west of Davidson. 
 
Mr. Bessey, who is the mayor of Bladworth, tells us that there 
were no flags around the broken pavement at the time of the 
incident. Flags were only placed there a week later and Mr. 
Bessey also tells us that he has witnesses to this incident. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell us today how many residents 
have filed damage claims with your office this year and what 
the total value of those claims are? And can Mr. Bessey expect 
to be compensated by your department for the damage sustained 
to his vehicle on Highway No. 44? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The policy that 
we have on vehicle damage claims is certainly if there is a . . . is 
that we do monitor the highway system very closely. If he’s 
brought his individual claim forward that will be looked at — 
and the circumstances around it. 
 
The number of claims that we’ve had in the last year are 202 
claims. And after investigations we have paid 94 claims on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1602 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

Workers’ Compensation Board Policy 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
session is drawing to a close. It is a session characterized by 
theatrics and accusations rather than solid legislative 
accomplishments. It is also a session of missed opportunities 
and unfinished business. 
 
A glaring example of this is the government’s tardiness in 
correcting the reprehensible injustice inflicted on widows and 
widowers by the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
My question to the Minister of Labour today is, what exact 
steps, sir, have you taken in the last several weeks to move this 
situation to its logical and decent conclusion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The member knows the answer to her 
question, Mr. Speaker, through a number of discussions that we 
have had. She knows that the government has this matter under 
consideration, and she knows that a decision will be announced 
when that consideration has been completed. That’s the 
situation and she knows that. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
government has for several weeks had the report from the 
Workers’ Compensation Board and the estimate of the cost to 
bring justice to this group of people who feel that they have 
been abused further by an uncaring bureaucracy in an 
unresponsive government. On April 11 the Minister of Labour 
said and I quote, “that the WCB is in a very strong financial 
position.” 
 
Mr. Minister, all of the necessary information has been in your 
hands. The Workers’ Compensation Board has the funds to pay 
the widows and widowers what is legally and morally theirs. 
Would you please explain when your government is going to 
settle with these individuals? Will it indeed be this year or not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think that certainly a decision will be 
made this year. I don’t think there’s any question about that. 
 
The question is not a light one, Mr. Speaker. The question is a 
very serious question because the amounts involved are very 
large. You know the Workers’ Compensation Board in this 
province is in a solid financial situation and everyone knows 
that and appreciates that. 
 
But it’s not in such a situation that it can lightly afford the kind 
of consequences that go with accepting the proposal that has 
been put to the government. And hence it is taking us a while to 
determine whether or not this claim should be honoured, and if 
it’s honoured, to what extent it should be honoured? What are 
the financial implications of that and how can they be 
absorbed? 
 
These are big, serious questions and government can not act 
quickly on them nor should it. Our responsibility is to the 
taxpayers, to the employers in this province who pay 
contributions to the premiums to the Workers’ Compensation 
Board and to the employees who look to that fund for 
compensation for their own injuries. These are serious questions 

and we have to deal with them in a serious manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 228  The Doctor-Patient Confidentiality Act 
 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of Bill No. 228, The Doctor-Patient Confidentiality Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I ask 
for leave under rule 46 to move a motion of an urgent and 
pressing nature. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Leader of the Opposition 
requests leave — Order! — Requests leave of the House to 
introduce a motion under rule 46 and I’ll ask the Leader of the 
Opposition to very, very briefly outline why he considers it to 
be a matter of urgent and pressing necessity, and therefore to set 
aside the ordinary business of the House, and to very briefly 
advise the House of the motion he wishes to have considered. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Cross-Canada Skate for Child Abuse Awareness 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think 
all members of the House are aware of the Sheldon Kennedy 
story and what he went through at the hands of a person of 
authority a few years ago. 
 
Further we are all aware of the courage Sheldon Kennedy 
showed in coming forward with his story. And, of course, aware 
of his current mission to in-line skate across Canada to raise 
awareness about the problem of child abuse in our country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sheldon Kennedy’s skate will bring him to 
Saskatchewan in late August and I think it’s only appropriate 
that this House pass a motion of support in recognition of Mr. 
Kennedy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, briefly the motion says: 
 

That the Assembly encourage all Saskatchewan people to 
support Sheldon Kennedy’s cross-Canada skate to raise 
awareness and understanding for the issue of child abuse 
and to raise funds to build and operate a ranch for children 
who have been victimized by this horrible ordeal, and that 
this Assembly calls on the government to proclaim August 
21, 1998 Sheldon Kennedy Day in Saskatchewan. 
 

I hope I have support of all members in the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
want to extend our appreciation to all members of the House. 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

Mr. Speaker, I know this motion is an unusual one to bring up 
as an emergency debate. But given the lateness of this session 
we felt this was the best way to draw this to the attention of 
other members of the legislature. 
 
I think every member of this legislature is well aware of the 
facts surrounding the Sheldon Kennedy story so there is little 
need for me to go into that at this moment. But it goes without 
saying that the decision Sheldon Kennedy took when he went 
public with his story of abuse at the hands of his coach — a 
man trusted by players and parents alike — took real courage. 
 
Of course Sheldon Kennedy became well-known in 
Saskatchewan through his great play with the Swift Current 
Broncos of the Western Hockey League. As a player in the 
NHL (National Hockey League) Sheldon Kennedy was high 
profile in his community and took great risks in bringing his 
story into the open in order to get a sexual predator off the street 
before he could hurt anyone else. 
 
When Mr. Kennedy made that decision he knew he would 
probably be opening himself up to ridicule by some people. 
Thankfully, as it turns out, that group is a very, very small one. 
Mostly there has been praise for Sheldon Kennedy — and 
admiration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the actions taken by Sheldon Kennedy, I have no 
doubt, will help other youths who are enduring similar terrible 
circumstances. The problem of sexual abuse against minors is a 
topic that many of us feel uncomfortable discussing, but discuss 
it we must. Because if we don’t, we’ll never get any closer to 
reducing the number of cases of abuse that pervade our society. 
 
Sheldon Kennedy more than anything made this a topic of 
urgent importance for all of us. We have to do all we can to 
protect our children against those who are supposed to be 
watching over them, keeping them out of harm’s way. That did 
not happen in time for Sheldon Kennedy. However, instead of 
blaming society for what he was forced to endure, Sheldon has 
instead decided to help. 
 
After his eight-year career in the NHL came to an end, Sheldon 
decided to devote time and energy to helping those kids who 
have been victims of sexual abuse. To that end, the Sheldon 
Kennedy Foundation was set up to increase an awareness of the 
issue of child abuse in our society. Through education at the 
grassroots level, and through specific programs, the foundation 
will make a major contribution to the prevention of child abuse 
in our society. 
 
As well, Sheldon Kennedy is developing a retreat for children 
who have fallen victim to abuse. This ranch will deliver therapy 
to children and to their families; subsidized continuing 
education for doctors, clinicians, social workers, and it will be 
an international reference centre for the study of child abuse. 
 
To that end he has embarked on a cross-country roller-blading 
trek to raise public awareness regarding this issue. He departed 
from St. John’s, Newfoundland on May 30. His trek will cover 
more than 8,000 kilometres and take 136 days. His journey is 
scheduled to conclude on October 12 in Vancouver. 
 
Along the way he will be encouraging all Canadians to join his 

mission by in-line skating with him to show the support that is 
needed to make a difference in our society. His schedule will 
bring him to Saskatchewan in August, and on August 21 he will 
be honoured by the people of Swift Current, the city where he 
played the game he loved and where unfortunately the abuse 
occurred. 
 
(1430) 
 
The people of Swift Current should be congratulated as well for 
their remarkable response to Sheldon Kennedy’s story. I know 
this hurt the people of Swift Current — to know what was 
occurring in their community at the hands of someone they 
looked up to so much. That city has rallied around Mr. 
Kennedy, and I think it’s only right the whole province does the 
same. 
 
This motion is but a small token of respect for the good that 
Sheldon Kennedy is trying to do for our youth. And I think we 
owe him this and much, much more. As the Calgary Sun 
declared, quote, “Sheldon Kennedy is in every way a true 
Canadian hero”. 
 
I urge all members to support this motion which I will now put 
forward, moved by myself, seconded by the member from 
Kindersley: 
 

That this Assembly encourage all Saskatchewan people to 
support Sheldon Kennedy’s cross-Canada skate to raise 
awareness and understanding for the issue of child abuse 
and to raise funds to build and operate a ranch for children 
who have been victimized by this horrible ordeal; 
 
And that this Assembly calls on the government to 
proclaim August 21, 1998 as Sheldon Kennedy Day in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
I so move. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Just very briefly, Mr. Speaker. I congratulate 
the Leader of the Opposition for bringing this motion forward. 
We in Saskatchewan remember that a few years ago Terry Fox 
began a cross-Canada run, and we remember with sadness that 
his run did not get to Saskatchewan. I trust that the skate across 
Canada of Sheldon Kennedy will have a happier conclusion 
than did the Terry Fox Marathon of Hope. 
 
We wish Sheldon Kennedy well and we wish him bon voyage, 
and we especially look forward to welcoming him to this 
province, which unhappily played a major part in the story of 
Sheldon Kennedy. By confronting his own past, he has forced 
us all to deal with an issue which I think we all feel 
uncomfortable in having to deal with, yet we all recognize that 
it is important that the subject be faced up to honestly and 
openly. 
 
So we wish Sheldon Kennedy bon voyage on his trip. We look 
forward to welcoming him to Saskatchewan, and I think it is 
important that we as members of this Assembly all show our 
unanimous support for the undertaking he has begun. And as I 
say, this time we hope that the skate across Canada will cross 
this province, will cross the whole of our nation, and will lead 
to necessary and valuable improvements. 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in question period, I think the actions 
of people like Sheldon Kennedy show that one person can make 
a difference. His very open and frank discussion of this issue 
and his efforts since then to raise the awareness of sexual abuse 
of children has done a lot to raise public understanding, and one 
hopes to prevent such situations from occurring in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I most 
certainly do agree with the motion being put forward today. As 
the Assembly well knows I have stood in this House a number 
of times speaking on this very subject, the sexual abuse of our 
children, especially as it is taking place on the streets of our 
cities and in fact throughout the province in its many 
horrendous forms. I commend Sheldon Kennedy, I can’t say 
how much I commend him for his courage and for his efforts 
now to assist sexually abused youths through the opening of 
this facility. This undertaking is something that is needed 
desperately in Canada because up until this time we have not 
had done a child abuse study in our entire nation. And I 
understand that part of the work being done at his facility will 
provide that kind of a study. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I often say it’s wonderful when one person — and 
a government member just mentioned that — when one person 
does something that has such a wonderful effect and really does 
work towards providing dignity for our children and the people 
of our country. 
 
But one person and one more person and one more person and 
governments can do a lot more. There is no doubt that in 
Saskatchewan our children on the streets are suffering daily. 
Within two minutes from where we sit right now, children are 
being abused daily — sexually abused — and no one seems to 
be doing anything about it. 
 
It is my contention that something must be done about it and 
must be done immediately. We cannot say that these children 
must wait. It is our responsibility to provide protection for them 
today. And it is our responsibility to make sure that whatever is 
possible — that can come forward immediately — must be 
done. 
 
Two minutes, Mr. Speaker, from where we are sitting, children 
are being abused. This is not acceptable, and it’s not acceptable 
. . . and it’s not responsible, rather, for us to say that these 
children must wait — June, July, August, September, October, 
November, December, January, February, March, and maybe 
April next year — before legislation is brought forward in this 
province that may assist these children. 
 
I plead with the government and I plead with the Minister of 
Social Services and the Minister of Justice to enact legislation, 
even within these last few days, that will assist our children on 
the streets. Their lives are at risk daily; their lives are being 
destroyed daily. There is no excuse for not moving forward 
with legislation that has been put forward and tabled this 

session. 
 
I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you to the Legislative Assembly I see I have a young friend 
in the gallery today. It looks like she’s probably with the 
Saskatoon school group, but I’d like to welcome Megan Koski 
here to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
this afternoon to introduce to you and through you to members 
of the House a group of 88 students from Father Robinson 
School in Saskatoon and from the constituency of Saskatoon 
Sutherland. They’re accompanied today by their teachers Mr. 
Remizowski, Mrs. Wawryk, and Mrs. Liztiza. Also chaperons 
Mrs. Totland and Mrs. Mason, and I’d like to ask all members 
to give them a warm welcome to the Assembly this afternoon. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, in the tradition of being open, 
accessible, and responsible, I hereby submit the answer to 
question no. 71 on behalf of this government. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to question 71 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton: 
 

That this Assembly, notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules 
and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly Saskatchewan, 
do observe a daily meeting time Monday through Thursday 
from 1:30 p.m. until 10:30 p.m., except on Fridays, when 
this Assembly shall meet from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. and 
ending upon adjournment of this session of the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Now I’ll ask all hon. members 
to be silent when the Chair is on his feet. 
 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Before I begin the second reading, there are some introductions 
that I would like to make and I would ask people to stand as 
they hear their name, to be acknowledged. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
ask Catherine McComb the president of the Saskatchewan 
Motion Picture Association, and Elizabeth Verrall the executive 
director of the Saskatchewan Motion Picture Association, and 
Kevin DeWalt, president of the Saskatchewan Film Producers 
Association. 
 
And I have a couple of other introductions, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to introduce Mr. Don Archbold, the newly hired general 
manager for SaskFILM. Mr. Archbold has been involved in the 
motion picture and television industries since 1969, first as a 
composer and then as a writer, producer, and director. 
Throughout the years his innovative projects have garnered 
awards and provided first hand, in-depth experiences in 
virtually all aspects of the business, both nationally and 
internationally. And I’d like members to join me in welcoming 
Don to Saskatchewan and SaskFILM. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Also with us today is Mr. Jay Heit, 
who is with Tri Mark Entertainment from Los Angeles, 
California. Jay’s career in the film and television industry has 
given him the opportunity to create programming with a variety 
of entertainment production companies, Mr. Speaker. This 
includes Hollywood Pictures, Walt Disney Pictures, and 
Dreamworks. 
 
Mr. Heit is in Saskatchewan to discuss co-production 
opportunities with Minds Eye Pictures. So I ask all members to 
help me welcome him to Saskatchewan today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 63 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 63, An Act 
respecting a Film Employment Tax Credit introduces a 
mechanism which will level the playing-field for the province’s 
film and video industry as it seeks to grow and remain 
competitive with the industry in other provinces and offshore. 
 

Adoption of this legislation will also aid in keeping major film 
companies in the province so they can continue to contribute to 
cultural expression, create employment in the industry, and 
economic growth in the province. 
 
Saskatchewan’s film industry is fast becoming one to reckon 
with both nationally and internationally. The industry has 
experienced exponential growth in the past few years — far 
beyond that of other jurisdictions. This growth and development 
does not come about by accident but partly as the result of a 
strategic partnership between government and industry and 
because of the irrefutable skill of Saskatchewan’s producers and 
film professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, film and television are widely accepted as being 
perhaps the most powerful media to reflect and inform society 
and project Canadian culture. Film and television productions 
are an integral part of the lives of Canadians and the citizens of 
most countries. They have emerged as the most accessible of all 
cultural activities and as media which enable us to share 
experiences and aspirations across provinces, countries, and 
languages. 
 
The industry is labour-intensive and comprises a wide range of 
highly skilled creative and technical people. From 45 to 60 per 
cent of a production’s total budget is allocated to salaries and 
labour costs. The industry provides opportunities for a diversity 
of people to work at creative, high skill, high value jobs. It also 
requires a wide range of materials and services making an 
impact on local economies wherever production activity takes 
place. 
 
In 1996, the industry directly provided over 500 creative, 
technical, and administrative positions in Saskatchewan. Many 
who freelance their services also own and operate incorporated 
businesses, which further broadens the corporate foundation of 
the industry. 
 
The film and television industry then, is a hybrid. It combines 
technical expertise with ingenuity and creativity to bring into 
being new stories that reflect our Saskatchewan way of life. 
 
Our unique stories, distinctive landscapes, the faces, and 
accents of our people, and our way of seeing the human 
condition are incorporated into these products and delivered to 
audiences at home and around the world. The dramatic growth 
and demand for motion picture products is testimony to their 
power to inform, enlighten, and entertain. 
 
However, the Canadian and Saskatchewan industry remains 
volatile and generally unprofitable for its production sector. 
Products are often developed on a project-by-project basis and 
are often considered too high-risk to attract enough private 
investment to allow the production to proceed without public 
subsidy. 
 
The realities of the Canadian market-place, a small population, 
different languages, and the impact of foreign control of 
distribution make the success and significant growth 
experienced by the Saskatchewan industry in the past five years 
even more remarkable. 
 
Total production volumes have grown from 5 million in 



1606 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

1993-94 to over 26 million in ’96-97, with similar totals 
projected for the year that we are currently in, Mr. Speaker. 
Governments then chose to provide support to the industry to 
maximize employment and economic impact and to ensure that 
a broad range of culturally significant products reflecting 
different viewpoints and visions are produced. 
 
With the exception of the United States, all of Canada’s major 
trading partners deliver public support — direct, indirect, or 
both — to their film and video production industries. The 
business of film production here is only about 10 years old. The 
early foundation of the industry was the production of corporate 
like information, television, educational and documentary 
projects. 
 
While these are still significant strengths for the industry, many 
companies are now also developing and producing larger and 
more expensive drama projects, often in cooperation with other 
Canadian or international companies through co-production 
agreements. 
 
This evolution is positive from both a corporate and cultural 
perspective as it enables the development of crew and personnel 
resources, strengthens the companies, and helps to establish a 
Saskatchewan presence in the national and international 
market-place. The film employment tax credit will enhance and 
strengthen the industry as it continues to grow and develop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the film employment tax credit is fully refundable 
and will rebate 35 per cent of salaries paid to Saskatchewan 
residents on eligible film, video, and multimedia productions. 
Eligible salaries will be limited to no more than 50 per cent of a 
project’s total production costs. 
 
The industry estimates that the film employment tax credit will 
enable production volumes to grow to over 50 million annually 
and that the industry will directly employ nearly 800 people by 
the year 2000. Total employment generated by the industry will 
be over 1,700 positions. 
 
The film employment tax credit also provides for a bonus of 5 
per cent of total production cost for projects which have a fixed 
base of operations in Saskatchewan which is more than 40 
kilometres from Regina or Saskatoon. This unique enhancement 
will, over time, help to ensure that communities and local 
economies across Saskatchewan benefit from production 
activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the film employment tax credit has two additional 
features which I would like to mention. As I indicated earlier, 
over the past few years the industry has been working very hard 
to develop a qualified and talented base of technical crews and 
other professionals. However this process does not occur 
overnight and the industry has indicated that it will still be a 
year or two before we can truly say that we have the human 
resources we need to move ahead on our own. This means that 
some of the people hired for productions taking place in 
Saskatchewan will come from out of province and their salaries 
would not be eligible for the tax credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that with the industry’s help we 
have designed and included in this Bill the provision that, in a 
situation where no qualified Saskatchewan employee exists, the 

salaries of qualified out-of-province mentors who are coming to 
Saskatchewan specifically to train local crew members and 
thereby develop our human resources may be eligible for the 
tax credit. This important feature will allow producers to take 
full advantage of the tax credit, attract top-quality talent, and 
develop Saskatchewan’s crew base all at the same time. 
 
The second additional feature concerns when the tax credit 
considers eligible labour expenditures to begin. Film tax credits 
in other provinces do not consider eligible labour costs to begin 
until after the final script stage has been reached. This means 
that the labour cost associated with the valuable research and 
writing work that goes into getting a project ready for 
production are not eligible for the tax credit. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan film employment tax credit recognizes the 
cultural and economic benefits of enabling and encouraging the 
participation of Saskatchewan writers and researchers in the 
industry. Therefore, the tax credit will allow all qualifying 
labour expenditures to be claimed regardless of where in the 
production process they occur. 
 
It is our government’s intention to proclaim the Bill after 
completion of the regulations called for in the legislation. The 
drafting of regulations has already begun, as have discussions 
and negotiations with the Sask Film and Video Development 
Corporation — or SaskFILM as we fondly know it — regarding 
the administration of the film employment tax credit. While no 
final decisions have yet been made, it is hoped that the majority 
of the administration for the tax credit will be done at 
SaskFILM under an agreement with my department. The 
expertise and experience resident at SaskFILM will be key to 
this process and officials from my department will be involved 
in an advisory capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with a foundation built upon over 10 years of 
steady growth and increasing recognition, Saskatchewan’s film 
and television industry has come of age. It is poised to take 
advantage of a burgeoning demand for products both at home 
and abroad. 
 
The film tax credit will be a critical element of the industry’s 
infrastructure. One which will help to ensure Saskatchewan 
companies, communities, and taxpayers realize the maximum 
benefit from this growing sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill, Bill No. 63, An 
Act respecting a Film Employment Tax Credit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker just a few 
comments in regard to the Bill as presented to us this afternoon. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say I think as we look at the 
legislation before us and the film tax credit, I think it’s going to 
do something for the industry that probably the industry has 
needed for a long time. 
 
And I think for one thing, it takes the burden off the taxpayer. 
And it actually gives the taxpayer — through a tax credit — the 
option of showing their public support for the film industry. 
And I think that’s something that’s very positive. Because I 
think . . . even the film industry. . . I think will realize and 
recognize that every time they’re looking to government via the 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1607 

taxpayer for money, it just creates a negative feeling in the 
industry. 
 
And this I believe is a positive way of allowing an industry, that 
is starting to come of age, to address a number of issues, and I 
believe they are showing to Saskatchewan people that they have 
the wherewithal. And I believe industry will certainly show its 
support as well once this tax credit is officially in place and 
allowed to function. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the film industry, I think this is a 
very positive move. And I would like to say this is one time 
where I really commend the government for taking a serious 
look and thinking of the taxpayers as well as thinking of the 
industry and giving it a real opportunity to show Saskatchewan 
people that it can be a positive contributor to our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Jury Act, 1998/ 
Loi do 1998 sur le jury 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Jury Act, 1998. The Jury Act outlines the 
procedures to be followed in selecting and summoning and 
choosing a jury. It’s being re-enacted in French and English 
with no changes of substance. However in the drafting of the 
English version, the sections were rearranged in a more logical 
order and Latin terminology was eliminated. This Act is being 
translated at the request of the French community in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give a brief background to this Bill and 
the other Bills that are being considered today in English and 
French. This is the tenth anniversary of the Mercure decision 
which was handed down by the Supreme Court of Canada in 
1988. In that decision the Supreme Court of Canada held that 
the use of English and French was a matter of Saskatchewan’s 
constitution, and that the legislature of Saskatchewan had the 
authority to determine the extent to which those languages 
could be used for official purposes. 
 
In 1988 the legislature enacted The Language Act which made 
English and French official languages in the courts of our 
province and in our Legislative Assembly. That Act also 
authorized this Assembly to enact laws in both official 
languages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1994 our government began a process of 
consulting with Saskatchewan francophones to develop a list of 
Acts that were of the greatest importance and usefulness to 
them. They provided us with a list of 35 Acts which they 
identified as Acts they would like to have translated. In 1995, 
eight Acts from that list were introduced and approved by the 
Assembly. In 1996, a further ten Acts were approved and in 
1997, six Acts were approved. 
 
This session we are introducing four more Bills from that list. 
They are The Adoption Act, 1998; The Jury Act, 1998; The 
Wildlife Act, 1998; and The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998. In 

addition to the Acts identified by the francophone community, 
the Assembly has enacted other legislation in English and 
French, including five Acts in 1988, one in 1993, two Acts in 
1997, and one further Act earlier this session, The Enforcement 
of Judgments Conventions Act. After the Bills before the 
Assembly this afternoon are approved, Saskatchewan will have 
enacted a total of 36 bilingual Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
Jurors and Juries. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 
(1500) 

Bill No. 60 — The Wildlife Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
give second reading to The Wildlife Act, 1998. This Bill is 
being presented in both English and French. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is identical to The Wildlife Act, 1997 that 
was enacted last year. It also incorporates the changes that were 
made to that Act by The Wildlife Amendment Act, 1998 which 
was approved by this Assembly earlier this session. 
 
The Bill establishes rules to protect wildlife and wild species at 
risk, and establishes rules to regulate hunting, trapping, and 
taking of wildlife. Because this Act is based on the 1997 Act, 
few changes were required to the English version to facilitate 
the translation into French. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Wildlife Act, 1998. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2)/ 

Loi n° 2 de 1998 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées 

et des jeux de hasard 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 
give second reading to The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2). This Bill is being presented in 
both English and French. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill was introduced to make amendments to 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997 which was 
enacted in English and French during the last session. The 
amendments in this Bill are identical to the amendments 
approved by this Assembly earlier this session to The Alcohol 
and Gaming Regulation Act, the English-only Act that currently 
regulates alcohol and gaming matters. 
 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997 has not been 
proclaimed in force. The Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority is still in the process of reviewing and updating its 
regulations and having them translated before the 1997 Act can 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

be proclaimed. Until the 1997 Act is proclaimed in force it is 
important to ensure that it is up to date with the 1993 Act which 
it will replace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 
Bill No. 62 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 

(No. 2)/ 
Loi no 2 de 1998 modifiant le Code de la route de 1996 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
give second reading to The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 
1998 (No. 2). This Bill is being presented in both English and 
French. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is introduced to make amendments to The 
Highway Traffic Act, 1996 which was enacted in English and 
French in the 1996 session. The Highway Traffic Act, 1996 has 
not been proclaimed in force. 
 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance is still in the process of 
reviewing and updating its regulations and having them 
translated before the 1996 Act can be proclaimed. Until the 
1996 Act is proclaimed in force, it’s important to ensure that 
it’s up to date with the Act which it will replace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
thank you to my colleagues in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a fine group of students 
seated in your gallery, they’ve just arrived, a group of young 
boys and girls from the community of Foam Lake. Specifically 
the Foam Lake Elementary School grades 5 and 6. 
 
The students have had an interesting day, Mr. Speaker, thus far. 
They’ve had the opportunity to meet with Ms. Joan McCusker 
from the winning curling rink, the gold medal rink from 
Saskatchewan, and I’m sure that they have found that meeting 
very, very interesting. And I know a number of them are avid 
curlers and I’m sure some inspiration has also been 
forthcoming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides the students I’d like to introduce teachers 
Jim Hack— Jim, if you would stand please — Wayne Bugera; 
Ruth Gislason; Shelley Koropatnicki; and of course I’m not 

sure if the bus drivers are up there, but the two bus drivers who 
of course are the most important, Dennis Friesen and Michelle 
Babychuk . . . right over there. I’d ask all my colleagues to join 
me in welcoming this group from Foam Lake. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58  The Adoption Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
give second reading to The Adoption Act, 1998. This Bill is 
being presented in both English and French. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill is essentially identical to the Act it is replacing. The Bill 
establishes rules respecting the adoption and placement of 
children. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Adoption 
Act, 1998. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 57 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 modifiant la 
Loi sur l’éducation be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, as I was mentioning the last day that this Bill was 
before the House, I had made some comments regarding the 
contents of the Bill. Some of the clauses that are fully supported 
by all of the parties involved — the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, 
and the francophone society. 
 
After all, the most important clause that we see coming forward 
in regards to the francophone community is the clause that will 
allow for the creation of one school division so that we will 
have the ability in Saskatchewan to have the current nine 
francophone school divisions amalgamate and actually form 
one school division, with nine subdivisions, which will allow a 
very thorough representation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been in contact with the francophone 
community, and I understand after talking with representatives 
of the francophone community that they are fully supportive 
and have been actively involved in the process and agree with 
the clause that is put forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other clauses that will be amended will change 
how urban school divisions may function. And as I indicated 
last day, if there is to be a referendum in an urban community 
that requires the school division to create the ward system, then 
a school board will be obligated to do that. That is clearly 
defined now in respect of the changes so that the wishes of the 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

people will be adhered to if indeed that referenda is passed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point of contention, though, in this Act is one 
specific clause to sections 261 and 263 of the Act. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to quote from two letters to indicate to the members of 
the House how difficult this issue is and how I believe the 
Minister of Education must spend a little more time dealing 
with the partners in education. 
 
Minister of Education has spoken a number of times in this 
House how she believes in collaboration, in cooperation, and 
consensus, and that there should be at all times an effort to put 
forward changes, to put forward ideas that are supported by 
everyone. She’s indicated that the difficulty with the protocol 
agreement and the fact that after nine meetings there was a need 
to disband the protocol agreement and thus arrive at a 
negotiated settlement. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, in this instance when we look at the 
clause that is suggested about the handling of grievances, we 
note that the minister said that there was a meeting about a 
month ago between the parties. And I think that the minister can 
resolve the issue by bringing together the groups that are 
involved and putting forward a suggestion that I think could be 
supported by all. 
 
And I want to quote from two letters, Mr. Speaker, so that the 
Assembly would understand how difficult an issue this is. This 
is a letter addressed to me from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, and it says: 
 

The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation is fully supportive 
of the Bill, including the amendments to sections 261 and 
263 with respect to the settlement of grievances. 
 

Fully supportive. On the other side, we have a letter from the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association that I know all 
MLAs have received, and it says: 
 

For the most part, the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association supports the changes. We are, however, very 
concerned that the government has introduced amendments 
to sections 261 and 263 which require that grievances 
under the provincial collective bargaining agreement must 
be handled by the government trustee bargaining team and 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation bargaining team. 
 

What you see is two very strong contradictions, one suggesting 
that the plan is okay and the other one suggesting that there 
needs to be some work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the minister has received an 
amendment, a suggested amendment, that would not delete any 
of the changes that she has put forward but would put the 
legislation, The Education Act legislation in the same frame of 
mind as is the current Trade Union Act whereby the grievance 
procedures must be handled. And there’s no question, I think, 
that the teachers in this province are somewhat unhappy with 
the grievance procedure and the fact that grievances are being 
tied up in the courts and that there is no settlement. There needs 
to be a clear understanding so that we can move those forward. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the question here is whether or not it 

would create a situation where the actual employer is not 
represented at the grievance settlement procedure and the 
amendment that is suggested is to place it into the same context 
as the current Trade Union Act. 
 
I ask that the Minister of Education, I ask that she take a good, 
hard look at the suggestions that have been put forward by 
trustees, by individuals, by boards of education, and I know, 
Mr. Speaker, from the copies that I’ve received of letters from 
all across the province, these are copies of letters that have been 
sent to the minister. I know that she has received that lobby, and 
indeed she has received the suggested amendment from the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think that kind of discussion, the kind 
of debate that we could have on the specific clauses, as I’ve 
indicated before, nearly 90 per cent of the suggested 
amendments are supported by everyone and will be supported 
by the opposition. 
 
However, I think that the item that is causing all of this 
contention needs to be dealt with in Committee of the Whole 
where we have the opportunity to put forward amendment, to 
put forward suggestions to the minister that might be a 
compromise, might be able to be accepted by both the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association so that indeed the ongoings of 
providing a better education system in the province continue. 
 
So with those comments, Mr. Speaker, I see no reason to delay 
the Bill and we would allow it to move to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1515) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Jury Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 sur le jury 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his official 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. I’m pleased to have with me today 
Susan Amrud from Saskatchewan Justice. 
 
The Chair: — Could we have leave of the Assembly to do this 
one in parts seeing as there’s so many clauses? 
 
Clauses 1 to 41 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Wildlife Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
The Chair: — I also would request leave of the Assembly. This 
has 9 parts and 91 clauses, can we do it in parts? Is that agreed? 
Agreed. 
 
Clauses 1 to 91 inclusive agreed to. 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2)/ 

Loi n° 2 de 1998 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées 

et des jeux de hasard 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
want to address a few questions to the minister. Mr. Minister, as 
we are dealing with the alcohol and gaming Act, you will be of 
course aware of the fact that a lot of people who volunteer in 
our province for various organizations of course use the 
permitting system in order to provide for functions in their 
communities. 
 
They have been asking for some changes to the Acts and one of 
the things of course you will recall that they wanted is to have 
an opportunity under the gaming Act to have small lotteries 
without as many restrictions. Does this Act in any way affect 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. You will also know that 
many people who are volunteering are worried about their 
responsibilities in terms of liability. They have constantly asked 
you for relief in this area over the past two years. They have 
lobbied, written letters, did everything except stand on their 
heads. Have you addressed this issue and is this issue included 
in this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The issue that you’ve raised isn’t 
discussed at all in this legislation. The issue is under review and 
discussion as there are many policy issues to be involved. And 
that discussion continues. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, that’s your answer and that’s the one we will be 
faxing to people tomorrow when we get the transcripts from 
Hansard. 
 
At this stage in the game, I really don’t care what your answers 
are. I think the people out in the country and in the cities will 
care. That’s who counts. And they’re going to interpret that 
once again you’ve had the opportunity to have legislation 
opened up, the opportunity to make the changes they’ve asked 
for have been ignored, and that’s the point. The legislation is 
open; the chance to the do the job is here. 
 
You have said to them basically by your inaction that you have 
no intentions of doing what they want done, which is basically 
to relieve the responsibility on volunteers in this province in 
order to save volunteerism. 
 
You have refused to allow small communities the opportunity 
to run lotteries without the restrictions that are presently in 
place. What you’re saying to them is that you had the 
legislation open and you are saying no to them. You are 
refusing to make the changes. 
 

To say that they are under review or under consideration is not 
an acceptable answer to me or to them, I don’t believe. But I’ll 
let them make that judgement because we will be passing on the 
transcripts tomorrow to those people to let them know that the 
opportunity was here and that you clearly ignored them. 
 
Minister, would you like to point out to the people what good 
things you’ve done in this legislation so that you can have that 
on the record in the same transcripts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, as the hon. member knows this 
is legislation that enacts French versions of legislation. The 
issues that he’s raised are covered under other pieces of 
legislation, including The Non-Profit Corporations Act or other 
specific legislation that may be created to address some of those 
issues. 
 
The legislation that we’re dealing with right now is legislation 
that is not being used to address that particular issue. And it 
would be very much appreciated if the hon. member would 
keep to the subject at hand here. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I am keeping to the subject at hand and the subject at 
hand is the demands of the people of Saskatchewan to have the 
changes made that they want. You have stated to them that you 
have no time to take care of their problems, that your 
department has to spend all of its time researching, studying, 
and getting ready for next year. 
 
And the reality is that you’ve opened up legislation here. 
You’ve shown to the people of Saskatchewan very clearly that 
in three days you can put together a piece of legislation and put 
it through this Assembly very quickly. You could have 
addressed their issues. You could have done it just as easily 
with a piece of legislation as you can to pass this piece of 
legislation. You could as easily put through their wants and 
their needs and their requests even though it might be a 
different Act or another process under your jurisdiction. 
 
Nevertheless the opportunity is here and you have bypassed that 
opportunity. And to simply stand here and say that you want to 
stick to the issues or that you don’t want to talk about this issue 
is not going to be sufficient to convince these people that you 
have addressed their problems. Because you haven’t — you 
haven’t looked at their problems and you are simply stalling in 
order to get out of this session as quickly as you can so that you 
don’t have to address the problems in Saskatchewan that people 
have been bringing to your department. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1530) 
 
The Chair: — My apologies to the minister, I didn’t realize he 
had another official join him and I didn’t give him the 
opportunity to introduce him. So I will ask the minister now to 
move the Bill without amendment, and if he wants to mention 
the name of the official that helped him that’s fine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The official that was with us to help us on 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

this particular legislation was Lorna Chomyn, who is the legal 
policy analyst with the Liquor and Gaming Authority, and I’d 
like to thank her for her assistance. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 62 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 

(No. 2)/ 
Loi no 2 de 1998 modifiant le Code de la route de 1996 

 
Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Adoption Act, 1998/ 
Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 

 
The Chair: — I see the Minister has one more official so I 
would ask him to introduce his other official please. 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m pleased to have with me this 
afternoon, Lynn Allan, who’s the acting director of the child 
welfare programs division of Social Services. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you. This again being a Bill that has 
some 47 clauses but it is broke down into seven parts. With 
leave, can we go part by part? Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, this is a very lengthy piece of legislation and you have 
many, many changes here. I guess I have a general question to 
start with; specific questions following. The general question is: 
how does this change to the Act fundamentally change the old 
Act? And I want to get into section no. 3 on page 8 next. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There are no changes from the Act; this is 
just a re-enactment in French. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — That’s good, Minister, because I think what 
people would have expected when you take the time to put an 
Act into the legislature simply to translate it into French, that 
you might also have opened up the opportunity to make some 
changes to the Act that people have been hoping to get in this 
province and in other places of the country as well. 
 
And I’m really amazed that you wouldn’t have taken a little bit 
of time to make a few very simple fundamental changes while 
you have the Act open and in fact are going through this very 
expensive process of holding the legislature into a session that 
somebody told me costs $34,000 a day and you would simply 
not use that opportunity to improve the legislation. 
 
How do you justify bringing in a piece of legislation simply to 
translate it into French without making the changes that people 
have asked for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, the hon. member would 
know that Bill 14 of this session was an Act to amend The 
Adoption Act, and at that point, there were some changes made 
to this legislation. Those changes have now been incorporated 
into the English version and now we’re enacting it in both 

French and English. 
 
So we have taken the time this session to look at some changes 
and we’ve made those changes, and I think that the hon. 
member may wish to withdraw his comments. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — It begs to be differed with, Mr. Chairman, 
because of course the changes that were made were not 
fundamentally the changes that people had asked for. And of 
course that’s why they’re so appalled that we went through the 
process twice and still didn’t get it right. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, it’s late in the day and far be it from me to 
tell you how to do your job any more, because obviously the 
people of Saskatchewan can’t get through to you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Again, I’m going to ask leave of the Assembly 
. . . and we have leave to do it parts, I guess. We do. 
 
Clauses 2 to 47 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, Mr. Chair. I’d first like to thank 
Susan Amrud who’s guided us through many Bills this session, 
and we very much appreciate her assistance. And I would like 
to move that we report this Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
today, Cheryl Hanson who is an assistant deputy minister in the 
department. I have Pat Parenteau who is a policy analyst with 
the department, Sheri Biblow, a policy assistant with the 
Department of Labour, and I think . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . yes, right, on the other side of me, John Boyd, the director 
of policy and planning at the Department of Labour. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to you and your officials. The changes that are being 
proposed under The Workers’ Compensation Act are certainly 
of interest to many people in the workforce today in 
Saskatchewan. We receive numerous concerns about the 
operations of the Workers’ Compensation Board. In fact I 
would go as far as saying that fully half of the concerns that 
come forward on a constituency basis to my office and many 
other members’ offices I’m sure are workers’ 
compensation-related in this province. 
 
We understand that there have been 52, or approximately 52 
recommendations, for changing the Workers’ Compensation 
Board made in the most recent review of its operations. For the 
record, can you tell us how many of these recommendations 
need legislative amendments and how many are simply policy 
or regulatory changes? 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — About half in each category, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Of the regulatory and policy changes, how many 
of the recommendations have been implemented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, I’m told 
that it is our understanding that 11 of the policy 
recommendations have already been implemented and the board 
is working and considering the other policy recommendations 
that were put forward by the committee. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And with this piece of legislation how many of 
the legislative changes will now be in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think that you’d find there’d be 10 of 
the recommendations for changes in the legislation that have 
been carried forward. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Can you tell us which of the recommendations 
that were proposed and haven’t been adopted — quite likely 
won’t be adopted any time soon — and what are the reasons 
why. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I’m not sure, Mr. Chair, that I can 
answer the member’s question with any precision at all. Let me 
try and address it in a general way though and see whether that 
suffices. 
 
We have built into our Workers’ Compensation Act a review 
that takes place every four years by a review panel that is 
external to government and to the board. That provision has 
been in operation since, I believe, the early ’70s. So they’ve 
gone around on this maybe six times, but there has been a 
review of the Act. 
 
And I believe it has performed a great service as far as this 
legislature is concerned because it has put the whole operation 
of the board, including the legislation, under the microscope of 
an external review and recommendations have been 
forthcoming in all of those reports. In none of them has the 
government of the day been prepared to accept all of the 
recommendations and there are no doubt very cogent reasons 
for not doing so. And I wouldn’t be in a position to offer any 
insights as to why previous governments haven’t accepted all of 
the recommendations. 
 
So far as we are concerned we went through a process of 
consultation with respect to the recommendations of the board 
and put forward various proposals for legislative change. It was 
an exhaustive consultation process that took a good deal of time 
and in the end we came forward with the package that we have, 
which had attracted substantial consensus from both the 
employer and the worker communities. And I can’t say that 
during the next couple of years before there is another review, I 
can’t say that there won’t be further amendments to this Act. 
The other recommendations that are not included in the Act 
remain before us and it may be that we will decide to act on one 
or more of them. 
 
Now I can offer the reasons why we rejected any particular 
recommendation that doesn’t appear in the legislation, the 

reason why we have not . . . we decided not to act on them at 
this time. For example, one of the recommendations was the 
appointment that the Chair of the Workers’ Compensation 
Board would be someone that was mutually acceptable to all of 
the so-called stakeholders. And we didn’t include that because, 
quite frankly, dealing with these groups all the time as we do, 
we didn’t think we’d be able to find an individual in 
Saskatchewan who would be able to attract the support of all of 
the stakeholders. It just didn’t seem to be a practical idea. 
 
But we did agree with the recommendation to the extent that 
there should be consultation with respect to the appointment of 
the Chair, and that provision is included in the legislation. 
 
So I realize, as I’m about to take my place, that I haven’t 
answered the member’s question precisely. But I can give the 
member the reason why we didn’t act on any particular 
recommendation. But I won’t take the time of the committee to 
go through them all just at this point. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — You’ve been reported as saying that the changes 
proposed will cost $4.7 million. Is that an accurate figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes. That’s an accurate figure. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Where will most of the increased costs be 
incurred? How much of this increased cost will go to the 
claimants? And how much will go towards increased 
administration of the WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The total cost is about 4,700,000. And 
the large bulk of that is represented by benefits. Four million 
four hundred thousand is involved in the provisions respecting 
dependent spouses in the amendment to section 83, and 250,000 
so far as common-law spouses are concerned under section 
88(1). 
 
Now there are administrative costs included in that figure, but 
they are small. The cost of an annual meeting is estimated at 
$24,000. And the cost of preparing and packaging the strategic 
plan to be presented at the annual meeting is estimated to cost 
15,000. So those are relatively insignificant. The bulk of the 
increased expenditures will go to beneficiaries. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — You have also been quoted as saying that these 
changes in increased costs will not result in higher costs for the 
employers. Can you give us your absolute assurance that that 
will be the case? Employers from across this province have had 
some rather unpleasant experiences with workers’ 
compensation rates over the years and we received numerous 
complaints as to the rate structures and how they arrive at them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I can tell the member that I’m assured 
by the board that these provisions will not result in any increase 
in the rates. Now that’s a little short of what you were asking 
me to do but it’s the best I can do. The board sets the rate and it 
is not any decision of mine that results in the rates or any 
changes to the rates. That process is entirely within the board. 
 
I agree that there have been times when rate increases have 
taken place and that has been a bit of a shock to the employer 
community. And this past year though we saw decreases in the 
premiums that amounted to between 15 and 25 per cent for 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

most categories and that was a good news item and the very 
opposite of a shock — whatever that is. A pleasant surprise put 
it that way. So sometimes it’s bad news and sometimes it’s 
good news, and I’m really glad that this year it has been a good 
news item. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Within the operations of the WCB, unfortunately 
pleasant surprises come along more infrequently than shocks, 
and that’s the concern that we get from many of the employers 
across this province. They are concerned about the operations of 
the WCB. They are concerned about their workers and wanting 
to ensure that there’s a safe workplace but they see a great deal 
of concern within the operations of that board. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have had plenty of interest in the 
benefit-of-doubt clause that will be enshrined in this piece of 
legislation. Can you briefly explain how you think that this will 
help the WCB claimants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The purpose of the provision is to 
imbed in the law the principle that if the evidence is equally 
divided on any particular point that’s before the board, if the 
weight of the evidence is even, then the benefit of the doubt will 
be given to the worker and that issue will be decided in favour 
of the worker. This has been a part of a policy of the board in its 
policy manuals for some time, but I believe — and the 
community seems to agree — that it is an important principle to 
embed in the law of the province and that’s what we’re seeking 
to do with this Bill. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — So you are saying that the benefit of doubt will 
clearly be in the interests of the claimant and not in the interests 
of the fiscal integrity of the WCB? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I wouldn’t put it in exactly those terms 
but I would simply say that the purpose of the Act is . . . the 
purpose of the whole scheme is to provide income replacement 
for people who have been injured on the job. And if their claim 
is one where the evidence is equally divided on a particular 
issue, why shouldn’t they have the benefit of the doubt? Why 
should there be any kind of presumption against them? And so I 
think the principle is an appropriate one and a sound one. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — One of the main complaints we get with regards 
to the WCB is the seeming attitude that the WCB has towards 
outside medical opinions. Many of the cases brought to our 
attention involve a family doctor or a medical specialist saying 
yes this person should be eligible for compensation, and that the 
WCB refuses to take that option. How will the benefit-of-doubt 
clause help in these cases or will it? 
 
And I’d also like to explore a little bit with you that attitude that 
seems to be prevalent in many of the WCB claimants in this 
province with regard to outside medical opinions. Perhaps you 
could take some time to explain the WCB’s position on outside 
medical advice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, it’s my 
understanding that the board no longer has its own in-house 
medical doctors. It didn’t used to be that way. For all of the 
board’s existence they have had in-house, full-time employees 
who were medical doctors. That practice was eliminated some 
time ago and the situation now is that the board does not have 

its own doctors. Now they have contractual arrangements with a 
number of outside doctors in private practice to advise them 
from time to time on certain kinds of injuries, and that no doubt 
leads to the kind of situations that the member has in mind 
when you’re asking the question that you asked. 
 
And it is a very, very difficult situation for the board to deal 
with. When you get a family doctor who gives an opinion as to 
the cause of an injury or the extent of an injury, and the board 
seeks third party advice or another doctor’s advice on the point 
and receives a contrary opinion, then the board is really in a 
tough spot. 
 
I would think in those circumstances . . . depending on the 
circumstances, the board might well invoke the 
benefit-of-the-doubt provision. Or they may try to find other 
medical opinions — a third or a fourth opinion, try to get some 
consensus, a medical opinion as to just what it is that’s involved 
in this particular case. 
 
None of the members of the board are medical doctors 
themselves. And they depend entirely on the advice of the 
profession in order to deal with issues or questions relating to 
medical matters. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Minister, what you are sort of 
attempting to do is suggest that the board is using people 
outside of the operations of the board. And I suppose in some 
respect they are. But what we are told by many of the claimants 
is, is that the board designates the doctor that they must go and 
have the examination with. Now that’s where the problem is: 
essentially it’s the same thing as having them in-house when 
you prescribe which doctor they’re going to go and have the 
examination with. 
 
And my question was with respect to additional outside medical 
opinion, that being the opinion of their family doctor or another 
medical specialist, which they have sought an opinion from. 
And too frequently we are hearing that there is conflicting 
opinions — very conflicting opinions — and invariably, 
invariably the board takes the opinion of the doctor that they 
have contracted with and is very reluctant — in fact simply 
does not take into account — the opinion of the person’s own 
family doctor or specialist. 
 
And that seems to be a concern that is very, very prevalent. And 
we get many, many calls to that: why does my family doctor 
say on one hand that I should be in a position to receive 
workers’ compensation and the in-house doctor, or the doctor as 
you described that the Workers’ Compensation Board has 
contracted with and has prescribed that the person has to have 
the medical opinion received from, why is there such a wide 
variation in opinions on this? 
 
(1600) 
 
Of course we realize that medical opinion is a little bit 
subjective, but if there should be . . . if there is a 
benefit-of-doubt clause in here, one would hope that the benefit 
of doubt should go towards the claimant as you’ve indicated it 
should. But it also should be tipped in favour of the medical 
opinion that their own family doctor — the doctor that probably 
is most familiar with their case, most familiar with their medical 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

history, most familiar with their background — would have at 
their disposal. That seems reasonable to me. 
 
If you’re going to offer a clause that suggests that people 
receive the benefit of doubt I suppose, I would be of the opinion 
anyway, that many people would feel that the first opinion 
should be the opinion of the doctor that they have as their own 
family doctor or the specialist that they have been referred to by 
their family doctor. 
 
Now of course medical history and medical expertise, as I said, 
is subjective. But we all develop somewhat of a rapport and a 
trust with your own family physician — you’re more likely I 
suspect to give detail of the concerns that you have about your 
condition, you’re more likely to share on a frank basis, the 
concerns that you have about your problems. Rather than to this 
doctor that the board has prescribed that you must go and see. 
Someone who, in all likelihood, you’ve never met before, has 
no knowledge of, don’t know their expertise in this area, don’t 
know any of those kinds of things about them. 
 
And I would be . . . I would think that many people would feel 
quite reluctant to share, what is in everyone’s case, a pretty 
serious and a pretty personal type of information with doctors 
you’ve just met. So one would hope that the Workers’ 
Compensation Board would take that into account and look at 
using the benefit-of-doubt clause, not only for the claimant but 
also for the claimant’s benefit when it comes to looking at the 
medical advice that they are going to use as the basis for 
determining whether there should be a claim or not. And I 
wonder if you might want to comment at this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I think that, and to the 
member, I don’t take exception with the points that you made. 
And I agree particularly that people are obviously much more 
inclined to share personal information with a doctor who 
they’ve known and worked with for years than they would 
speaking to a stranger in an office probably in a city apart from 
where you live. So I’m not taking any real exception to the 
points that the member puts forward. 
 
Some situations, I’m sure you’ll agree, require a level of 
expertise or speciality that a general practitioner may not have. 
And in those situations, I think the board would be quite 
justified in accepting the opinion of the specialist over the 
opinion of the general practitioner, but it all depends on the 
circumstances. And I think the board should be sensitive to that 
and I . . . they obviously can’t likely dismiss the opinion of a 
physician that knows the patient and knows things about the 
patient that a specialist who’s never met the patient before can 
possibly find. 
 
And in many of these situations, as I indicated in my previous 
answer, the benefit of the doubt should be given to the claimant. 
One would hope this isn’t true — it’s a matter of professional 
integrity — and if a family doctor is just doing it as a favour or 
offers an opinion to simply keep the patient as a patient, you 
know. In other words sometimes there could be tough, tough 
situations in which a family doctor may not want to go out on a 
limb and make the hard statement. I’m not saying that’s 
happened; I don’t know whether it’s happened or not. But as I 
speak here today I can imagine circumstances in which it would 
happen. 

And decision makers like boards and courts must have to deal 
with these situations all the time and I think that I’m prepared to 
let them continue to do that with the provision that the 
benefit-of-the-doubt clause be there, to make it clear that the 
claimant should be preferred. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Again, Mr. Minister, I certainly understand that 
and appreciate your comments. There are regulatory bodies like 
the college of physicians and surgeons that deal with these 
kinds of ethical, or in some cases, even legal issues and I’m not 
. . . I don’t want to get into a discussion about that sort of thing. 
 
What I want to suggest to you though and to the board is, again, 
that people feel more comfortable with their doctor, and they 
also feel more comfortable with the recommendation for a 
specialist that they receive from their doctor, from their family 
doctor. And I think that that is important. 
 
One would hope that that area — that opinion that they received 
from their family doctor or from the specialist that their family 
doctor recommends to them — would make for a better 
diagnosis perhaps than the diagnosis of someone who’s never 
met them. And I think we can all probably think of examples of 
how that might be the case. 
 
As I said, there seems to be the concern out there in large 
number — and you probably have heard many of them yourself. 
And we’ll get a little bit more into this in Labour estimates 
where we have a number of specific cases that we might be 
prepared to bring forward. Actually I’m a little bit reluctant to 
have to admit to bringing forward cases on a specific basis and I 
might just provide the information to you in the form of letters 
rather than bringing individual’s cases. I don’t think that that’s 
necessary nor appropriate in a lot of cases to do that. We’ll 
undertake that in Labour estimates — to get on with that 
business however. 
 
But I want to make it very clear on behalf of many, many of the 
people that we have had contact from that there seems to be in 
too many cases such a vast difference between the medical 
advice that they were receiving on one hand from their family 
doctor or from the family doctor’s recommendation for a 
specialist and what they received from the specialists or doctors 
that the Workers’ Compensation Board contracts with. And 
because it’s subjective and because it means, in many cases, 
that there is a claim that is successful in terms of having a 
pay-out to the claimant or not, you could understand the reasons 
why many of the claimants would feel that their family doctor is 
probably in a better position, or the specialists that their family 
doctor has recommended is in a better position to make a 
judgement on their case perhaps than the physician that you 
people recommend. 
 
I just wanted to highlight that concern and make it very clear 
that we receive, oh, it’s literally dozens of complaints about 
those kinds of differing opinions from various doctors. 
 
In fact you may be . . . You may remember the case of a man — 
as I said I don’t want to get into specific cases here — but you 
remember the case of a man who was injured on the job and 
granted compensation. But in the course of the treatment for 
that injury a doctor’s mistake caused him a more severe injury 
that was unrelated to his workplace accident. 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

You may be familiar with that one. I think you know. The 
minister’s nodding that he’s familiar with that particular case. 
 
Yet he still cannot take legal action against the doctor for a 
more severe non-work-related injury. Can you explain the 
rationale here and if the government is looking and you are 
looking into making changes to deal with this provision and 
problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, I 
indicated while the member was speaking that I was familiar 
with the case, and I am. And this is a situation that the 
government still has under consideration. 
 
We weren’t able to develop a consensus around how those 
cases should be handled. The board’s position is that the doctor 
is an employer like any other employer and is entitled to the 
benefits of the Act and some line of reasoning that I, I must say, 
I don’t understand fully enough to be able to rationalize as I 
stand here. 
 
But I am told, I am advised that the . . . my officials believe that 
the matter is under review by the courts and this is a question 
that is not yet settled. But we were not able to settle it in time to 
include it in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. You’re proposing to 
expand the definition of the term “injury”. Can you tell us what 
this will encompass now that it is before us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 
change in the definition is to include the concept of industrial 
disease in the definition of “accident”. It doesn’t mark any big 
change in policy, but it is simply a clarifying provision. 
 
The review panel found that while the current definition of 
injury is intended to include occupational disease, the reality is 
that there is no consistent recognition, recognition of 
occupational diseases and disorders, so the definition is 
expanded. Really it’s going back to an earlier definition that had 
existed in the Act in prior years and had been removed in the 
interests of simplicity. We’re going back to the original 
formulation for the sake of clarity. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us how many WCB 
people claimants are receiving compensation due to stress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, we’ve 
got so much material it’s often difficult to put our hands on it, 
but we do have the answer to the member’s question. In 1997, 
which is of course just the previous year, the board accepted 41 
claims for compensation on account of stress — 41. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and we appreciate the 
fact that you have a very good group of staff of people to help 
you dig out the information. It makes it certainly helpful, I’m 
sure. 
 
Mr. Minister, when was stress first covered, and can you tell us 
how the numbers of the WCB claimants due to stress have 
changed since this time? Are we seeing a continual growth in 
that particular category, or are we seeing just a sort of a normal 
pattern of work . . . what might be considered a normal pattern 

of Workers’ Compensation-related claims due to stress? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — According to our information the board 
has been recognizing stress as a compensable situation for more 
than 20 years. They have recognized two categories of stress: 
one being a chronic stress, which is viewed as a long-term and 
ongoing problem that disables a person from functioning 
normally in day-to-day life situations; and the second is a 
traumatic type of stress that results from an incident where 
perhaps an individual has been involved in a life-threatening 
situation or a hostage-taking, or some kind of horrendous 
accident or injury. 
 
So they’ve been recognizing the incidents or the reality of stress 
as a disabling condition for more than 20 years. I have numbers 
with me that show the situation since 1987 — would be the last 
10 or 11 years — and the numbers show a gradual but 
consistent increase in the number of stress claims reported over 
the years with the exception of last year. 
 
In 1987 the total reported was 29 of which the board accepted 
14. And then the numbers increase steadily through to 1996 
when there was 222 claims reported, and the board accepted 44 
of those. Then last year the number was reduced to 175 and the 
board accepted 41 of those. 
 
Now the explanation that is offered for the drop in the number 
of claims is that the workforce has been catching on to the fact 
that stress can affect them and that they should take measures to 
ensure that it doesn’t capture them, that it doesn’t disable them. 
And so they’ll find ways to avoid stress or relieve stress or 
ameliorate stress and so protect themself from it. But it’s been a 
growing problem, as I have said to the member, steadily over 
the years and the board has been considering these claims and 
acting on them. 
 
As I look over the number, I think it would be correct to say 
that the board has been accepting 25, 35 per cent of the claims 
in an average year. Now I’m just working out those percentages 
on the fly here, but I think that would cover most years. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Of course when 
granting stress compensation it must be . . . and I can appreciate 
the difficulty in deciding whether a claim is valid or not. And 
I’m interested in knowing how the WCB determines whether 
the stress was work-related or how they make that kind of 
decision. Stress is prevalent in all of our lives and at times it’s 
surprising that there isn’t claimants coming out of this place a 
lot more than there ever has been in the past. 
 
Can you give us some indication as to how the WCB 
determines stress-related incidents? You mentioned . . . and I 
wonder if you also might have some degree of . . . could 
provide us with an indication on those 41 claimants that you 
have as to what kind of stress-related things we are looking at 
here. 
 
You mention hostage-taking related things. Do we actually have 
claimants that have been involved in hostage-related incidents 
that are currently claimants of Workers’ Compensation? And in 
addition to that, what length of time are we looking at when we 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

talk about stress-related benefits? Is this something that is a 
lengthy claimant position . . . person in that position a lengthy 
claimant? Or is it relatively short-term claims that we are 
looking at, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — With respect to the first part of the 
member’s question, Mr. Chair, I can quote from the board’s 
policy on stress and I’m now quoting: 
 

Injury from chronic stress will be seen to have arisen out 
of, and in the course of, employment if there is clear and 
convincing evidence that: 
 
(1) the work stress was excessive and unusual in 
comparison to pressures and tensions experienced by the 
average employee; normal pressures and tensions including 
routine industrial relations actions taken by the employer 
such as discipline, work evaluation, transfers, lay-offs, 
demotions, terminations, reorganizations, etc.; and 
 
(2) the work stress was the predominant cause of the 
injury. 
 

I’m quoting there from the policy of the board. 
 

The board must evaluate various factors in determining 
whether a stress claim is compensable. 

 
For example, some occupations such as air traffic controllers 
are inherently stressful, while other occupations that are not 
typically stressful may be so in certain circumstances. And 
therefore the board must assess whether the workplace or the 
occupation is the predominate cause of stress; and in doing so, 
the board interviews the worker as well as the worker’s family 
and fellow workers and the employer and tries to determine 
whether the condition of the claimant is attributable to stress on 
the job. 
 
Now we are not able today to provide the member with 
information as to the examples of traumatic stress situations. 
The examples I gave earlier were theoretical more than any 
practical case. I was trying to illustrate some really horrible 
situation that would be expected to cause stress. But this is 
obtainable, and if the member wishes, I can provide that. 
 
Similarly I don’t have information as to the length of time in 
which these successful claimants have been on compensation 
for stress leave. But again, that’s information that I can get. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and we would 
appreciate if you would undertake to provide us with that 
information, and I see yourself and your officials nodding in the 
affirmative. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is much concern that the WCB is moving 
towards compensating what would be called diseases of life, 
those afflictions where there’s not a direct link to the 
workplace. And I want your comments on that. 
 
And what I’m talking about here you’re probably familiar with. 
What I’m talking about here is the concern that many 
employers have that we’re going to see a mushrooming of 
claims out across the piece in Saskatchewan where, as an 

example that has come to my attention, two examples that have 
come to my attention: someone who might be a heavy smoker 
who is also a diesel mechanic around a lot of fumes, all those 
kinds of things, concern in that area; or a heavy smoker who is 
a grain elevator agent subjected to a situation in the workplace 
where there’s a lot of dust and resulting in respiratory problems 
for that particular worker. 
 
Now I wonder how the Workers’ Compensation Board makes 
those kinds of determinations, and whether or not we are going 
to be moving into situations where we’ll see what many people 
consider diseases of life or lifestyle now become . . . coming 
forward in larger numbers as claimants into . . . and putting a 
great deal of additional burden on an overburdened system 
already. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I hope the 
Assembly will forgive me for taking advice on this question. 
We’re not able to answer the member’s question with any 
precision, but we can offer some general observations based on 
our conversation with the board over the months and years. 
 
The board does take into account certain lifestyle questions. 
And a heavy smoker, as mentioned by the member, that’s a 
common one. And in determining the cause of the disablement 
they will take that into account and in appropriate 
circumstances may reduce the amount of the award that is 
given, so that they’re not compensating a person for the damage 
they do to themselves because they’re a smoker. But they will 
compensate them only to the extent to which their injury was 
caused by the workplace condition. 
 
I think that is a sensible policy. It’s obviously a complex 
situation, and it’s becoming more complex as the workplace 
becomes more complex and as people run into new and 
different things in their lives that may have some effect on their 
health or make them more susceptible to occupational disease. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. One of the major 
concerns brought to our attention from employers is the concern 
about an occupational disease panel, which may be under 
consideration, and the cost associated with that; and the 
experience of provinces like Ontario where they’ve been tried 
and, many, many people believe, failed very miserably. Can 
you tell us if this plan is off the table permanently? 
 
Certainly, we understand it was under consideration for a period 
of time, and only after the substantial lobbying efforts from the 
business community that that piece of a very contentious part of 
this legislation was removed. Is it off the table permanently or 
whether . . . Are you of the view that you might want to try and 
put it back on the table in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Now as far as I’m concerned, Mr. 
Chair, it’s off the table permanently, yes, as far as I’m 
concerned. Who knows what may happen with another minister 
at another time, another board of review, whatever you like. 
That particular formulation in the end had no adherence, no one 
was saluting that particular flag. And I long ago learned that 
when you get in that situation, you pull down the flag and put it 
away. 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

Mr. Boyd: — Well, your cousins in Ontario thought it was a 
pretty good piece of legislation I’m quite sure. Where were they 
when you needed them? Well the people of Ontario might share 
your thoughts in that area in many respects I’m sure. 
 
Can you tell us the average length of time between a claim 
being made to when it’s approved or rejected outright? Is this a 
speedy process that we’re looking at? 
 
That is often again the concern that we hear that these things go 
on and on and on and there seems to be no end to them. Is there 
some kind of a target date that you use, a target time frame that 
you use — or is there actual . . . something in regulation that 
you use to try and determine whether a claim is valid or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The board tells us that they have 
substantially improved their performance over recent years and 
now are at the point where they will normally give a decision 
within 14 days, sometimes the same day, and in no case later 
than 30 days from the date in which the claim is filed. 
 
So, apparently that’s much better than has been the case in prior 
years, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, how many investigators 
do you have on staff, and are all claims fully investigated before 
being granted or rejected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, we would be guessing. We 
don’t have that information with us but these are all matters that 
are referred to . . . are public and are referred to in the annual 
reports, and we can undertake to give to the member the 
breakdown of the various classifications that the board had. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — If a person were to make a claim and then find 
that it is subject to further investigation, is there a provision that 
grants them some interim compensation, or are they just on 
their own until that claim is finally settled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The board does not pay interim 
compensation. The board will make a decision before they pay 
out any money, so that if the investigation takes a little longer it 
is a fact that the claimant has to wait. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — What is the average caseload of a case worker, 
and has this number showed any significant change over the 
years? Are we looking at case workers with substantial more 
cases before them and burdening them down so that they’re 
having difficulty making decisions, or are we making some 
progress in this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chair, we don’t have that 
particular information. If it’s satisfactory with the member, we 
will get it and provide it to him. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much. I’m going to begin 
with some basic comments, Mr. Minister, and then lead into 
particular questions if I may. The changes to The Workers’ 
Compensation Act are certainly welcome and considered long 
overdue, and any changes that results in workers being treated 
with greater respect, fairness, and consideration are to be 
supported. 
 

The four issues that my constituents have the greatest concerns 
with and raise most frequently with me are: first, health care or 
the lack thereof; secondly, social services; thirdly, their dealings 
with SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and in 
particular no-fault insurance; and lastly, Workers’ 
Compensation Board issues. And those are not done in any 
particular priority. We just seem overwhelmed with all of the 
above, Mr. Minister. 
 
I find it passing strange and quite disturbing that according to 
you, Mr. Minster, the government is responding to complaints 
about the board that have been heard over 25 years. It is, I 
think, unusual that it would take 25 years to bring about the 
changes these amendments propose when this Act is subject to 
review every four years. One cannot help but wonder what 
additional improvements are required but will now have to wait 
for the next round of reviews four years hence. 
 
And so the question on Bill 29 is whether the amendments 
adequately address the obvious problems now with the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. Certainly there are some who 
would not feel that they do. The Blue Rose Advocacy group 
does not think so. There’s a citizen in the Speaker’s gallery who 
doesn’t think so. The Blue Rose Advocacy group claims that it 
is not so much problems with the Act but rather with the board 
itself which does not use the Act and follow its own rules. 
 
And if I may take some liberty — and I’ll probably will not be 
addressing this very articulately — the individual present today 
has been seriously affected by treatment she received at the 
hands of employers and yet cannot get her concerns addressed 
because the damage done was not physical in nature. 
 
I wonder if a review of how the board administers the Act 
should not go hand in hand with these amendments. You can 
have the best designed legislation in the world, but if those 
administering it do not observe its intent in spirit fully, it can be 
totally ineffective. And certainly there are enough horror stories 
about the shabby treatment of injured and disabled workers. As 
I mentioned just a few moments ago, complaints from my 
constituents about Workers’ Compensation Board are amongst 
the most frequently voiced. 
 
And I want you to know that I don’t believe for one moment 
that each and every one of these people can be people who all 
come from some made-up place in the world that they think that 
they deserve something that they really don’t deserve. Each and 
every one of these cases is quite distinct. Each and every one of 
these individuals has their own stories. And it is truly of 
concern to those of us who must listen to these stories that they 
don’t feel not only that they’re receiving fairness, but often 
times they’re treated in such an appalling manner that that 
exacerbates what already has been an extremely difficult 
situation. 
 
I’m going to begin then with a series of questions, the first of 
which is: will these amendments prevent the board from first of 
all denying compensation claims, pressuring individuals to 
return to work before they are well, and ordering inappropriate 
medical treatment or physical therapy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The answer is no. The board receives 
claims, and we in this legislature expect the board to adjudicate 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

on them. We instruct them to determine whether an injury or a 
disease has arose out of or in the course of employment, and 
that the injury or disease indeed disables the person either 
temporarily or permanently from earning their income. And as 
in any such system, you would expect that some of those claims 
would fail. So the board has always denied certain claims that 
they found to be groundless or not within the Act, and they’ll 
continue to do that. 
 
The numbers over the years have been — over the last few 
years anyway — have been that the board accepts about 94 per 
cent of the claims that they receive and reject about 6 per cent 
of the claims in an average year so that they will continue to 
deny some claims, and of course so they should. If they receive 
a fraudulent claim and they learn it’s a fraudulent claim, they’re 
going to dismiss it. That’s an example. 
 
They have an early Return-to-Work program which has been 
really quite popular. Where they learned it from — I’ll just take 
a moment to explain this to the member — they picked it up 
from sports, from athletics, where they learned that football 
injuries and hockey injuries can be best treated if the injured 
athlete is up on their feet and working out and doing everything 
they can physically within the limits of their injury as quickly as 
they can. And we’ve seen that in hospitals, for example, where 
you used to lay in bed for weeks after an operation, now they’ve 
got you walking up and down the hall the next day. 
 
So the board has, I think, with caution and with care introduced 
the early Return-to-Work program where they get the employee 
back into the workforce in a reduced capacity that’s appropriate 
to the level of injury. In most cases it’s not their original job, 
but it’s some kind of a job around the place that the employer 
provides so that the employee’s back in the work environment 
and back with their fellow workers and maintaining an 
attachment to the workforce, rather than being at home alone 
and depressed about their condition and so on and so forth. 
 
And so I think that there’s nothing in the legislation to 
discourage that. And indeed I think we in this legislature would 
encourage it provided that it’s administered with care and with 
compassion and with sensitivity. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well thank you very much. I am interested 
in what you’ve said very much. I’m interested in the fact that 94 
per cent of people in fact have their claims addressed in a 
positive way. 
 
And I guess that raises the question: does your department 
collate all of this information? What sort of follow-up is done 
with, not only just the 94 per cent but the 96 per cent or 94 per 
cent, but the other remaining group as well, in a way that can 
really tell us the story of these people who say that their claims 
have been settled. I mean have they got things to contribute to 
the overall body of knowledge that can tell the board how to do 
a better job, what sorts of things work, what sorts of things 
haven’t worked, what sorts of things made their lives easier 
after having to endure something that may have taken away 
their ability to work as they ever had in the past. 
 
I mean what is being done to collect information that can allow 
the Workers’ Compensation Board and your department to do a 
better job? 

(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, I don’t 
pretend for a moment that an adequate job is being done. I mean 
I think you raise ideas there that are food for thought, and we 
will consider those and I’ll have the board consider them also. 
 
We’re not totally inactive though. I mean the four-year review 
in this province is a wonderful idea I think. As I’ve said earlier, 
it is an arm’s-length review by people from the industry; from 
employers and workers and a Chair outside of government, 
away from government, and they review not only the contents 
of the legislation but the administration of the Act. 
 
And they have things to say about that each year. And each 
committee review seems to look at a different aspect of the 
board’s operation. This year they were concerned, as you know, 
with the way in which the board governed itself and its 
accountability and that sort of thing; they tended to focus on 
that. 
 
The points that you make are maybe relevant for review 
because we have an early Return-to-Work program which 
obviously yields experience that will be very, very useful — 
one thing to have a theory and implement it and another thing to 
evaluate it. And you’re speaking to the evaluation of it, and I 
think that’s a very useful suggestion. We’re not totally remiss 
on it, but I think there’s a great deal more we can do. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I most certainly would encourage you to 
be doing such because I think that it’s probably one of the most 
beneficial things that people can do over time. I know that the 
best place to gain knowledge is from those who have gone 
through the actual experience. 
 
And I most certainly agree that in many instances it’s a great 
and worthwhile undertaking for people to be able to become 
active rather than being sedentary after being injured or 
undergoing some other kind of problem from the workplace. 
But I guess my concern lies in the fact that oftentimes the 
stories that I’m told deal directly with individuals whose own 
personal physicians tell them one thing, but they’re receiving 
conflicting information from people they’re dealing with at the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
And I think that one has to be very, very cautious about that. I 
think in fact it’s a dangerous way of proceeding if someone is 
being told one thing by people in whom they have been taught 
to place their trust and are placing their overall health, and yet 
an agency from which really in some ways they’re going to be 
beholden for their own livelihood is requiring them to do 
something else. 
 
And I most certainly would hope that the board would take into 
consideration, more frequently than it does, information that 
comes directly from people’s physicians and specialists because 
it appears too often that this information’s ignored. 
 
And if I may I just want to make one more comment 
surrounding that. Too often people are treated as simply 
physical entities following some sort of accident and sustained 
injury. And as we all know, Mr. Minister, we aren’t just 
physical bodies going through this world? People are whole 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

people, and that means that they are their mental selves, their 
physical selves, their emotional selves, and their spiritual 
selves. 
 
If they are not treated with fairness, if they’re treated 
disrespectfully, if they feel that they’re constantly under 
suspicion, if they’re undermined, it most certainly does affect 
their mental well-being. It most certainly has an emotional cost. 
It is very damaging to one’s sense of spirit and spirituality about 
humankind overall, let alone the group with whom you’re 
having to deal. 
 
And that comes with a physical cost. It keeps people from 
healing. It makes them unable to be productive citizens that 
they could be otherwise. And I think it goes without saying that 
too often people who are dealing with the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and some of the employees . . . and I don’t 
want to say it in some overall inclusive way; I want to 
emphasize some, not all because there are some individuals 
there who most certainly do provide much more thoughtful care 
when they’re dealing with individuals who have to approach 
them, but there are others who do not. And I think that that 
comes at too great a cost. 
 
I more than anyone would support finding those people who 
misuse and abuse the system because they make it wrong and 
problematic for everyone else. But one always has to come 
from the point of view that one is innocent before guilty. And I 
think that it’s a very sad statement indeed when one is 
automatically assumed somehow to be wanting to abuse the 
system. 
 
Now having said all of that, I do have a question, and just for 
the sake of time I’m going to move on to this one because I 
think it is something that really is going to be more and more 
problematic as time goes on, and it deals with occupational 
disease. Are there lists for occupational diseases associated with 
particular trades, with particular industries, employment 
categories, and so forth? And the reason I raise this, I want to 
know about specific identification and a list, hitherto, of 
unidentified occupational diseases for two reasons, Mr. 
Minister. And they are as follows. 
 
There’s one thing that we’re guaranteed of, given what has been 
transpiring not just within our own province and nation but 
internationally, and the member from Humboldt raised this 
yesterday in terms of what is now in our water supply in 
Saskatchewan, what has been transpiring with the Camecospill 
just within the last few days. 
 
All of these things come with a price, and that price will be 
multiple chemical syndrome. It is a guarantee, if one is reading 
the literature today, that this is going to become more and more 
problematic which means it’s going to lend greater and greater 
problems to something like the Workers’ Compensation Board 
in making these kind of differentiated diagnoses, if you will, of 
things that are truly related to one’s occupation. And I’d like 
you to address that. 
 
I’d also like you to, if you may or will, include in that some 
comments regarding firefighters and their requests in the 
province of Saskatchewan because of the high percentage now 
of those who have been firefighters in our province who have 

been diagnosed with, and are dying from in some cases — 
that’s past tense — from different cancers that they believe are 
related to occupational hazard. 
 
I would appreciate your comments, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, there is 
no list of diseases. The board has the freedom given to it by the 
Act to make its decisions with respect to individual situations 
and they do that. They recognize that at any point in time, you 
don’t know everything about everything. There’s always new 
information and new analysis and new research and they try to 
keep up with that. 
 
This takes then to the member’s point about the multiple 
intrusions on the human body and the way in which those can 
build up over the years. This is going to become particularly 
acute as people go through a number of different occupations in 
their lifetime and they wind up at the end of the day with a 
serious respiratory problem or something like that and the board 
not only has to deal with that in the case so far as the individual 
worker is concerned, but to which category of . . . (inaudible) 
. . . do you apply the costs because the individual may have 
moved from employers in different classes which then presents 
the board with a question of how to apportion those costs 
through the different sub-funds that are in existence. I agree 
with the member. It’s going to be a bigger problem as time goes 
on. 
 
The fire-fighter situation is very current and we have had 
representations from them. They were the one group that 
strongly supported the idea of the occupational disease panels 
that we had . . . we had in draft legislation and was out for 
consultation. We pulled those provisions because with the 
exception of the fire-fighters, I think there was nobody that 
liked the idea that we put forward. 
 
But certainly it’s current and a lot of research is being done 
about it and the board is very conscious — I know this in 
conversations with the chairman — very conscious of the . . . 
problems like we saw in Saskatoon recently where a number of 
fire-fighters had gone to a landfill and fought a fire and they’re 
all having problems. Well that’s a clue, isn’t it, I mean that’s the 
signal for the board to do some serious . . . (inaudible) . . . on 
the problem, and I know that they are. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I’m going to ask something that will be 
fairly short for the sake of some time, hoping that you’ll be able 
to give me a specific response. And I have several more here so 
we’ll probably be joining each other later. With respect to the 
benefit-of-a-doubt clause, who will determine when everything 
is equal with respect to the information gathered and presented 
by each side? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The whole structure of the board, the 
whole decision-making apparatus within the board has to 
observe that requirement. Right from the initial claims officer, 
client . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . client service 
representative — yes, sorry, I forgot the name — right through 
the various appeal processes, right up to the board itself. 
Everybody has to apply that rule. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I’m going to look at the verbatim on that 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

one because I missed some of it, I’m sorry to say. Just going 
back to a moment, with this whole idea of occupational health, 
I’m curious about why cooperation between the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and the occupational health and safety 
division of the Department of Labour has been a matter of 
controversy in the past. 
 
Will this legislation be requiring cooperation? I mean, will it be 
effective in fact if the two solitudes lack the cooperative spirit 
that’s necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I am ensuring cooperation, and I have a 
full expectation that my successors will ensure cooperation. 
 
There is a tension between the two, which is natural. The 
occupational health and safety program is funded by Workers’ 
Compensation funds. That in itself creates a certain tension. The 
occupational health and safety division is responsible for all of 
the . . . all aspects of occupational health and safety, including 
education and prevention and that sort of thing. 
 
This has historically been the turf of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and that has been the source of tension 
between these two organizations since at least 1972, you know. 
And it doesn’t seem to go away. 
 
But I go back to my first answer. The minister has to ensure that 
there is a satisfactory degree of cooperation and a good working 
relationship. And I believe that very strongly, and I take 
advantage of every opportunity with both organizations to 
remind them of the necessity for that. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much. I bet that if you 
resolved one outstanding issue I could think that you would be 
the best person to be able to work with these two groups and 
solve any issues that might come forward. If this happens 
before the end of session, the thing I’m referring to, well 
probably believe you can walk on water too. 
 
Does increasing the minimum lump sum annuity payment from 
5,000 to $20,000 really and meaningfully give injured workers 
more retirement options? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The problem with the $5,000 limit is 
that the agents simply won’t accept $5,000 for the purchase of 
an annuity. I’ll just repeat that for the member — the problem 
with the present law is that the $5,000 is just too trifling a sum 
for agents to deal with, so they just won’t accept it. They will 
accept $20,000 so that just opens up at least one option and 
probably more for the beneficiaries. 
 
(1700) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — How does holding one general annual 
meeting for all organizations with interests in the operations of 
Workers’ Compensation Board concretely benefit workers? I 
mean I’m quite interested in this and I’m talking about in terms 
of the workers and direct benefits to them. 
 
And I’ll pose these other two. They kind of go in conjunction 
with one another. In the past, I’m curious if the Chair of the 
board has also been the chief executive and the chief 
administrative officer of the board. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, the board 
has of course always done public consultations. They’ve done it 
separately with employer groups and with the worker groups — 
trade unions chiefly. There’s for a long time been the fear, 
perhaps even the impression, that the board has different 
messages for the different groups. This is a provision designed 
to ensure that the message is the same for both groups; that it’s 
consistent. Now I don’t necessarily accept that it was different 
in the past, but perception is as important as reality in some 
situations. 
 
Now as far as the chief executive officer is concerned, I think 
this is an advance that is long, long overdue; it should have 
been done years ago. But the board makes the policy decisions 
and sets the general direction, and then there is an 
administrative official who is responsible for executing the 
board policy. And Peter Federko, the current CEO, is the first 
one that we’ve had. Prior to that the Chair has tried to do both 
jobs. 
 
The Chair is appointed invariably — almost invariably — 
because of their stature, their decision-making abilities, rather 
than their administrative abilities. So in practice it has been that 
the Chair has performed like a Chair of a board should. And 
then the executive function has been diffusely spread out across 
the organization, the top levels of the organization, with no 
single official sort of in charge the way a CEO should. The 
Chair just simply didn’t have the time, nor the background in 
many cases, to do these particular duties that a CEO does. 
 
So I think this is a very good move, and the committee of 
review agreed with that and asked that we put it into the 
legislation to ensure that these two functions were not put in 
one person again. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Minister, was there any particular 
conflict or difficulty that arose? I mean I am curious as to why 
this has not been changed before. And of course that begs the 
question: why is it being changed now if there weren’t 
problems that arose from it before? Is there something that I 
need to know here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think not. As I mentioned earlier, this 
particular committee of review focused on governance issues, 
and this is a governance issue. I think that it just didn’t occur to 
previous boards of review, committees of review, to look at that 
particular part of the structure. So as I say, it is overdue. It 
should have been done years ago but nobody really thought of it 
until Stan Cameron saw it and implemented it. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Minister, when you introduced the 
amendments, you stated that according to Price Waterhouse the 
Workers’ Compensation Board surplus and reserves should be 
able to absorb, and I quote the word “most,” of the increased 
costs resulting from these amendments. It says most; it does not 
say all. 
 
So I’m wondering, how much is the shortfall if there is one? 
And how will it be covered if not through premium increases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The increased costs that will follow 
from these amendments are estimated to be $4.7 million — 4.4 
of that will go into the pockets of beneficiaries and the rest will 



June 4, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

be increased administrative expenses mostly around the annual 
meeting and the strategic plan and that sort of thing. The board 
believes that it will be able to handle this out of its existing rate 
structure. If it had to recover those costs they . . . well they 
don’t think they’ll have to so I shouldn’t even speculate about 
it. So this is a manageable increase in costs as far as they’re 
concerned. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well I’ll sum up here with just a comment 
and would most certainly welcome any response. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is one amendment that I believe is glaringly 
absent from this Bill, and that is an amendment to correct what 
I’ve deemed here a grievous injustice to the disenfranchised 
widows and widowers by the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
And without such an amendment I don’t believe that this is a 
whole Bill. 
 
I’m wanting to ask, with what you’ve seen to date, will an 
amendment of The Workers’ Compensation Board Act be 
required in order to address the issue that I’ve raised with you 
throughout this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There is some division of opinion on it 
but the best advice appears to be that a legislative amendment 
will be required. We have tried hard to get things to a position 
where we could have a decision so we’d know whether to go 
with the amendment or not. I think it’s becoming increasingly 
clear that we won’t have that, but we did try because there’s a 
great deal of pressure on us to get this thing sorted out and get a 
decision on it right now, and I think we’re going to fail. 
 
I think that answers the member’s question. We dealt with this 
in question period today. I said at that time that this is a 
big-ticket item. This is an expensive thing no matter how you 
look at it. And so it just can’t be decided in a hurry. It’s a tough 
one. And there are various options that are available, and we’re 
trying to work our way through those. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I have tabled before this House a private 
members’ Bill that deals with session dates. Mr. Minister, of 
course why I believe we should have set session dates is not for 
the convenience of the people who come to this Legislative 
Assembly on a regular basis and receive pay cheques, but 
primarily because the people of this province should be able to 
know with great predictability when we will and will not be 
here to have public discussion of their concerns. 
 
I most certainly hope that at some point this government, our 
province, will do what other provinces have done and that’s to 
create a short fall session where controversial Bills in particular 
are tabled, allowing time for us to go throughout the province 
and talk with stakeholders who will be affected, and then come 
back in a winter session, which doesn’t go into the middle of 
June, in which we can complete our work on the citizens’ 
behalf. 
 
Now if in fact by some miracle that private member’s Bill is 
adopted next week, we’ll have a wonderful opportunity to have 
the necessary amendments to The Workers’ Compensation 
Board Act brought forward in a fall session. It’s unlikely 
however that that will happen. 
 

And I’m wondering what you could say to people today. And 
you know that I’m not exaggerating when I say that some of 
these women, and they’re primarily women, I’m not 
exaggerating their condition when I say that many of them are 
not well and many of them do live in poverty. And it’s not even 
so much for some the thought of a lump sum — it’s what a 
difference it would make to have $150 a month come into their 
home to help them. What is it that we can say to them about this 
particular Act which will be passed this legislative session, not 
including them, when in their view justice delayed is justice 
denied. 
 
I know that you’ve indicated to me if there are things that you 
can share with me, you will. I’ve not seen any best guestimates 
as to the costs. 
 
And these are not unreasonable people. If they had a sense of 
what this might mean to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, I think 
that it would in fact help them to understand why there seems to 
be such delay involved. But to them it means that it’s all right 
for your government to take them into litigation — that’s how 
they’re conceptualizing this. 
 
People who have no money — many of whom are old and 
many of whom are not well, who have already endured some 
great challenges in their lives — are feeling that they will have 
to do what people had to do in another New Democratic 
province of British Columbia and take their government to 
court, which went all the way to the Supreme Court of British 
Columbia. I don’t believe . . . I mean in my heart of hearts I 
don’t believe that you think that is right. I most certainly would 
not like to have that happen. 
 
And you have an opportunity this afternoon, although I’m sure 
if 1 per cent of them are listening — there may be others who 
are — you have an opportunity to at least give them some sense 
of what might transpire, that you can give them some hope and 
maybe bring them a little bit of peace. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member. I don’t 
know what I can say to give them hope and peace except that 
we’re treating this claim very seriously, they know that, and 
we’re working on it hard and they know that. 
 
This legislature spoke on this issue back in 1985 and passed the 
law that it passed, which dealt with all situations where spouses 
of deceased beneficiaries remarry. Prior to that they were all cut 
off and after the amendments that this House passed, such 
situations did not cut them off. 
 
And the legislature presumably had an opportunity at that time, 
and I was here — no I wasn’t here — but I mean they had an 
opportunity to go, to be retroactive then, and they didn’t. And 
it’s an issue that just was not on our radar screen at all until last 
fall when the Workers’ Compensation Board itself read in a 
newspaper of this group of people who were dissatisfied and 
invited them in. And so the process started and of course you 
know the rest of that story. 
 
(1715) 
 
So I can’t hold out any hope other than that we’re treating it 
seriously. We have a lot of sympathy for them. I mean there’s 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1998 

302 people affected that we know of, most of whom are 
widows, some of whom are in dire circumstances and we’re 
sympathetic but it’s a big ticket item. And I’ll just briefly 
mention the numbers. 
 
We haven’t even calculated the cost of the solution you 
proposed, which was to go retroactive in every case to the date 
of their second marriage, with interest. We haven’t even 
calculated that because it’s too high. But just calculating 
retroactivity to the April 1, 1985 — without interest, just the 
claim — the cost to the board would be about $74 million. Now 
that’s a lot of money. The board just can’t absorb that. Maybe it 
can afford . . . it can absorb the costs here, of this Bill, but it 
couldn’t absorb that. 
 
And even if we talked in terms of simply paying them a pension 
today, with no retroactivity at all, the estimated cost of funding 
those pensions would be $40 million. Well those are obviously 
big-ticket items with a lot of issues. Do you land all that on 
existing employers? Or do you subsidize the board in some 
way? Or what do you do? 
 
These are hard issues and it’s the reason why we’re having . . . 
it’s taking us some time to produce a decision on it. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well I know that, I just want to . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — By leave of the Assembly to recess 
until 7 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1593 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1593 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1593 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1593 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1593 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1593 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1593 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1593 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1594 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1594 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1594 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1594 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1594 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1594 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1594 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Communications 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1594 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1595 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1595 
  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1595 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1595 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1595 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1604 
  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1604 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1605 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1608 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Tourism Week 
  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1595 
 Health Care Concerns 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1595 
 Prince Albert Tourism Awards 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1596 
 Saskatchewan’s Population 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1596 
 New Apprenticeship Programs 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1596 
 Surgery Waiting-lists 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1597 
 International Agricultural Biotechnology Conference 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1597 
 Eighth Annual Sommerfest in Humboldt 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1597 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Elective Surgery at Royal University Hospital 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1597 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1597 
 Health Care Ombudsman 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1598 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1598 
 Fund-raising Efforts by Sheldon Kennedy 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1599 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1599 
 Emergency Rescue Equipment 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1600 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1600 
 Capital Funding for Health Care Facilities 
  McPherson...............................................................................................................................................................................1600 



  

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1600 
 Confidentiality of Health Information 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1601 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1601 
 Vehicle Damage Claims 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1601 
  Bradley.....................................................................................................................................................................................1601 
 Workers’ Compensation Board Policy 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1602 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1602 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 228  The Doctor-Patient Confidentiality Act 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1602 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Cross-Canada Skate for Child Abuse Awareness 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1602 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1603 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1604 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1604 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1604 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
  MacKinnon..............................................................................................................................................................................1604 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 63 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Act 
  Teichrob...................................................................................................................................................................................1605 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1606 
 Bill No. 59 — The Jury Act, 1998/Loi do 1998 sur le jury 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1607 
 Bill No. 60 — The Wildlife Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1607 
 Bill No. 61 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2)/ 
 Loi n° 2 de 1998 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1607 
 Bill No. 62 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 1998 modifiant le Code de la route de 1996 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1608 
 Bill No. 58  The Adoption Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1608 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 57 — The Education Amendment Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1608 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 59 — The Jury Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur le jury 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1609 
 Bill No. 60 — The Wildlife Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur la faune ..............................................................................................1609 
 Bill No. 61 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2)/ 
 Loi n° 2 de 1998 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1610 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1610 
 Bill No. 62 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 1998 (No. 2)/ 
 Loi no 2 de 1998 modifiant le Code de la route de 1996...........................................................................................................1611 
 Bill No. 58 — The Adoption Act, 1998/Loi de 1998 sur l’adoption 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
 Bill No. 29 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1611 
  Haverstock...............................................................................................................................................................................1617 
 


