





























































Hansard: April 09, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 551 
 April 9, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
petitions this morning on behalf of residents in Saskatchewan. 
The prayers reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to these petitions are from the 
communities of Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Big River. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present this morning. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from Wawota, Carlyle, and Prince Albert, 
Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, to present petitions as well and I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by individuals from the Redvers, 
Goodwater, Springside, and Antler areas of the province of 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 

And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of 
Regina, and Coleville. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise this 
morning to present a petition and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these are signed by the people from Coleville, Kindersley, 
and Kerrobert. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of people in the province. The issues they’re concerned 
about are the severance payments to Jack Messer and calling for 
an independent public inquiry to find out all of the facts 
surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. Signatures on this 
petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of St. Brieux, 
Lake Lenore, and Melfort, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The petition I have to 
present today states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
People that have signed this petition are from Rose Valley. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to present 
petitions as well today to do with the Jack Messer, Channel 
Lake situation. People from across Saskatchewan are obviously 
concerned about the issue. These petitioners come from the 
Coleville, Kindersley area of the province of Saskatchewan. I’m 
pleased to present them on their behalf. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition has been signed by the folks from 
Willow Bunch, Assiniboia, Coronach, and Crane Valley; 
Mazenod as well. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise again 
today to present a petition. And the prayer reads as follows: 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
primarily from Ponteix. And I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of those concerned about the Plains Health 
Centre closure. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities such as Gull Lake, Maple Creek, and a number of 
them from Swift Current, which is very likely to be a future 
location for one of our forums on the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now the hon. member 
will recognize, of course, that he’s not to enter into debate when 
presenting petitions. And I know he recognizes this. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues today in bringing forward petitions to try and stop 
the Plains closing. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 
basically from Ponteix and some from the Pambrun areas of the 
province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present 
petitions from citizens of the province concerned with the 
impending closure of the Plains Health Centre. The petitioners 
who have signed this petition come from Pilot Butte. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
present, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, the following 
petition. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This group of people, Mr. Speaker, come from the community 
of Piapot and the surrounding area. 

 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions for private 
Bills are hereby presented and laid on the Table: 
 

By Mr. Koenker — Of the Conference of Mennonites of 
Saskatchewan, in the province of Saskatchewan; and 
 
By Mr. Kasperski — Of the Fondation de la Radio 
Française and l’Association Culturelle Franco-Canadienne 
de la Saskatchewan, in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway; saving the Plains Health Centre; and cancelling 
severance payments to Jack Messer and calling an 
independent public inquiry into Channel Lake. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 29 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services regarding the new child 
benefit and employment system computer program: what 
was the total cost to the government for the planning, 
development, and implementation of this computer 
program, and was the work on this program tendered? 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Easter Celebration 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today begins 
the final weekend of the Easter season, the major religious 
observance for millions of Christians the world over. The 
season of Lent is one of contemplation, preparation, and 
commitment — a season which culminates in the joyous 
reaffirmation of life and promise, the promise which is at the 
heart of the Easter celebration. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, as other members have observed in 
years past, this Assembly is not the proper forum to promote a 
particular religious creed. But the suggestive significance of 
Easter to our society and to our lives goes far beyond any 
particular belief. Easter is our most optimistic holiday because 



April 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

it heralds the end of winter and the beginning of spring. The 
biblical image of life out of death is mirrored in what we see 
happening all about us. This is a season we celebrate the victory 
of life over death, of hope over fear. The season in which we 
renew a faith that good ultimately does triumph over evil. 
 
Easter also marks for us and for most people a break in our 
temporal activities — time to catch our breath, visit our 
families, do a little gardening, and prepare ourselves to return to 
our duties here with renewed energy and commitment to our 
duty. 
 
So on this day we ask for peace among all peoples, 
reconciliation among the nations, and for health and respect for 
the less fortunate. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know too much about the game of chess, but over the past 
few weeks I’ve started to learn a little more. As we’ve seen 
from the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) actions at Crown 
Corps, the pawns are all rallying around to save the castle. 
 
Today Murray Mandryk compared the move of putting the 
Deputy Premier before the investigation instead of the Premier 
to sacrificing the queen to save the king. Well for starters, I 
think Her Majesty would take great offence at being compared 
to the Deputy Premier. 
 
It’s clear from the course of events that the Deputy Premier has 
also been demoted to the level of a pawn, putting him in the 
company of hon. members like the member from Regina South. 
And for another, I don’t think the Premier should be called the 
king. He’s more like the bishops scooting sideways all over the 
board to avoid testifying. 
 
Of course, experienced chess players know that the most 
powerful piece is the knight. Using it’s big L moves as a base, it 
can slip around all attempts by the stodgy old pieces to block its 
advances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Channel Lake investigation continues the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus will continue to act as the knights 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. No matter how often 
the government attempt to sideline this investigation, we will 
pop up in front to ensure that the public scrutiny continues. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Passover Celebration 
 

Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sundown tomorrow 
also marks the beginning of Passover week, the week Jewish 
people the world over observe the preparation for it and the 
flight from oppression in the land of Egypt as told in the Old 
Testament Book of Exodus. 
 

This observance of course, is one on which Easter is built, a 
more ancient but still very contemporary celebration. As the 
member from Meadow Lake said, this is not the place to 
mention a particular creed, and in our province Passover 
ceremonies will be greatly scattered because in numbers, Jewish 
people are a fraction of our population. 
 
But the historical, legal, religious, and ethical significance of 
Passover is far greater than any account of its celebrants in a 
particular location. First, the exodus of the children of Israel 
from Pharaoh’s Egypt is probably the most significant 
migration in the history of western civilization — a migration 
resulting from one people’s refusal to be enslaved by another. 
 
This refusal and the subsequent events led directly to the 
founding of the principal institutions of our civilization and the 
creation of two of the major religions of the world. 
 
Passover then represents a belief in tolerance, in freedom, and 
in the collective struggle for the rights of people. 
 
So on this very important weekend I say, be well, shalom, and 
thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Hospital Bed Crisis 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis there’s more 
evidence of a hospital bed crisis here in the city of Regina. 
Today we read that an 80-year-old stroke victim wasn’t 
admitted because there was no available beds. We also hear an 
Oxbow man express frustration because his father’s surgery 
was also delayed. He suggests, if people are missing surgery, 
they must be dying. 
 
And how does the Premier respond? He says these concerns 
will be alleviated after the Plains hospital closes. This 
government doesn’t get it. There is already a bed crisis and 
there are no plans to fund more beds once the Plains closes or if 
the Plains closes. But the Premier doesn’t stop there. He also 
adds that the Regina Health District could even cut more beds 
without harming services if doctors discharged people earlier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder this government’s approval rating 
is at its lowest level since being elected. They have lost touch. 
They refuse to acknowledge the health care crisis, but worst of 
all it appears that they just don’t care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Labour Force Survey 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
March labour force survey, courtesy of Statistics Canada, is out. 
And once again it contains good news for Saskatchewan 
workers, Saskatchewan working youth, and the Saskatchewan 
economy in general, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan unemployment rate for March 1998 was 6.3 
per cent, more than a full percentage point better than in March 
a year ago. Although Saskatchewan’s labour force, Mr. 
Speaker, increased by 9,500 last March, there are 4,800 fewer 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

persons unemployed as well. There were 466,600 people 
employed in Saskatchewan last month — at the end of the 
winter, before spring planting begins, by the way — 14,300 
more, Mr. Speaker, than the number employed March a year 
ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the fact I really like from this report. 
Contrary to what the members opposite say, the children who 
are supposedly leaving this province in droves does not happen. 
People are now coming in, and in this age group are working 
more than ever before. The age group 15 to 24, 71,800 people 
are working in this age category, Mr. Speaker. That’s 500 more 
than a year ago. 
 
Good programs, Mr. Speaker, frugal government, confident, 
hard-working people — all make for good employment 
statistics. And behind every statistic, Mr. Speaker, is a worker 
and a family contributing to our economy here in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Easter/Passover Celebration 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
weekend brings us an important holiday. Easter is an ancient 
historical holiday that happens on the first Sunday after the full 
moon that occurs on or after the spring equinox. 
 
There are many customs that relate to Easter. Some are based 
on historical beliefs and others are based on conventional 
customs. Christians celebrate Easter as the religious holiday 
commemorating the resurrection and ascension into heaven of 
Jesus Christ. 
 
The Christian celebration of Easter is related to the Jewish 
festival of Passover, which is celebrated around the same time 
of the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both the cycle of nature and our religion make this 
a time of renewal and rebirth. 
 
On behalf of the Liberal opposition I wish all members and 
staff, their families, and all the people of Saskatchewan the very 
best this holiday weekend. To those who follow the Christian 
calendar, I say happy Easter, and to our Jewish friends, I say 
happy Passover. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Edam First Responders 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the second year 
in a row, Edam first responders have been hailed the best in the 
province. The team captured the skills competition title in 
Saskatoon in March. 
 
George Greening, Julie Levasseaur, and Kevin Foulds 
demonstrated their mastery of first responders skills and 
abilities as they captured first place once again. The provincial 
skills competition is held in conjunction with the first response 
conference where first responders from across the province 
showcase their skills and share their knowledge. 

The skills competition is designed to test a number of skills 
required in emergency situations, and I’m very proud of the first 
responders in my area. The Edam team was pitted against 
competitors from across the north-west. 
 
The second consistent victory by the Edam squad is a testament 
both to the hard work and dedication of Julie, George, and 
Kevin, and to their training program, which is supervised by 
Troy Heystek. 
 
I congratulate all competitors at the first responders skills 
competition and encourage them to continue refining their skills 
in the pursuit to provide high quality of pre-hospital care that 
the residents of Saskatchewan have come to expect. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Concerns 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the last couple of 
weeks I’ve received over a thousand letters from Thunder Creek 
households worried about health care. While the Premier says 
he cares and his minister and colleagues say everything is okay, 
my constituents are telling the real story. 
 
I have before me a letter from Susan McNutt of the Moose Jaw 
district. Susan writes and I quote: 
 

With only one MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) in 
Saskatchewan and such a waiting-list, some people who 
need an MRI done cannot wait. They have to go to Alberta. 
 

Ms. McNutt since has phoned me and told me that she is one of 
those people now waiting on one of this government’s 
all-too-long waiting-lists. After spending two weeks at the 
Plains she’s been at home waiting for two months to hear when 
she will get an MRI to find out what’s wrong with her. 
 
She would go to Alberta, but like too many people in 
Saskatchewan she doesn’t have the money and still hopes her 
own province can give her the care she needs, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, Ms. McNutt is, as we speak, trying to take care of her 
children and still run a cattle operation to support her family. 
All the while she continues to suffer from an unknown ailment 
and endures headaches, nausea, and other torments. Like many 
others however, Mr. Speaker, she continues to wait. 
 
I’ll send copies of this letter across to the Premier and the 
Minister of Health and ask them to make this certain woman . . . 
or get this woman the care that she needs. In closing, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll leave the Premier with an inspirational quote . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member’s time has expired. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Channel Lake 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 
weeks now the Saskatchewan Party has been saying NDP 
ministers knew what was going on in Channel Lake every step 
of the way. We now have a Justice department legal opinion 
that says exactly the same thing. 



April 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

The Justice department concluded that Jack Messer could not be 
fired with cause because the SaskPower board and the CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) board knew 
about his illegal activities and they did nothing to stop him. In 
fact they condoned and concealed his illegal gas trading 
activities starting as far back as 1994. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many NDP ministers who are still in cabinet have 
been on the SaskPower board and the CIC board since 1994. 
Those ministers must start taking responsibility. My question is 
for the Minister of Energy, the former SaskPower minister: why 
did you and your colleagues condone and conceal Jack 
Messer’s illegal gas trading activities as indicated in the Justice 
department’s report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Words used by the member 
opposite are loose and, I would argue, misleading, because the 
opinion is very clear in the Deloitte Touche report — and you 
know because I’ve quoted it many times in the House — the 
words are used that incomplete — incomplete — information 
was given to the board in an untimely fashion and decisions 
were made without proper briefing from the officials. 
 
Now the headline in the Leader-Post confirms the issue of 
whether or not information came in a timely and a complete 
fashion. This is what the debate is all about. This is what the 
debate is all about. Now you will pick the words that you 
choose, but the issue of the inquiry, the issue of the inquiry is to 
do the interviews — all of them, not selectively as you would 
want to do for political reasons — but listen to all of the 
individuals in the hearing process and then come to a 
conclusion. Otherwise this will be very difficult because you’ll 
have to do all of the interviews, listen carefully . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, this is not my conclusion; it’s 
the Justice department’s conclusion. The Justice department 
says CIC became aware of Jack Messer’s illegal gas trading 
activities on March 14, 1994 through a report by David 
Dombowsky. The Justice department’s legal opinion dated 
March 4, 1998 says, and I quote: 
 

The gas trading activities engaged in by Channel Lake 
clearly went much beyond the mandate authorized by 
SaskPower’s board. This may have constituted just cause 
for (Jack Messer’s) dismissal. However, his activities and 
the gas trading itself were condoned by CIC failing to 
order Mr. Messer to cease after becoming aware of the 
trading through the Dombowsky report. SaskPower’s 
board also condoned the gas trading activities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there’s about a dozen current ministers who 
served on the board since that report. To whichever minister 
wants to answer: why did you cover up this activity? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what the member 
knows is nothing, but nothing he is raising today wasn’t already 
made public in the Deloitte Touche report. It was clear four 

weeks ago — four weeks ago — that there was unauthorized 
gas trading. We knew that. We knew that. 
 
You’re not digging anything out or finding anything new. The 
words “unauthorized gas trading” was talked about four weeks 
ago. Four weeks ago. Now the member here . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Now . . . Order! 
Order. Hon. members, all hon. members: Order! Order. The 
question was quite audible and able to be heard. Now I’m 
having great difficulty being able to hear the minister provide 
the response because of the continuous commentary from the 
official opposition. And I will ask for the cooperation of the 
House to enable the minister’s response to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The issue here is, as the member raises, the issue of 
the potential of unauthorized gas trading. We reported that to 
the House four weeks ago. We reported it to the House. It was 
in the report. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You knew. You knew! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well look, if you would read the 
report or if you would get someone to read it to you — if you 
would get someone to read it to you, it was delivered to the 
House four weeks ago — the issue now is, the issue now is the 
inquiry that’s going on where you can bring in witnesses and 
ask them the questions. Mr. Messer is coming before your 
committee; ask him those questions. I am coming, yes. And Mr. 
Lautermilch, the member of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order! Now I know the 
minister will be aware that he’s not permitted to use proper 
names of members of the House but to refer to them only by the 
position they serve here. And I’ll ask the minister to very, very, 
very quickly wrap up his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the members 
opposite, if they would have read the report they would know 
about the potential of unauthorized gas trading. We reported it. 
You’re not reporting anything here. What you’re doing is 
grandstanding, trying to dig yourself out of a hole where you’re 
losing a leadership race. That’s what you’re doing, and good 
luck to you. But I’ll tell you, the member from Kindersley is 
campaigning hard for Mr. Hermanson. 
 
And so you can try your best to bring new information to the 
House — which is four weeks old — but it isn’t working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The issue here is 
who knew about this activity. Under the heading, the 
concealment of gas trading losses, the Justice opinion says and I 
quote: 
 

. . .Channel Lake failed to file financial statements with 
CIC in the Legislative Assembly as required. 
 
. . . such failure was in fact condoned by both SaskPower’s 
board and CIC . . . 
 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

. . . the failure by both SaskPower’s board and CIC to order 
production of these financial statements in a timely fashion 
is fatal . . . 
 

So first of all you conceal the illegal gas trading activity. You 
conceal the fact that there is million of dollars of trading losses. 
It’s not my conclusion. It’s the Justice department’s conclusion, 
and that means every minister knew what was going on. My 
question is, why did you conceal these facts and try to cover 
them up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Again I say to the member 
opposite, it’s been concealed so well that for the last four weeks 
it’s laid on the Table here, if someone would have read the 
report to you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, exactly, that 
there was the potential of unauthorized gas trading. 
 
That’s what you’re saying today, and that it was reported in an 
untimely manner to the board. We all know that. We admitted 
it; we said mistakes had been made and now we’re doing an 
inquiry, and we delivered a thousand documents to you; well 
you say it’s a cover-up. 
 
Look, when Grant Devine was the premier of the province . . . 
and the member from Kindersley, who is now going to get to 
his feet, and supported Grant Devine as the leader, now 
pretending not to be a Tory for political reasons, will get up and 
talk about open government. 
 
Here you try to get the Public Accounts Committee shut down. 
We give you a thousand documents and you talk about 
cover-up. Look, it’s nonsense and it’s ridiculous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, my 
questions are for you this morning. The minister keeps saying 
this whole sorry mess is going to be reviewed by the Crown 
Corporations Committee. Let’s just for a moment take a look at 
who’s on that committee. These are some of the very same 
people involved in the cover-up. 
 
On March 14, 1994 when David Dombowsky first reported the 
illegal gas trading activity to CIC, who were one of the 
members on the board of CIC at that time? It was none other 
than the NDP member from Regina Dewdney, and it was also 
the NDP member and current Provincial Secretary. And these 
two jokers are sitting on the committee today . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The hon. member 
will acknowledge, I’m sure, that he has just engaged in the use 
of language that is not parliamentary. I’ll ask him to withdraw 
the remark and proceed directly to his question. He’s been 
lengthy in his preamble. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I withdraw that remark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These two members are now sitting on the committee that’s 
supposed to be reviewing this mess. They were part of the 
cover-up then and they’re part of the cover-up now. 
 
Mr. Premier, this is a huge conflict of interest, having those 
members on that committee. Will you immediately remove 

these two members from the Crown Corporations Committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite that the cover-up that you talk about, the cover-up, 
now let’s follow this cover-up through. 
 
When we found out about it in December, we called — we did 
— called on CIC officials to do a review which led to a 
complete review by Deloitte Touche. And we brought the 
reports here to the Assembly. 
 
And we set up the CIC committee to . . . the Crown 
Corporations Committee to do a review and we’ve delivered a 
thousand documents. This is the cover-up you talk about. 
 
Now I would like you, sir, I would like you, sir, if you’re being 
honest, to compare it to your government, the Grant Devine 
government, on any issue — on any issue — and tell me when, 
ever, any documents to this extent or openness was followed by 
that administration. It was never. 
 
And so I would say if you can’t be honest, maybe it’s you who 
should resign. Maybe it’s you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, if these 
hearings were being held in a court, this would be immediate 
grounds for a mistrial. This is a massive conflict of interest. We 
may have to call those two members who were involved with 
the cover-up at that time, and now they’re sitting on the 
committee. 
 
Let’s just go through this again. Your Department of Justice 
says you have to pay Jack Messer severance because CIC knew 
about the illegal activity in 1994 and condoned it. The member 
from Regina Dewdney was the Vice-Chair of CIC at the time, 
and the current Provincial Secretary has been the Chair of CIC 
since that time, and those two now are leading the cover-up in 
Crown Corporations Committee for you, sir. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s now time to clean up this entire mess, clean up 
the cover-up, come clean with the people of Saskatchewan. Will 
you do the right thing for all of Saskatchewan and call a public 
inquiry so we can get to the bottom of this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Now we know what the motive is 
here. The most disruptive member of the committee — the most 
disruptive member of the committee — who tried to advise his 
caucus, who tried to advise his caucus that the Public Accounts 
Committee shouldn’t sit . . . 
 
This is what he did in a disruptive manner — which he always 
does — got his Chair of Public Accounts in deep water for not 
calling the committee and then he gets moved to Crown 
Corporations Committee. He’s still stinging on that, and he 
doesn’t want the committee to work. 
 
Unlike other members of the opposition, who say we have 
received every document — every document — that the 
opposition asked for. That’s what was said yesterday. Now why 



April 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

do you, sir, former Conservative member, supporter of Grant 
Devine, who ran up a debt of $15 billion, why don’t you want 
the process to work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Health Care 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Health indicated twice in the past week that he had a solution to 
the bed crisis in Regina. The minister stated in Assiniboia on 
Tuesday night, to the absolute horror . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order! Order. I will ask, I will ask all hon. 
members to come to order including the third, including the 
third party House Leader, who shouts from his chair at the 
Chair. Order! All hon. members will, all hon. members will 
come to order now. Order. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister stated 
in Assiniboia on Tuesday night, to the absolute horror of the 
people in attendance, that perhaps the solution is to boot people 
from hospital sooner. And what does the Premier say? He 
agrees, adding, and I quote: “The district could cut more beds 
without harming services if doctors discharge people earlier.” 
 
Patients are already being booted out so fast they have to take 
an ambulance, not only to the hospital, but from the hospital, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, are you hearing from 
doctors or nurses that patients are staying too long in hospital? 
Or are you just simple hearing from your NDP bean counters? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health 
from the government, plus several other members of the 
government caucus, were very pleased to attend the meeting in 
Assiniboia and to participate in the meeting. I want to tell you 
what they told the folks in Assiniboia. 
 
And by the way, having reviewed Pasqua Hospital and the 
construction, and the construction at General Hospital, I can 
report to this House that the bed numbers for Regina will not be 
reduced at all. Not only will they not be reduced, there will be 
greater efficiencies in the provisions of the services. There will 
be an MRI; there’ll be a world-class, first-class renal cardiac 
unit. 
 
Southern Saskatchewan is going to get the best quality health 
care ever once this project is complete in October of 1998. 
People know that. What I would ask the hon. Liberals opposite 
is to stop spreading misinformation about this issue and, if 
they’re really interested in health care, to come to the aid of this 
government in asking the Liberal counterparts in Ottawa to stop 
dismantling medicare and start building it like we are here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, people in rural areas are alarmed 
by other comments made by the minister as well. And they fear 
they maybe signal the next phase of the government’s so-called 
health reform. 
 

The minister told the crowd in Assiniboia that he now has rural 
hospitals with an average daily count that is below capacity. 
And he asked the crowd: what do you expect me to do with 
these hospitals? We know that the minister has been involved in 
other meetings in which rural health care was the focus. He’s 
used the term, consolidation, and of course, consolidation is just 
another word, Mr. Premier, for closure. 
 
Mr. Premier, are more rural hospitals on the chopping block in 
the next phase of your government’s so-called health reform? 
And can you give us the names of these hospitals that you’re 
going to cut? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, of course the hon. 
member opposite who, I say with the greatest respect, probably 
does not understand the fundamental concepts of medicare 
since he advocates a two-tier system for health care. This is on 
the record of Hansard, and the people of Saskatchewan will be 
told this over and over and over again in the months ahead. The 
member opposite obviously does not understand nor does he 
accept. 
 
He belongs to a political party which historically has fought 
medicare’s establishment. He belongs to a political party which 
today on a national basis is decimating the health care system. 
 
We in Saskatchewan are putting in $1.7 billion. The highest 
expenditure for health care in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan, with no bed loss for Regina, and the finest 
service for southern Saskatchewan come October when the 
switch is made over. This is going to be a state-of-the-art health 
care system. That’s our commitment to health care, and not 
yours, which is an abandonment of . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North Battleford Emergency Services 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For years anesthetists 
in North Battleford have provided weekend on-call services, but 
not this holiday weekend. For months they have been warning 
that they will withdraw on-call services unless an agreement is 
in place. 
 
But the government has simply ignored the situation and done 
absolutely nothing. As a result, there is no on-call list now in 
Battlefords Union Hospital. Surgeries cannot be performed 
even on an emergency basis at this regional care centre. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is a holiday weekend. Thousands of families 
will be on the road — we are on the Yellowhead national 
highway system — tragedies may occur. 
 
Tell this House, what are you doing to ensure emergency care 
in the Battlefords, an on-call anesthetist list? What are you 
going to do besides simply saying, ship them to Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I have every confidence that, 
with respect to any emergency that may arise, that will be dealt 
with by physicians and anesthetists in the Battlefords and 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

elsewhere in a professional manner, Mr. Speaker. A 
professional manner that does not involve the kind of 
fearmongering we hear day after day from the Liberals and 
Conservatives, that people aren’t going to have health care, Mr. 
Speaker. People are going to continue to have health care. 
 
And on a case-by-case basis, if there are any emergencies in the 
Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, those emergencies are going to be 
dealt with by the health care system in the professional and 
excellent manner that they always are. And the professional 
medical people in the Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, are going to act 
professionally, as they always do, and people are going to be 
taken care of. 
 
And this is not the politics of fact, Mr. Speaker, that we hear 
day after day from the opposition; this is the politics of fear, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what it is. And we’re going to continue 
doing what we do do, which is provide the best health care 
system in the world here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Speaker, the 
minister is certainly correct if he says there’s a lot of fear out 
there, but that fear is generated by you, not by us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Gas Supply Contract 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I’d like to follow up on that, but unfortunately 
there are so many issues that have to be raised against this 
government, it’s like shooting fish in a barrel. Liberal research 
has uncovered yet more damning evidence that the taxpayers of 
this province are continuing to pay for your mismanagement 
and poor judgement. 
 
I’m specifically referring to the 10-year, exclusive contract with 
DEML (Direct Energy Marketing Limited) by SaskPower, 
which industry experts now tell us is a sweetheart deal. Experts 
in the gas industry have advised us that the gas supply contract 
is nothing but a gift. The management fees that will be paid to 
DEML are triple the industry average — not equal to, not 
double to, but triple industry standards. 
 
Will the minister explain why we are going to pay three times 
industry standards to DEML for 10 years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, again the 10-year gas 
contract we’ve debated a number of times in the Assembly over 
the last month. And we’ve talked about its relationship to the 
Channel Lake sale. All of this is under review by the inquiry of 
Crown Corporations Committee, and the documentation is 
there. 
 
My understanding of the arrangement of the commission that 
DEML will get on the arrangement has nothing to do with the 
price of gas. It’s a flow-through of the gas price, so they make 
no money on the gas and their commission ranges between 1 
and 3 per cent — 3 per cent for the first amount of gigajoules, 
then 2 per cent, then 1 per cent. But it’s also my understanding 

that it’s within a range that’s acceptable within the industry. 
 
Now when the officials come to the committee, I would urge 
the member, who I understand is not an expert on commissions 
for gas, as I am not . . . but the range of 3 to 1 per cent is within 
industry standards. Now if that is not true, we should be 
challenging our officials in the committee, and I would urge 
you to do that. But for you to come here and act as if you’ve 
found some new, important piece of information, when it’s been 
discussed for 30 days here in the House day after day, is not 
accurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday was the first day we 
could consult with industry experts to ask if this contract is an 
average or if it’s a gift. And they told us it’s a gift. They’re 
telling us that DEML may make up to $10 million in excess 
profits over what industry standard would call for. I would 
remind the government that you tore up the GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) contracts claiming that they were 
too rich, too generous to the farmers of this province. 
 
Industry experts are telling us this contract is too rich, that it 
gouges us. It gouges us by the same people who hoodwinked us 
over the sale in the first place. Why are you paying $10 million 
to DEML over and above industry standards? That’s what the 
industry experts tell us. Why are you doing this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Again I would say to the member 
opposite that the contract — the 10-year contract, supply 
contract, for SaskPower which resulted in part as the sale of 
Channel Lake — is being reviewed by the committee. Now I 
would ask you the officials’ names who you’ve consulted so 
they can come to the committee and give their explanation to 
the committee. 
 
Will you provide for the House the names of the officials that 
you have consulted with today? Will you give them to us today? 
Because what I want to do is be able to confirm and bring these 
officials to the committee. Is it . . . Who are they? What 
experience do they have? Because the officials in SaskPower 
tell me that the range of 1 to 3 per cent is within industry 
standards. Now if you have information from officials, bring 
them here, give us the names, because we want to hear it in the 
committee as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the revelations yesterday raised 
real questions as to what we really got for the sale of Channel 
Lake. Did we sell it for 15 million? Well not if part of the deal 
was a gift back to the purchasers of $10 million. Let’s do the 
arithmetic, Mr. Minister. 
 
We sold Channel Lake for 15 million, but over the next 10 
years we give 10 million back to the purchasers, in excessive 
fees. That leaves $5 million we sold Channel Lake for — that’s 
all. So we didn’t sell it for 27 million or 21 million or 15 
million, we sold it for 5 million. Will you admit that’s the net, 
that’s all we got for dumping Channel Lake? 



April 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I thought Grant 
Devine’s math was bad, but I’ll tell you, if you were running 
the economy of the province with that kind of arithmetic . . . 
and the member laughs from his seat, the member laughs from 
his seat. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, you came here with 
great credibility and we expect more from you than this kind of 
phoney-baloney arithmetic where you say that the commission, 
if it is within the range of industry, that then you say this is part 
of the sale price, you know that isn’t accurate. You know that 
isn’t accurate. 
 
So what I would urge you to do, which you didn’t do when you 
stood on your feet, is give me the names of the industry officials 
who say that a range from 3 to 1 per cent is not within industry 
standard. Go outside the House, go outside the House if you 
have credibility and give the names to the press today. Do it 
today. Give it to us. Because I don’t think that you’re being 
totally honest in what you’re bringing to the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Rail-line Abandonment 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to defend the interests of grain producers in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Federal government inaction is 
facilitating the planned abandonment of the rail line from Prince 
Albert to Birch Hills, a line known as the CN (Canadian 
National) Tisdale subdivision. 
 
Just two days ago this Assembly urged the federal Liberal 
government to immediately halt all rail-line abandonment 
projects until the Estey grain review has completed its work, 
submitted its recommendations to the federal government, and 
those recommendations have been given due and thorough 
consideration with a view to providing maximum benefit to 
grain producers. 
 
Our government has been demanding time and time again that 
the federal government use its influence to prevent the railways 
from dismantling our rail system during the Estey review. For 
the Estey review to be credible, the federal government must 
halt branch-line abandonment while the review is under way. It 
makes absolutely no sense to be reviewing a system that is 
being dismantled while the review is taking place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have written to and discussed this very irritant 
issue with the federal Minister of Transport on several 
occasions. And I’ve received assurances from Mr. Collenette 
that Canada transportation Act is working as it should and that 
railways will behave in a reasonable and responsible manner 

when lines are put up for abandonment. 
 
Today I provide a prime example of how the Canada 
transportation Act is not working, of how the rail companies are 
not being reasonable, and exactly why there must be a halt to 
branch-line abandonment during the Estey review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 21-mile CN subdivision from Birch Hills to 
Prince Albert is at serious risk. This past December, CN 
announced the line would be discontinued and sold for salvage 
if a buyer could not be found to continue to operate it. 
 
Removal of this short section of track will remove the only 
direct rail link to the Port of Churchill from Prince Albert. It 
will destroy the viability of the entire CN line from Prince 
Albert to Hudson Bay. This rail line is a strategic, east-west link 
for our entire province. This section of rail line serves the Port 
of Churchill, a port that as we speak is undergoing a 
multimillion-dollar refit. A port that farmers in Saskatchewan 
have long supported. 
 
What sets this Tisdale subdivision apart from some others that 
are in the process of being abandoned is that this line is not 
only important for local producers but also for the long-term 
economic interests of our province. Mr. Speaker, SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), and the 
department commissioned a study to look at rail lines in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Birch Hills to Prince Albert line was clearly identified by 
that study as a strategic rail link for central and north-east 
Saskatchewan. As a result, my department is working diligently 
to examine all options that will prevent the removal of the 
Tisdale subdivision. We are currently working with the 
communities in Prince Albert and Birch Hills area to identify 
options. We are attempting to negotiate with CN to save this 
rail line. 
 
This government cannot and will not stand by and watch as this 
important link in our province’s core rail system is ripped out. 
Abandonment of small sections of branch lines is clearly in 
CN’s best interest and not in the best interest of grain producers 
and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canada transportation Act does not work. This 
lack of action on the rail-line abandonment issue by the federal 
government is totally unacceptable. There must be a halt to 
abandonment during the grain review. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me the opportunity to 
bring this important issue to the Assembly’s attention today. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
glad to have the opportunity to rise to the minister’s statement 
this morning, and I very much agree with her that the 21-mile 
CN subdivision from Birch Hills to Prince Albert is very 
important to northern Saskatchewan and actually the whole 
province. We realize when the rail-line abandonment happens 
the cost to our roads are astronomical. 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would somewhat question the minister’s 
sincerity when she says this morning, I rise today to defend the 
interest of grain producers, because we’ve saw the stand that the 
Agriculture minister has taken with grain producers in 
supporting Bill C-4 and wanting it hurried through when hardly 
one farmer that I’ve talked to supports that Bill. 
 
She also goes on to say that she supports or gets up to defend 
rural Saskatchewan. Well if they were defending . . . this 
government was defending rural Saskatchewan, why have you 
been downloading on them for the last seven or eight years, to 
municipalities. Even last year, for an example, $29 million. 
 
I mean you can’t do it both ways. You get up one minute and 
support rural people and the next minute you cut the funding off 
that was there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government was also serious, successor 
rights come into this problem. If you really wanted to help 
short-line rail, abolish successor rights. Every group we talk to 
it is a problem. It’s not the only problem but it’s one of the main 
problems. 
 
And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, even though that we agree 
with the moratorium, Mr. Ralph Goodale and the federal 
government has wroten off agriculture. I agree with the 
government. They have done absolutely nothing out here to 
help sustain agriculture in this province. 
 
But I also think that Saskatchewan Agriculture minister has 
done the same. We saw GRIP go and we’ve saw every program 
that was out there really helping agriculture disappear under his 
tutelage. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if this government believes in moratoriums 
they could go one step further. Why don’t we have one for the 
Plains Health Centre then? If a moratorium is good in one spot 
it certainly is good with the Plains Health Centre. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I have said, I support the minister in this 
respect, on the moratorium on short-line rails, but I think this 
government could go a lot further in doing their part for 
Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 
opportunity to speak to the minister here this morning and her 
government. I do find it rather humorous that this government 
and this minister would stand in defence of grain producers in 
this province, even what has been their record. We don’t have 
to speak on federal issues, issues of federal jurisdiction, to 
know just how little agriculture means to this government. 
 
We had the issue of the GRIP contract being torn up. We’ve 
had an agriculture budget that saw nothing but slash and burn 
since this government came into power. So it is rather 
humorous to hear a minister of this government rise in defence 
of grain producers in this province, because it just goes to show 
the hollow rhetoric that we hear from the members across, the 
hollering from the members, the back-benchers; that’s all they 
can do. But I know there’s nothing they can do within their own 
caucus to influence the cabinet ministers, the one which we’ve 

heard here this afternoon as well. 
 
It’s also interesting to hear this government now finally getting 
on the same page of the book as the Liberal opposition and the 
Tory Party as well. For the last two years, for the last two years 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now I will ask for the 
cooperation of members — all members on both sides of the 
House — to allow the hon. member for Thunder Creek to be — 
order — to allow the hon. member for Thunder Creek to be able 
to provide his response to the ministerial statement in an 
uninterrupted manner. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very interesting 
to see that this government would finally get on the same page 
of the book as the Liberal opposition. As I was trying to say 
earlier before I was shouted down, the Liberal opposition in this 
province for two years now has been asking for a halt to 
rail-line abandonment — so this isn’t a new issue — well 
before the Estey Commission was ever struck, and certainly we 
still do support that rail-line abandonment be halted until after 
this review is completed. 
 
I also find it interesting — and I have to quote what the minister 
said here this morning, saying, I quote, “This government 
cannot and will not stand by and watch as this important link in 
our province’s core rail system is ripped out.” 
 
Well that sounds mighty fine, Mr. Speaker, but are they 
prepared to back that rhetoric up with some bucks? Is that what 
we’re talking about here? Is this finally a branch line . . . finally 
is this a short-line candidate that this province is ready to 
support? Well maybe. Perhaps we can read between the lines 
here. 
 
But I would suggest that it’s nothing more than some hollow 
rhetoric again from this government. And that’s all that 
agriculture has been able to enjoy since this government came 
to power in 1991. 
 
Now the minister also mentions how the lack of action on 
rail-line abandonment by the federal government is totally 
unacceptable. But I think equally as unacceptable is this 
government’s lack of action on fixing up our failing highway 
system in this province. 
 
The highway system in this province is in shambles. We’re 
hearing daily from people with problems related to hitting the 
potholes, or we’re hearing daily from people who can’t get their 
vehicles out of the trenches that are being made by all of the 
truck traffic in this province. It’s certainly a lot of grain traffic, 
but all kinds of truck traffic — everything moves by truck these 
days — and it’s something that people are saying to us, the 
government has to start taking some action, beyond words. 
 
(1100) 
 
Fifteen years isn’t soon enough to twin the Trans-Canada 
Highway they’re telling us. And it’s certain a 10-year project 
that we’ve been talking about since last year’s budget of putting 
some piddly amounts additional into the highway system just 
isn’t going to cut it. 



April 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

We need a lot more attention paid to the transportation system 
in this province. And that’s where this government should start 
doing a little bit of homework instead of trying to lead 
everybody off down the path of, let’s all go off and attack the 
federal government for what they’re not doing. We’ve already 
been there. We’re doing that when it’s needed. But get back to 
the business of doing what you should be doing, which is 
dealing with what you change here. 
 
I heard, I heard that the UGG (United Grain Growers Limited) 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order, order. Now the 
minister’s statement . . . Order. Order. Now the hon. member 
has the floor. You need not to be shouting across the floor while 
the Chair is on his feet. I recognize that the minister’s statement 
— order — I recognize that the minister’s statement was quite 
lengthy, inordinately lengthy this morning, and that — order — 
and that in response the hon. member has already spoken longer 
than the minister. And I will ask the hon. member if he wishes 
to make one final comment in conclusion. I’ll permit him that, 
but then we will proceed. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. One final 
comment. I heard the UGG president on the radio this morning 
saying that their company is prepared to stop the closure of 
elevators on branch lines until this review is completed. I’d 
suggest that this government could do a lot to influence other 
big grain companies in getting them to stop closing elevators on 
these branch lines as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave to 
comment on the ministerial statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to begin by thanking the minister for sending her 
ministerial statement to me this morning. 
 
It’s a very interesting time of year. We’re gearing up for 
pre-seeding, Mr. Speaker. And my comments will be brief, but 
indeed they will convey what I’ve been hearing as I’ve been 
going throughout rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve been very, very fortunate each and every year since about 
1985 to participate in rural municipality ratepayer supper 
meetings, to meet with and speak with people in every corner of 
the province. And I think what was conveyed to me last week, 
this past week, really is reflective of concerns across the 
province amongst farm families. 
 
They are faced with a tremendous number of stressors which 
have not changed: the stressors of unpredictability of weather, 
unpredictability of machinery breakdown, pest disease and crop 
failure, government policies and regulations, low commodity 
prices with limited cash flow, high input costs and so forth. And 
this is one area that genuinely does disturb them. It concerns 
them and it should concern all of us. 
 
But one of the things that’s overriding all things is that when 

this government came into power, Mr. Speaker, there were 
many, many people from every political stripe that 
accompanied this government to Ottawa to talk about the prices 
in agriculture and what could be done. Each and every one of 
these people who participated in that trek have said the same 
thing to me, that this particular administration has shown no 
vision, no direction for agriculture, and they most certainly have 
not shown a commitment to it by their actions. 
 
So I think it indeed does ring hollow today to listen to these 
words, because people don’t simply want to have a government 
say words. They want a government to take action. And it is 
with a heavy heart that I must admit that I too, in accompanying 
this group to Ottawa, say that they have not followed through, 
they have not provided commitment, they most certainly have 
not provided direction, and there is no vision to save rural 
Saskatchewan from this administration. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — I would, by leave, comment briefly on the 
statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to all 
colleagues in the Assembly for offering me this opportunity to 
speak briefly to the ministerial statement. Madam Minister, I 
say directly to you I support your initiative on this issue 
unequivocally . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member will 
recognize of course, that in bringing debate to the House he’s to 
direct it through the Chair, and I’ll request that he do it in the 
normal manner. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll rephrase that. 
Mr. Speaker, through you I will say to the minister 
unequivocally, I would support you in this initiative and on this 
issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Having said that, Mr. Speaker, and given that 
unequivocal support to the minister, I want to say also to you 
and through you, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, that perhaps we 
should broaden your horizons a little on this issue. You talked 
about the CN, and of course that’s the railroad that basically 
occupies the north part of our province. CPR (Canadian Pacific 
Railway) of course, is in the South. 
 
And while I’m not too sure how many branch lines there are in 
Saskatoon, in the Cypress Hills, which comprises 10,000 square 
miles in my constituency, we do have branch lines, and this is a 
real problem. And of course CPR are the villains in this part of 
the world. 
 
We have the Notukeu line, Mr. Speaker, that I would 
particularly like the minister to put as an addition to her notes as 
she travels to Ottawa, either by letter or by telephone or by 
travelling there. It travels of course, through Shaunavon, 
Eastend, Consul, and Frontier, in those communities, and it is 
under threat of disappearing. That’s a major part of miles and 
miles that will be without service. 
 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

We are in threat of losing the Hazlet line, and of course that line 
over to Fox Valley that now goes through Leader. That’s an 
extremely important line to the other part of our constituency. It 
would leave us with a main line basically through that entire 
part of the province, and it’s a big part of the province. And it’s 
many, many miles for trucks to travel. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I ask you on behalf of the constituents to 
include those arguments along with your own. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’d request leave of the 
Assembly to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce a person who has travelled down to Regina from 
Nipawin and who has travelled many times representing his 
constituents in the last legislature in this House. And I’m 
talking about Mr. Tom Keeping, who is sitting in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to tell Mr. Keeping that we miss his poetry. I suspect 
there is a reason for being here, is he’s to look over the 
opposition to see which one of those seats he’s going to 
challenge in the next election. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also 
like to welcome Mr. Tom Keeping to the Assembly today. We 
too miss your poetry, and I’d like to wish you a happy Easter. 
And as far as a seat that may be available, look over at the 
corner; it’s right there. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
welcome Tom. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce 
one further guest in your gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and all 
members. I would like to introduce a visitor to your gallery 
today, Mr. Speaker, that is also well-known to many members 
in this House because he spent a fair bit of time working in this 
building serving constituents and constituencies across this 
province. And I point to Mr. Lorne Hill, who is in your gallery, 
a constituent of mine, very active in our community, as you can 
tell by the shirt he wears today, very active in amateur hockey. 
So I would like all members to join with me in greeting Lorne 

Hill to the gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to submit a full 
and complete answer to question no. 25 as requested, and with 
leave also submit the answer to question no. 26. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to questions 25 and 26 are 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Certified General Accountants 
Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 16, The Certified General 
Accountants Amendment Act, 1998. This Bill furthers our 
government’s goal of simplifying and streamlining 
Saskatchewan’s legislation by repealing The Accredited Public 
Accountants Act. 
 
In 1987 the accredited public accountants merged with the 
certified general accountants. At that time the accredited public 
accountants received the certified general accountants 
designation so they all became CGAs (certified general 
accountant). As a result, there have been no accredited public 
accountants in Saskatchewan since 1987. This Act will continue 
to prohibit use of the designated initials previously awarded to 
the accredited public accountants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Also this legislation restricts the 
designation, Hon. CGA, only to those who have been granted 
an honorary membership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see that members of this House have long 
awaited these changes, and so I’m happy to move An Act to 
amend The Certified General Accountants Amendment Act, 
and I move An Act to amend The Certified General 
Accountants Amendment Act, 1994, be read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
certainly respect the reasons that have been brought forward for 
this particular piece of legislation. In fact when our caucus has 
been looking at it, we don’t see any real problems, any real 
reasons to hold it up. 
 
I believe it’s, as we saw in 1987, the attempt at that time to 
simplify the process. This just goes one step further and 
addresses some of the concerns regarding the title of CGA hon. 



April 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, as we look at it very carefully, it just 
seems to be common sense. And therefore seeing there’s no 
reason to hold it up and allow the business . . . in showing 
cooperation from the opposition, which is hard to do on many 
occasions, we will allow this Bill to proceed to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 17  The Certified Management Consultants Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 17, The Certified Management 
Consultants Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This is a new Bill, Mr. Speaker. For the 
past two years we have been consulting with the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Certified Management Consultants on the 
development of self-governing legislation. The outcome of that 
process is the Act before you today. We are extremely pleased 
that with the cooperation of the management-consulting 
profession, this has been brought to a successful conclusion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Certified management consultants are 
widely utilized. Their clientele includes industry, municipal, 
provincial, and federal governments, Crown corporations, and 
small businesses. Certified management consultants are valued 
for their expertise in human resources, financial planning, 
strategic management, marketing, and operations management. 
 
Currently there are no standards to determine who can be a 
management consultant in Saskatchewan. The number of 
consultants is growing and the quality of advice they provide 
varies widely. 
 
Self-governing legislation for the institute will provide 
assurance to those who use their services that certified 
management consultants are trained and competent. It will 
reassure their clientele that the Saskatchewan certified 
management consultants meet the necessary professional 
standards. 
 
A Saskatchewan chapter of the Institute of Certified 
Management Consultants was incorporated in 1990. That 
institute is affiliated with a national institute of certified 
management consultants which has existed since 1969. 
 
This legislation gives the Saskatchewan institute the authority 
to ensure certified management consultants have the appropriate 
education and experience to provide advice on a wide variety of 
issues with which they regularly deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Through this Bill, the institute will have 
legislation comparable to that of other professions and certified 
management consultants in other jurisdictions. 
 
As with other professional legislation, a high degree of public 

accountability is required. For example, representatives of the 
public will be included on the institute’s council and 
disciplinary committee. These appointees represent the interests 
of the general public. The Act will also require the institute to 
file an annual report. In addition, bylaws that affect the public 
will require approval of the government. 
 
This Bill will come into force on a day to be fixed by the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act 
respecting Certified Management Consultants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bill that 
we have before us today is a fairly straightforward piece of 
legislation, or at least on the surface is appears to be standard 
professional association legislation. The main intent of the Bill 
is to allow certified management consultants to regulate 
themselves through a professional association. This is, however, 
Mr. Speaker, a new Bill rather than an amendment to an 
existing piece of legislation, and therefore will require a closer 
look before we allow it to pass. 
 
For starters, Mr. Speaker, this Bill highlights the diversity of 
services available in the financial sector. There are, as we all 
know, certified accountants, certified management accountants, 
certified general accountants, and so on. Whenever we are faced 
with legislation of this kind we have a duty to ensure that the 
public is clear about what the different professions do and what 
services they provide. 
 
Further, we cannot assume that legislation that is appropriate 
for one profession is appropriate for them all. 
 
The government maintains that this Bill brings professional 
standards for certified management consultants into line with 
other, similar professions. With this, as with all professional 
legislation, we want to be very careful to determine what these 
standards are and whether they are the best for the serving the 
needs of the public and of the profession. 
 
Further, this Bill and others like it bring in some relatively new 
concepts to professional ethical standards, such as one 
professional’s duty to report the offences of a colleague. We 
would be negligent if we did not give careful consideration, 
whenever such measures are discussed, to spell out exactly 
what these duties are and how they impact on the delivery of 
financial services. 
 
It is the usual assumption with Bills of this kind that the 
profession has been thoroughly consulted before the Bill is 
presented. While we trust that the government has likely taken 
this step, it is our duty, as the opposition, to double-check with 
the associations involved to find out what has been done. 
 
Further, it’s almost inevitable that there will be dissenting 
voices within this profession that may have different views on 
what should be included in such legislation. For these reasons 
the official opposition feels that more time should be spent on 
this Bill to cover off these concerns. Therefore, I move debate 
on this Bill be adjourned. 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Arts Board Amendment Act, 1998 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 1, The Arts Boards 
Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
The Arts Board Amendment Act proposes to remove the 
distinction between professional and vocational artists which 
currently is in the Act. This change has been requested by the 
arts community, and I’m pleased to help the community work 
toward a goal of equal and like treatment of its many diverse 
members through this amendment. 
 
The Saskatchewan Arts Board, the Saskatchewan Council of 
Cultural Organizations — now SaskCulture — and the 
Saskatchewan Arts Alliance requested these clarifying 
amendments regarding professional and vocational artists. And 
I commend them for making the request. 
 
This Act further proposes to clarify the roles and 
responsibilities of donors and the Arts Board regarding the 
endowment fund. This new fund will allow the Arts Board to 
establish a permanent capital fund which would attract 
individual and corporate sector donations in support of the arts. 
 
In response to community requests, the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board requested the addition of two clauses to clarify the intent 
of section 26 of the Act. Some potential donors expressed a 
concern that donated funds might end up in the General 
Revenue Fund rather than in the arts community. The intent of 
the original provision establishing an endowment fund in the 
Act was to have endowed monies directed for the arts in 
perpetuity. The new clause ensures that the intent is now 
airtight and it should please donors. 
 
The arts community is looking forward to changes proposed in 
this Act. I urge your support of these amendments. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to move second reading of Bill No 1, The Arts 
Board Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
The Arts Board Act, I believe, is a very important piece of 
legislation and needs to be carefully reviewed, because over 
time there has been a number of very serious discussions about 
the actions that the Arts Board was taking. And I believe that 
the minister has identified some of those when she talks about 
whether or not the funds that were being contributed for art 
development in this province were actually reaching the artists, 
or whether or not it was being used up in the General Revenue 
Fund, simply disappearing into that black hole of government. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that that particular piece 
of the Act be clarified. 
 
We also have a number of other areas in this, in The Arts Board 
Act, that we believe are of some concerns, because previously 
the board acted as an unaccountable social assistance agency for 
those that were classified as professional artists, which the 
board alone defined, Mr. Speaker. 
 

We’ve observed that in the past these professional board 
members often voted themselves large grants while rejecting 
grants to people from outside of the main urban communities 
and art communities. The people from small town 
Saskatchewan seem to get very little of the grant monies, while 
the members who were closely associated with the Arts Board 
received the majority of those particular grants. And indeed, 
Mr. Speaker, the board members often went to art gallery 
openings in places like New York and Europe. We believe that 
those are not necessarily the best ways that the Arts Board 
money should be spent, Mr. Speaker. I mentioned earlier about 
the donors that had some concerns about the monies going into 
the General Revenue Fund. Again that type of concern, Mr. 
Speaker, is hopefully going to be addressed by this and we’ll 
delve into that more later. 
 
One of the points that we need to keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, is 
that, however, that this Act is simply changing the wording of 
the Act; it does nothing about the attitudes of those who are 
appointed to the board. 
 
What the government needs to commit to, Mr. Speaker, is the 
appointment of those that were under the term avocational, or 
perhaps those that don’t include art as their entire life function, 
Mr. Speaker, that are employed other places. You might call 
them amateur artists, although their art, Mr. Speaker, is very 
good in a lot of cases. Perhaps we need more of them on the 
board of directors for the Saskatchewan Arts Board, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the final notes was the note that how donations are being 
spent are only suggestions. And at the end of the day the board 
has its own . . . can take its own advice on what it does; it does 
not have to follow the directions of the donors. We believe that 
the Arts Board needs to follow the directions of those who wish 
to contribute towards the art community in this province; that 
their general revenue funds that they receive are those that they 
can use for the other areas, but if someone says, I want to 
donate for this kind of a project, then the money should be 
directed to those projects. 
 
I think this is a positive move overall, Mr. Speaker. It’s unlike 
the attempt of the government to charge taxes on art donations 
that were coming into this province from outside. That was 
absolutely abhorrent, Mr. Speaker. It would simply attempt to 
increase the revenues of the government at the cost of art and 
artists in this province. 
 
People were becoming reluctant to donate art if the art gallery 
or museum or whoever was receiving those art donations had to 
turn around and pay taxes on that art coming in from outside of 
the province. That was absolutely wrong, Mr. Speaker. At least 
the government recognized there that they were on the wrong 
track and made the changes, but it was not until after a number 
of people complained that that happened. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to further discussions on this 
particular Bill. We look forward to the comments coming from 
the arts community on this Bill; therefore I would move that we 
adjourn debate on this Bill at the present time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



April 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I rise to begin second 
reading debate on An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation Act. 
 
The amendments are necessary for two reasons. First, because 
of the great success of Innovation Place, the world-renowned 
research and development park in Saskatoon; second, because 
of demand for development in Regina to support advanced 
technology. We want to continue to build on this success. 
 
Before I turn to the details of these legislative amendments, I 
want to talk briefly about how SOCO (Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation) is playing a key role in this 
government’s economic development strategy. Mr. Speaker, 
one of the biggest concerns of Saskatchewan people is jobs. The 
government is working to address that concern and I’m proud to 
say we’re having some success. 
 
There was a record high number of people working in our 
province last year. Even more encouraging is the fact that there 
were more young people working and there were more full-time 
jobs. We have one of the lowest unemployment rates in Canada. 
Our government uses a number of vehicles and strategies to 
help create the atmosphere for companies to expand and hire 
people. One of those vehicles is the Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation or SOCO. 
 
This provincial Crown corporation was established in 1994. 
Since then it has invested more than $23 million in a total of 44 
projects. These investments are paying off in terms of jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. Clients estimate almost 500 jobs have 
been created; more than 800 have been maintained. As well 
there have been about 1,500 part-time and temporary jobs. 
 
SOCO invests in a variety of sectors. For example, Birsay 
Livestock in Birsay; Del-Air Systems in Humboldt; Sci-Tec 
Instruments in Saskatoon; and the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa 
in Moose Jaw are just a few of the firms in which SOCO has 
invested. 
 
But investing in companies is just one part of SOCO’s mandate. 
The corporation also supports economic growth through the 
development of infrastructure which encourages business 
growth in our province. Specifically, SOCO develops and 
manages research and development parks, highly specialized 
forms of real estate. 
 
Innovation Place, the R&D (research and development) park in 
Saskatoon, has developed an international reputation as one of 
the world’s most active centres for ag-biotech research. It 
houses state-of-the-art bio-fermentation support facilities and 
specialized greenhouse research units. The park is enhancing 
our ability to compete in the global market place with our 
agriculture and value added products. 
 
Tenants include firms in the fields of agriculture, 
biotechnology, computers, pharmaceuticals, and many others. 
The park has attracted international businesses to 
Saskatchewan, including AgrEvo from Germany, Groupe 

Limagrain from France, and Monsanto from the United States. 
 
The R&D park has been extremely important in our efforts to 
create jobs and stimulate economic growth. About 1,600 people 
work at Innovation Place and it generates more than $150 
million worth of economic activity in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this year I had the pleasure of announcing 
that SOCO would be developing a new building in support of a 
research and development park at the University of Regina. 
This comes in response to demand from the growing advanced 
technology sector. This sector is a crucial one for Saskatchewan 
to build on as we compete in the information age. It will 
become even more important in the years to come as we seek to 
support innovative approaches to growing our economy. By 
investing in advanced technology now, the young people of 
Saskatchewan will be prepared to compete in the global, 
knowledge-based economy of the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a proven track record with Innovation 
Place in Saskatoon and we have a bright future with the planned 
development in Regina. SOCO’s cash flows with respect to 
R&D parks are positive. The corporation receives rental 
revenues from tenants that support its operating costs, including 
interest costs associated with its borrowings. Cash flows are 
used to partially offset depreciation and pay down debt. 
 
At the end of 1997 SOCO had borrowed $76 million for the 
development of research parks. The corporation has announced 
plans to develop a facility adjacent to the University of Regina. 
Demand for expansion from new and existing tenants at 
Innovation Place continues. 
 
In the next year or two SOCO’s capital requirements may result 
in a need to exceed the $100 million borrowing limit approved 
for the purpose of developing research parks. SOCO’s 
legislated borrowing limit related to R&D parks needs to be 
increased to $150 million so that the corporation can continue 
to support the development of innovative sectors of our 
economy and attract business investment in our province. 
 
I hasten to add the capital required for research parks is 
investment capital. It is not a grant or a subsidy. SOCO pays 
interest on the money it borrows and invests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the development of research parks has resulted in 
wealth creation and jobs for the people of our province. We are 
attracting international businesses, supporting the growth of key 
sectors, and gaining an international reputation for establishing 
sectors of strength. 
 
I believe that through responsible, coordinated development, 
R&D parks can be an effective tool for economic development. 
SOCO should be given the legislative tools necessary to carry 
out this function and therefore I urge all members to support 
these legislative amendments. 
 
I move that Bill No. 10, The Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation Amendment Act, be now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with a few 
comments before I move adjournment of debate on second 
reading of Bill No. 10, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting that the government now 
is moving back into an area that in the early ’90s and certainly 
in 1994, when they changed the former SEDCO (Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation) Corporation to 
Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, to SOCO 
— renamed it to try and diffuse a number of concerns and 
issues that had been raised over the years in the way SEDCO 
operated — that they’re now basically moving back into an area 
that they suggested SOCO or SEDCO or with any other 
government agency, should not be involved in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I listen to the minister, I certainly compliment 
the minister and the government on the fact that they recognize 
that Saskatchewan can certainly be a place where we can do 
research and development and get involved in some of the 
technical, logical changes that we’ve seen and note take place 
over the past few years, but for many years, Mr. Speaker, have 
not taken place in this province. 
 
I believe we do have a trained workforce. I believe we do have 
young people with a lot of intelligence and a lot of abilities in 
providing the technology, providing the research, providing the 
development to build for the future. And it’s pleasing to see that 
this current government certainly recognizes that governments 
of the past, who were talking of it as well, see that this is a 
benefit and can be a benefit to our province, not only in 
educating our young people, but as well preparing our young 
people to face the future. And I think that’s positive. 
 
And so when I look at what SOCO is doing and what it’s 
attempting to do, there are some very positive areas that we see 
SOCO’s involved in, and we compliment them for that. 
 
However, we do have a problem when we see SOCO being 
given the opportunity now to get into capital expenditures and 
construction. 
 
The reason I would suggest that it’s something that we need to 
look at very carefully is the fact that while it may look innocent 
on the top, down the road, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t necessarily 
mean that the changes today may not be reflected in bad 
decisions down the road. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, if I’m not mistaken, some of this . . . the 
limits that are being put in place right now on capital 
construction projects can be done without reference to cabinet 
. . . or can be given approval through cabinet. It really doesn’t 
allow for public debate to see whether or not SOCO would be 
moving into an area of development or construction that would 
be beneficial to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And just leaving it in the hands of cabinet, or even in the hands 
of a board, which in many cases are a board that continues to be 
made up through appointment by government, I think, Mr. 
Speaker, as we are seeing currently taking place in the province 
of Saskatchewan the debate over the Channel Lake accord in 
SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation), one would have to 
question whether or not this is the right move; whether or not 

there should be methods whereby you can make boards more 
accountable or even cabinet. 
 
And so we’ve got some major concerns when we look at the 
suggestions that are being brought forward and the mandate that 
is going to be given to SOCO and the expenditures of funds. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at research 
and development, and I believe the minister talked about 
AgrEvo and Monsanto, some major players in the world in 
regards to chemicals and other commodities, that a firm such as 
this, Mr. Speaker, I hope that the minister and her government 
are looking at the fact of talking to agencies such as large 
corporations and asking them to invest something in 
Saskatchewan rather than asking the taxpayers to always do the 
investment. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s important for businesses to become 
stakeholders in this province as well. It’s important for them if 
they want to look at research, and rather than just going and 
looking to governments around the world and the government 
that will give them the best deal and asking the taxpayers to 
foot the bill, that it’s important that businesses begin to realize 
they have a role to play as well. 
 
And it would seem to me that in some of the areas that this Bill 
is talking about, we could certainly approach businesses, we 
could certainly approach major companies and ask for their 
direct involvement for investments in our province rather than 
always going to the Saskatchewan taxpayer for those 
investments. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I see this Bill as maybe going back a little bit 
on some of the commitments the government made a few years 
ago in regards to how we see the role of SOCO, especially 
reflecting back on what SEDCO used to be. And I would 
suggest that it’s a piece of legislation that certainly needs 
further debate as we look into it. It needs to be looked at more 
in depth as we digest what the proposals are and determine 
whether or not, at the end of the day, this is going to be a piece 
of legislation that is beneficial to the taxpayers of the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 12  The University of Saskatchewan 
Foundation Repeal Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 
reading of Bill No. 12, The University of Saskatchewan 
Foundation Repeal Act. The Act was created in 1957 to solicit, 
receive, and hold gifts and donations for the University of 
Saskatchewan, a corporation created for charitable purposes. It 
was created in 1957 because some tax laws of our country were 
different than they are today. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan Foundation Act was legislated 
at a time when a foundation structure was necessary for donors 
to receive a tax benefit for their gifts to the university. This is 
no longer the case. Canadian universities are now treated as 
charitable organizations for tax purposes. So, Mr. Speaker, the 



April 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

foundation itself has become redundant. The majority of 
individuals and corporations wanting to support the university 
already give their gifts or donations directly to the institution 
itself, not to the foundation, and the costs associated with 
running the foundation are therefore spent unnecessarily. 
 
The foundation is governed by trustees and the Act requires 
them to meet at least annually. These meetings, along with 
other administrative items such as the development of financial 
statements, have proven to be costly. They are an inefficient use 
of time and resources of the foundation’s officers and the 
trustees themselves agree that the foundation is no longer 
necessary or desirable. 
 
The effect of repealing The University of Saskatchewan 
Foundation Act, Mr. Speaker, would be to eliminate an existing 
inefficiency within the university structure. The university’s 
board of governors is currently responsible for many trusts and 
donations. It holds and administers this money and ensures their 
use for the best possible advantage of the University of 
Saskatchewan students. And we certainly have no reason to 
believe that this accountability would diminish if The 
University of Saskatchewan Foundation Act were eliminated. 
 
Accordingly we are proposing an Act which would repeal The 
University of Saskatchewan Foundation Act, provide for the 
wind-up of the foundation, and provide for the transfer of future 
bequests and donations. The new Act would appoint as trustees 
the chancellor, the president, the Chair of the board of 
governors of the University of Saskatchewan, and the president 
of the university alumni association. 
 
These trustees shall be charged with the winding-up and the 
proper transfer of the foundation’s responsibilities. They will 
take all steps to notify the public that the foundation will be 
wound up, and after the debts are properly paid, the trustees will 
transfer all remaining assets to the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
The foundation now holds just one trust, valued at 
approximately one-half million dollars. Section 17 of the 
existing Act allows for the transfer of assets on the winding-up 
of the foundation. And certainly the conditions outlined in the 
donation will not change with the transfer. And I think I’ll just 
skip a couple of pages here. 
 
Once the transfer is completed, the University of Saskatchewan 
Foundation will be considered wound up, and the rights, 
obligations, and liabilities will be transferred to the University 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
All of the objectives of the foundation can more efficiently be 
dealt with as part of the overall University of Saskatchewan’s 
administration by transferring the foundation’s assets to the 
university. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask for the support of the 
legislature for The University of Saskatchewan Foundation 
Repeal Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It would be in order for the minister to move 
the motion. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Oh, I move this Bill, second reading, 

Bill No. 12. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to begin by indicating a little bit more on what 
the minister has already raised because I think it’s important for 
people in Saskatchewan and members here in the House to 
understand the reasons for this Bill. 
 
The minister has indicated, of course, that The University of 
Saskatchewan Foundation Act was created in 1957 and was the 
vehicle that many people used to ensure that there was a receipt 
that could be used for tax purposes. 
 
When the individuals though, started to look at the limit, and we 
all are subjected to that same limit of 20 per cent donations to 
the charitable organizations, I think what was recognized by the 
board of governors at the University of Saskatchewan is that 
there was a need to create an expansion to that. 
 
And as a result, I believe it was in 1994, the change occurred at 
the University of Saskatchewan to create The U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) Crown Foundation Act, and that 
allowed, for a very brief period of time, it allowed additional 
donations to be made to a Crown foundation and to be subjected 
— or subject to different regulations and rules. 
 
But I think we understand very well that the Minister of Finance 
federally, made some changes to the Income Tax Act and as a 
result, actually placed, not only charitable institutions like the 
University of Saskatchewan and Crown foundations like the U 
of S Crown Foundation Act, on a level playing-field, if I can 
use that. 
 
So really, today there is no advantage to anyone to actually 
donate the money to the foundation or to donate it directly to 
the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
As indicated by the minister, the trustees that will be involved 
in winding down the foundation Act will be the president of the 
University of Saskatchewan. So I gave a call, I made a call to 
Dr. George Ivany to indicate . . . to find out what he felt was 
necessary in the Bill and whether the Bill was meeting their 
needs. 
 
And his concern was not so much of what the Bill was doing — 
that is was necessary; it was requested by the university — but 
he did indicate that the section that we’re looking at, I believe 
it’s section no. 4, it talks about the transfer of . . . first of all, the 
payment of the debts that the foundation may have currently on 
its books or may be subjected to pay and then, as a result, the 
assets that will be left over. 
 
And the clause that’s in the Bill currently indicates that the 
assets will be transferred directly to the University of 
Saskatchewan not to the University of Saskatchewan’s Crown 
Foundation, which is the other foundation that is current. And 
of course his explanation was that — very similar to the 
minister — that there isn’t a large number of trusts that are 
caught up in this, in this procedure right now. And I think the 
minister’s indicated that there’s only one. 
 
So that type of handling of that particular account can be done 
directly to the University of Saskatchewan rather than to the 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

foundation. 
 
(1145) 
 
The concern though was in the area of future bequests. And 
there may be wills that are established already by individuals 
across the province who are willing to, in their wills, to leave a 
sum of money to the University of Saskatchewan. And section 
no. 5 indicates that that money, even though it may say The 
University of Saskatchewan Foundation Act — the old Act — 
will automatically mean once this comes into force, that the 
Crown Foundation will be the recipient. 
 
And it stills seems a little confusing, I think, that people of 
Saskatchewan currently who have had a trust in the name of the 
foundation will have those assets transferred directly to the 
University of Saskatchewan. Yet future bequests that may fall 
into the hands of the university will, as a result of the 
amendments that are being proposed, will fall into the hands of 
the Crown Foundation. 
 
Now that’s not a serious problem, and I’d suggest to the 
minister that that kind of explanation is necessary, is necessary 
to explain to the people of Saskatchewan as to how that will 
transpire. 
 
This Bill, I think, will eliminate a level of administration as 
indicated by another gentleman I spoke to at the university, 
Matt Webster, who says that currently, as indicated by the 
minister, there is a level of administration there that is now 
redundant. It’s not needed. I think that’s beneficial — to 
remove something that is not necessary at the moment and to 
ensure that we can maybe improve in terms of efficiencies. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those comments regarding some concerns 
that have been raised by the presidents and by Mr. Webster, I 
think that the minister and her officials will be able to handle 
those comments in committee and I would support moving the 
Bill to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to give second reading to Bill No. 13, An Act to 
amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act. This 
amendment primarily introduces an important new regulatory 
tool to the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 
I want to emphasize at the outset that the vast majority of liquor 
and gaming participants take their responsibilities very 
seriously. They adhere to the regulations in place for the 
protection of the public — for example, the prohibition against 
serving liquor to minors. The enforcement options and the 
amendments I am proposing will be addressed to a small 
minority. 
 
As you may be aware, Mr. Speaker, the Authority presently has 
a limited array of options for enforcing liquor and gaming 
regulations in our province. The Authority can issue a letter of 

warning. It can repeat the warning more severely. It can 
suspend a gaming participant or liquor permit for several days, 
meaning that a business cannot operate. It can issue another 
suspension for a longer period of time. The ultimate sanction at 
its disposal is to cancel the authorization altogether. 
 
These penalties are administered on a case-by-case basis 
depending on the severity of the offence and the regulatory 
record of the business. These options are usually effective in 
achieving compliance from the responsible parties as a closed 
business results in lost profits, something most businesses 
prefer to avoid. However, when offences do occur and these 
sanctions are imposed, there are some indirect consequences. 
This amendment addresses these concerns. 
 
When a hospitality business is forced to close for several days 
the owner loses profits, as intended by the sanction. However, 
the staff of the establishment also suffer. Through no fault of 
their own, they cannot work during the shut-down and will lose 
wages. In the case of charity gaming establishments, charities 
lose revenues when a gaming supplier is suspended as their 
fund-raising efforts are interrupted. In each case, employees and 
charities are adversely affected through no fault of their own. 
 
This amendment, Mr. Speaker, allows the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority to use an additional different tool, a tool which allows 
it to enforce the liquor and gaming regulations in the province 
while avoiding consequences for pay cheques and for charity 
revenues. 
 
It introduces the option of fining businesses found to be in 
breach of the regulations rather than suspending them. In 
paying a fine, the business owner is still penalized, however, the 
business stays open and the employees and charities can 
continue to work and raise the funds they need. I say that this is 
only another enforcement tool, Mr. Speaker, because there will 
obviously still be many circumstances where suspension or 
cancellation of a permit or registration is the only proper 
recourse. 
 
The Authority generally allows a progressive course in 
sanctioning liquor establishments and gaming suppliers for 
breaches of regulations depending on the severity of the 
offence. The first sanction may be a letter of warning, the 
second may be a short suspension, the third may be a longer 
suspension, and the fourth, perhaps the cancellation. The 
levying of a fine will generally be considered in cases where 
only the lightest reprimand, a letter of warning, has been issued 
in the past to the establishment or to the supplier. 
 
If a supplier or establishment has a record which indicates 
continued breaches of regulations, a fine may not be considered 
a sufficient sanction. By introducing the options of fines, the 
Authority will have greater leeway to deal with instances where 
a breach of the regulations has occurred but a suspension is seen 
to be out of proportion to that offence. This will help to protect 
hospitality industry jobs and charity profits for gaming 
fund-raisers in the case of less severe breaches of the 
regulations while holding the responsible party accountable. It 
also ensures that severe offences are still punishable by other 
severe sanctions such as long suspensions or cancellations. 
 
The option of fining offenders has existed for many years in the 



April 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

legislation surrounding horse-racing industry in this province, 
so this new initiative brings the gaming and liquor regulations 
into greater harmony. It also brings Saskatchewan into greater 
harmony with other provinces, Mr. Speaker. The Northwest 
Territories presently allows the levying of fines for liquor 
regulation violations, and Alberta and North . . . New 
Brunswick, I should say, allow it for both liquor and gaming. 
British Columbia is also moving in this direction. 
 
The amendment suggests that the Authority may levy a fine of 
up to $10,000 and set a date by which the fine must be paid. If a 
fine is not paid after that time, a period of suspension for the 
permit or registration would occur. Of course some protection 
has been built into the amendment as well for the responsible 
party. 
 
A business facing a fine would be provided the same right of 
appeal presently allowed to those facing suspension, an appeal 
to the Liquor and Gaming Licensing Commission and 
ultimately to the courts. The Authority also agrees not to assess 
a penalty for an offence which came to its attention more than 
three years ago. 
 
Our hospitality industry and the charity stakeholders have asked 
for this legislative change, Mr. Speaker, and I’m pleased to 
introduce the second reading for it today. I believe this 
amendment will help keep Saskatchewan’s workforce and 
charities in the black while still ensuring that the laws and 
regulations surrounding liquor and gaming in the province are 
heeded and enforced. 
 
Before I close I want to briefly describe one additional 
amendment in the Bill, a housekeeping matter really. The 
amendment allows the Authority, through regulation, to exempt 
specific permitees from having to purchase wine and beer 
directly from the Authority’s stores or its franchises. This 
amendment provides these permitees with the opportunity to 
purchase wine and beer from permitees which . . . with, I should 
say, off-sale endorsements. 
 
Consequently it will be easier for many permitees to make these 
purchases as they will no longer be required to travel sometimes 
considerable distances to the Authority’s stores. This is a 
positive addition to the Authority’s Act for a number of 
permitees across the province. 
 
I ask members of the Assembly to support this Act, and I 
therefore move second reading of Bill No. 13, The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak 
on Bill No. 13, the liquor and gaming regulations Act. I’m not 
sure if this is the appropriate number because a good many 
people consider no. 13 to be an unlucky number particularly 
when you’re dealing with a gaming issue, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well we’re not gamblers over here. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well that’s true. There are a lot of 
gamblers on that side, Mr. Speaker, as the member from 
Rosetown says. 

Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that I think needs to be brought 
forward in this particular piece of legislation is the appeals 
process for fines. I think it’s very important that appeals process 
be put in place. 
 
The question I guess we have to ask is to whom does a 
complainant appeal? Do they appeal to the Liquor Authority or 
is it some body outside of the Liquor Authority to whom you 
would make that appeal. Because you can’t have someone 
appealing to the person who just made a ruling against you — it 
has to be to some other body. So I think it’s very important to 
ensure that the appeals process would be outside of the Liquor 
and Gaming Authority. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, previously the Authority would suspend 
licences for even minor offences. And indeed as the minister 
said, that put a great burden on the employees and on the 
innocent victims . . . (inaudible) . . . a charity situation, on the 
people who were trying to run the charities and to raise funds 
for their particular functions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Likewise with the gaming licence suspensions, bingo halls as I 
mentioned, that causes a great deal of concern to those groups 
like figure-skating, or the Boy Scouts, or whomever may be 
running a bingo at a charity hall if that hall is for some reason 
shut down. That causes them a great deal of difficulty. And I 
believe this piece of legislation will help to deal with that and 
we would support that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The amount of the fines of up to $10,000 is a significant fine, 
Mr. Speaker. I realize that other jurisdictions perhaps have 
more, but to go from no fine process to a $10,000 fine process 
can be of considerable impact for those particular organizations 
that may be involved. 
 
The minister went on at some length to rationalize the actions 
that could happen within the bingo community and the 
charities. And it’s true that charities shouldn’t be penalized for 
the actions of bingo hall owners. But the reverse is also true, 
Mr. Speaker. The government’s lengthy legal analysis 
concludes that it’s almost impossible to levy fines against 
charities. So if a fine is to be laid at all, it will held against the 
facility owners or anyone else who is offering the charities 
technical support for gaming. 
 
If this is the Authority’s intention, it’s clearly unfair, and we 
will be questioning that fairly extensively in committee, Mr. 
Speaker. If the government can’t fine the charities for their own 
offences, then they shouldn’t go looking for somebody else to 
be the scapegoat. Because we have to remember, Mr. Speaker, 
that fines are simply another term for taxation. 
 
The comments that the minister made on the change, the 
amendment to where someone providing off-sale or serving 
liquor, buying their off-sale, I think is very important. And that 
is a worthwhile change to this particular Act. Because in some 
communities there is no liquor franchise for a group to purchase 
their liquor from that particular place. They have to go down 
the road to the next community or a few communities down the 
road. If they could support their own local businesses, such as 
the local hotel, and purchase their supplies from that particular 
off-sale outlet is of benefit, Mr. Speaker, to everyone in 
Saskatchewan. 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

Because we do have a number of concerns and a number of 
questions — there are charities that are concerned about this; 
the hotel people have some concerns about this — at this 
present time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate 
on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1200) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
The Chair: — I will ask first the minister to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I am pleased to have with me 
today John Whyte, who is the deputy minister of Justice and 
Deputy Attorney General; Doug Moen, who is the executive 
director of public law and community justice; Colleen 
Matthews, who is the executive assistant to the deputy minister; 
Elizabeth Smith, who is the director of the administrative 
services branch; Richard Quinney, who is the executive director 
of the public prosecutions branch. 
 
At the back I have John Baker, executive director of law 
enforcement services; Keith Laxdal, who is the associate deputy 
minister of finance, administration division; Terry Lang, who is 
with corrections; and Ron Hewitt, who is assistant deputy 
minister of registry services division. 
 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Good morning, Mr. Minister, and a welcome 
to your officials as well. One of the first things that shows up is 
that your staff complement I believe has increased by 40, and 
I’m wondering first of all where specifically those people are 
located and what exactly has been going on that requires that 
increased staffing 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Okay, the question is about the increase of 
full-time equivalent positions, and I will go through and give 
you the explanation. Effectively what it is, is an increase of 44.5 
full-time equivalent positions as well as a reduction of four 
full-time equivalent positions. 
 
Public prosecutions, there are 17 new positions in the sense that 
there are 10 new positions and then there’s permanent funding 
for 7 existing positions that we have been managing. Under the 
prosecutions, well in the whole initiative that we have around 
building safer communities in Saskatchewan, there are 14.2 
positions. Of these, prosecutions, 4.5; corrections, 5.2; family 
violence, orders and issues around that, 1 position; 
communications department, 3.5 positions. Within the court 
structure, there are 2 traditional officer positions; at the Office 
of the Rentalsman, 4.7 positions. 
 
The LAND (Land Titles automated network development) 
project which is the renewal and development of a new land 
titles system, there are 4 positions. Under the police 
administration part of the department, 1 position; at the 

Securities Commission, there’s 1 position; and the coroner’s 
department, there’s a .6 position. The decreases are in the area 
of gun control. The people that we’ve had employed doing that 
will no longer be doing that function once the federal 
government takes over. At the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board, 
there’s 1 less position there as well. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I guess there’s three of those 
that I’d like to have some further comment on. The first one is 
you mentioned that there’s an increase in the component for the 
Rentalsman, and I’d like to know exactly what’s been 
happening in that department that requires an increase. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well as you will know, effective October 
1, 1997, the limit on the amount of a security deposit was 
eliminated and we used to have a maximum of $125 as a 
security deposit. As part of that change of allowing security 
deposits up to one month, we also changed a number of the 
provisions relating to the return of the security deposit in a 
timely fashion from landlords, who held those, back to tenants. 
 
As part of that process of reorganization, it did include more 
involvement of the Rentalsman’s office in the process. And so 
as a result, we have increased the number of people who are 
involved in dealing with some of the issues around the larger 
security deposits that are charged. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, I have a further question on that one. 
Is this a situation that’s going to be ongoing or is it just 
something that’s here till we get the system working? The next 
question, I believe you had 3.5 more people in communications. 
Exactly what is their responsibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to your question 
is that there’s a very large public education component in the 
Justice department. As you know there are just about almost 
2,000 employees. What we’re looking at in the new set-up is to 
have people available to work at coordinating the information 
about a number of the new programs. We also have a 
substantial amount of correspondence that comes to the 
department on many of the issues that you’re well aware of, and 
that involves some more staff there. 
 
But basically the answer is that throughout the Department of 
Justice there are many programs, many new kinds of things that 
are being dealt with that require more explanation and this is 
part of the communications budget. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — So as I asked earlier on about the 
Rentalsman, that’s a new area, and you mentioned there’s some 
new programs coming out here. What have you put into place to 
ensure that these jobs do not become long-term jobs even when 
the programs have been introduced and are running? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the answer there is that there 
are a total of now seven people within the whole Department of 
Justice that are involved in all of these areas. And it would be 
our plan that those people would continue in the work, because 
it’s an ongoing process to respond to the questions of the 
public, provide appropriate information as needed, deal with 
many of the concerns that I know that you raise and others 
raise, and that the plan would be that these people would 
continue in their positions. 



April 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s an interesting 
answer. Because first of all you said that you needed more 
people in Rentalsman because that was new. Then you said 
there are more new programs on here but that these people are 
going to stay around once those new programs have been 
introduced and are there. 
 
It seems like that’s a bit of a make-work project, and I’m not 
sure that at the end of the day some of that money probably 
couldn’t be used better in your Justice department than just to 
say they introduced a new program back in 1997, back in 1998, 
but they’re still there. And we’re not quite sure what, but we’ve 
managed to go ahead and make sure that the work that was 
there expanded itself to give something for everyone to do. 
 
You may want to comment on that, but my next question is I 
would like to know really quite specifically what areas are 
covered by sentencing circles or community justice committees. 
What sorts of crimes, if you wish to use that term, are they 
allowed to deal with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll respond to your question about the 
communications department and I think you’re 
misunderstanding my answer. Basically we’ve been working 
with not enough resources in that particular area and we’ve 
increased those resources to the need of the public for more 
information about the kinds of things that are being dealt with 
in the Justice department. And that’s everything right through 
from Rentalsman, Securities Commission, to the land title’s 
issues, the victim services program to all of the issues 
surrounding the courts, policing. And we’ve been operating 
with less than the total number that were needed in that area. 
 
As far as your question about sentencing circles, but I think 
really the gist of your questions relates to alternative measures 
programs, various kinds of things that are dealt with that way. 
 
There is a Saskatchewan Justice diversion program policy 
which was set out in 1996 effectively for some of these 
diversion programs. The criteria are this. For an offender, it’s an 
adult offender, there has to be sufficient evidence existing to 
support the criminal charge. Prosecution can’t be brought 
barred at law. There has to be some acknowledgement of 
responsibility for the behaviour on behalf of the person that the 
complaint’s been made about. There can’t have been diversions 
more than twice in the last three years. 
 
In other words, you don’t get a lot chances at this alternate 
measures program. You can’t have a failed diversion in the last 
six months, and there can’t be a substantial record of similar 
offences or recent charges. 
 
(1215) 
 
Offences that are totally excluded from the alternative measures 
program, and I think this is maybe more specifically where your 
question is raised, is any offence that involves the use or 
threatened use of a weapon; any violence against a person; 
cases adult or child where the Crown elects to proceed by way 
of indictment; child sexual abuse cases — they’re excluded; 
sexual assault cases where the Crown elects to proceed by way 
of indictment are excluded; perjury cases are excluded; driving 
while disqualified excluded; Criminal Code driving offences 

where alcohol was a contributing factor are excluded; federal 
offences other than certain Criminal Code offences, and the 
federal Department of Justice has their own lists of some of 
these federal offences which are excluded; and family violence 
cases are excluded from the alternative measures program. 
 
And then in addition to that policy, there are eight criteria for 
sentencing circles that are set out in the case law in 
Saskatchewan: Provincial Court Judge Fafard in the R. v. 
Joseyounen case and Mr. Justice Grotsky in the R. v. 
Cheekinew case, which was subsequently affirmed in another 
case, R. v. Moran. 
 
And the criteria as set out in those cases are as follows, and 
there are eight points which I’ll read to you: 
 
1. The accused must agree to be referred to the sentencing 

circle. 
 
2. The accused must have deep roots in the community in which 

the circle is held and from which the participants are drawn. 
 
3. That there are elders or respected non-political community 

leaders willing to participate. 
 
4. The victim is willing to participate and has been subjected to 

no coercion or pressure in so agreeing. 
 
5. The court should try to determine beforehand as best it can if 

the victim is subject to battered spouse syndrome. 
 
6. Disputed facts have been resolved in advance. 
 
7. The case is one in which a court would be willing to take a 

calculated risk and depart from the usual range of sentencing. 
 
8. The judge must agree to order a sentencing circle. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Probably a comment on a specific. If you 
picked up today’s Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, and you probably 
have, you’ve seen the article there on page A3 about the police 
charge a banished rapist in new assaults. It seems rather 
interesting when I think I followed through the list of situations 
that would qualify a person for a sentencing circle or keep them 
off a sentencing circle, it seems rather interesting that this 
individual was allowed into that situation for that banishment 
thing because it doesn’t seem to fit that category. 
 
I just wonder if you care to comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Since these new charges are before the 
court I can’t comment on the facts. Mr. Taylor’s previous 
contacts with the law are well documented in the news media. 
And the Department of Justice appealed his previous sentence 
of banishment suggesting that that sentence was inappropriate 
given the circumstances. The Court of Appeal disagreed with 
the appeal made by the Crown and upheld his original sentence. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I think it’s this sort of thing that we’re just 
talking about now that puts the thing a bit into question. And 
one of the questions I have is what security does the public have 
with regards to people who go through things such as 
community justice committees or sentencing circles that he 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

doesn’t leave that particular community because it’s that 
community that he’s in that is involved in this system. 
 
Now if he’s not being incarcerated, what is there in place to 
ensure that he stays within that community on a physical basis 
and isn’t allowed into a greater community, a community that 
had no say in his sentencing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I can’t comment specifically on the 
situation before the court today, but on the previous charge that 
I think you’re asking the question about, he would have been 
out of regular sentence at a prison in any case by today’s date. 
 
I think that what you’ve identified is a concern for all of us in 
Saskatchewan, in Canada, or North America, which is 
recidivism. How do you stop people from committing a crime 
again? And there are many, many concerns around this and 
practically, what we know is that there are many things that we 
do both within the traditional or within the correctional system 
within . . . and also within some of the alternative measures 
programs that we get involved with. 
 
And so in this whole area we continue to work to try to find the 
best solutions that will emphasize that the public protection is 
of paramount importance, and that we will make sure that 
people have the best chances that they can to sort out their 
problems so that when they do return to the community, they 
become contributing members of society rather than people 
who commit another crime. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I think I’ll have to rephrase that 
question to get exactly where I’m at. If a community justice 
committee or a sentencing circle deals with an individual, he 
isn’t necessarily incarcerated. They may decide to give him 
whatever sentence they choose within the criteria that they are 
allowed to work. 
 
So you had a certain segment of society has said, this is what 
we’re going to do with this individual; he can stay living here. 
Now that doesn’t provide any kind of protection for the rest of 
society within this province that had absolutely no input into 
that. In the justice system the justice system is suppose to take 
care of all of society. Here you have a small segment of society 
making decisions. This individual, whoever it happens to be, 
past, present or future, may be a threat to the larger society and 
yet they have no recourse. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think I do understand your 
question. Then I think the issue is one that’s a problem for all 
societies when you have behaviour which is antisocial or 
deviant. And I think your question revolves around what kinds 
of methods we use as sanctions against individuals. 
 
And specifically in situations where a sentencing circle model is 
used in Saskatchewan in conjunction with a judge, those 
sentences are no less tough. In some ways they are tougher than 
the sentences that might come out of the court process, in the 
sense that the individual is dealing with the people in their 
community that they’ve harmed. Often it’s their relatives, their 
teacher, their priest, others who are part of that process, who 
end up holding the person accountable in a much more effective 
way often, than what would be more of an anonymous judge 
who is dealing with that particular situation. But then on top of 

that, the judges do participate and affirm under our structure 
what the ultimate sentence is. 
 
I think the bigger question and the one that I think is difficult to 
answer, is the question around people who have fulfilled their 
sentence, they return to the community, and they still end up for 
whatever reason, having the propensity towards creating more 
criminal activities. 
 
And we in our society say that for most people, we’ll have them 
serve their time and then come out into the community in a 
staged fashion which allows them to somehow reintegrate into 
the community. But we have to admit that isn’t a hundred per 
cent effective and that there are some people that end up being 
more of a problem. 
 
We do have certain people that are dangerous to the community 
that are designated that, and we end up then having the 
dangerous offender provisions under the Criminal Code, which 
we use those applications as well. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I would hope that the idea 
isn’t coming through that I’m totally against sentencing circles. 
I think they have some key strong points, and the one that you 
addressed is probably one of the stronger ones, and that is that 
there is the victim involved. And I think that’s a definite 
positive move where the victim feels they have some input into 
the sentencing, into the justice that takes place. So that’s a good 
step. But we’re still a little vague on the security for the larger 
community. 
 
In conversation with several native people about sentencing 
circles, one of the problems that they’ve identified deals with 
keeping the offender in the community. And that’s sort of what 
I was really referring to, in that they do not always have 
adequate policing. I’m wondering what measures are there now 
and what directions are you thinking of going in that area to 
make sure that that’s addressed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Is your specific question about policing in 
aboriginal communities? Well I think on that particular area, we 
in Saskatchewan are quite proud of our concern about public 
safety as we deal with policing through our tripartite 
agreements with the federal government and the first nations. 
And we have a broad network of policing arrangements within 
first nations communities, where rather than have the police 
come from outside of the first nations communities, many of 
them have their offices and their homes on the first nations and 
are providing policing with the assistance of local police 
advisory commissions and other things like this. 
 
So that we’re attempting to deal with some of the concerns that 
you’ve raised and I think that I can say that throughout the 
province we have developed a broad network of the tripartite 
policing agreements on the first nations situation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Welcome to the officials. I have a question, 
Mr. Minister, on a court case regarding a native issue that was 
actually ruled on regarding . . . in British Columbia. And I’m 
going to spell it because I can’t say the word. 
D-E-L-G-A-M-U-U-K-Y-S. I’m sure you can probably tell me 
what it is. 
 



April 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

I’m concerned, as I’m sure lots of people are, about this case 
and how it may affect the land claims that have actually been 
settled or supposedly settled here in Saskatchewan because of 
determining the aboriginal title, and also the term “shared 
exclusivity” and how it might affect some of the treaty land 
entitlement cases here in Saskatchewan. Can you give me some 
information on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I appreciate this question. How you 
say that word is “Del-ga-mook.” Delgamuukys case. And it’s 
the case involving the Nishga in north-western British 
Columbia. 
 
I think the key thing to remember for all of Saskatchewan 
residents is that we have treaties covering our whole province. 
And that’s completely different than British Columbia. The 
only treaty in British Columbia is way up in the north-east 
corner. Otherwise they are dealing with situations that have 
never been resolved through a treaty. 
 
Now we have outstanding obligations under our treaties in 
Saskatchewan and we are working to fulfil those, but we don’t 
have the same kinds of issues that relate to the aboriginal title as 
arose in the Delgamuukys case. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I’m also interested . . . At the same time, the 
judge had decided that oral evidence could be given and used in 
different cases. And I’m wondering if this will affect any of the 
other cases that you may be dealing with right now? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to that is yes, it 
will affect some of the cases in that the Supreme Court of 
Canada set out guidelines around the use of oral-tradition 
evidence, and so practically that will affect how some of the 
cases that we may have in Saskatchewan in the future will be 
dealt with. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So at the present time, are there cases that are 
being dealt with that this will have an impact on that is beyond 
what the budget is for or planned for when the settlements were 
made? 
 
I understand that even the bands that have settled their land 
claims right now haven’t been required to completely release 
. . . to give releases. And so if there’s a new type of . . . 
something new will come up like giving oral history, that it 
might actually change the way it’ll be dealt with. Are there 
cases like this ongoing at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think practically, it’s hard to 
predict exactly how evidence might unfold. One of the things 
that we do know in Saskatchewan, as various cases have 
developed in the courts, that the judges have used their 
discretion to make sure that they get the best evidence that they 
can before the courts. 
 
What this particular Delgamuukys case does is talk in more 
detail about the kinds of information that were excluded by 
some of the lower courts in British Columbia in that particular 
case. 
 

It’s not totally obvious that the same thing would have 
happened in Saskatchewan if there had been a similar case here. 
But I think practically, what we will do is take the suggestions, 
the ideas, and the rules, such as they are, out of that particular 
case and, you know, argue around the cases that we do have in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so practically, once again I say the answer to your question 
is yes, that it will have some effect. As to the specific effect, I 
can’t say for sure. 
 
Ms. Draude: — At this time are you concerned that the term 
that was used by the judge in that case, of “shared exclusivity,” 
is that going to have an effect on the cases that you’re dealing 
with now, and can actually claims be reopened to include that 
term? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Our position is that that term will not 
affect how the treaties are interpreted and that were protected 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I’d like to change 
gears a little bit and get a bit of background on just the legal 
process so that we’re comfortable with what’s going to be 
taking place here, in the next few questions. If a person has a 
chance of being called as a witness in a trial, would they be 
allowed to sit on the jury hearing that particular trial? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. It’s good to get a nice, short, 
concise answer so we know where we’re going. 
 
Okay, what if we just change that scenario somewhat and we 
say there’s a public inquiry that’s in process, would a person 
who is a potential witness be allowed to hear the testimony? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think you’re asking a fairly 
complicated question, but the answer is there are circumstances 
where witnesses may be present at an inquiry and not excluded, 
if that’s your question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, so I believe what you’ve told us then 
is that potential witness could hear the testimony. 
 
Now in a legislative inquiry, as we move down this ladder, in 
your opinion as a Justice minister and as a member of the legal 
profession — you should have this nicely in hand — 
hypothetically, would it be proper for members of this House 
who may be called to give a testimony before a committee of 
this legislature to also sit as members of that committee — 
hypothetically? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — A simple answer to your question is that 
this legislature controls its own procedure. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — So you feel that it is totally acceptable for the 
person to be both the judge and the person who is being 
questioned in a situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I didn’t say that. I said that the House 
controls its own procedure. 
 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

Mr. Heppner: — Okay. Would you be . . . say that a potential 
witness should be allowed to be part of a jury process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No. It’s clear that a witness would not be 
on a jury. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. We believe the member from 
Regina Dewdney and the member from Regina north-west must 
be called as witnesses before the Crown Corporations 
Committee, the hearing into the Channel Lakes. In your opinion 
and from your legal background, should they not immediately 
step down from that committee? 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I’m going to intervene here. I 
think these questions are not for the Department of Justice and 
are committee questions. We are into the estimates for the 
Department of Justice, and I don’t think these questions are in 
line for that. I will not require the minister to answer it. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I’m asking the Minister of Justice, the 
Minister of Justice for this province, for a legal opinion. 
 
The Chair: — The opinion of the Chair cannot be challenged 
and the Chair has made the ruling on it. If the hon. member 
from Rosthern wishes to continue his questioning on the 
estimates of Justice, he may do so. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, a point 
of order. Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask a question of the Chair 
and a clarification. 
 
It seems to me that the committee before the Assembly this 
morning is the Justice estimates. And when you start talking 
about whether it was Justice or Social Services or Health 
estimates, there are wide-ranging questions that deal with 
process — process — and I’m asking, Mr. Chairman, whether 
or not this is a limitation of the ability of the members to seek 
some guidance and get some information and seek the direction 
as to how the Justice department continues and represents 
decisions and concerns of individuals in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I would expect that members would 
know that they cannot argue with the Chair. There is a 
procedure whereby you may ask that the Speaker confirm the 
ruling, but you cannot argue with the Chair. This is clearly out 
of order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In your view. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — In the rules of the House. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The Chair has ruled on it, and the point 
of order as risen by the member from Moosomin is out of order 
and the ruling will stand. Theses are not relevant questions, I 
don’t believe, to the Department of Justice finances. Now 
questioning will continue or we will call the vote on 
administration subvote (JU01). 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. Well, we’ll just go back to a different 
question then and we’ll see if we can come back to where this 

province wants us to be at. 
 
I see in the Estimates that the money as allocated for 
community justice involve the coroner investigations. We find 
that there’s members of families in this province who are 
having to wait a very long time for coroners’ reports, and that 
has a number of difficulties that are involved there. One is it 
really elongates the grieving process, which is unfortunate; the 
other thing is, if it involves car accidents and SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), they need the coroners’ 
reports before they will compensate the family. 
 
And I’m wondering how much of any new money is allocated 
to coroner’s office and what is the average wait for reports that 
are being produced for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There’s no new money for the coroner’s 
office, but I think the specific concern that you have relates to 
the length of time that the coroners have to wait for receiving 
the final reports from the pathologist. And so it’s a question that 
relates to the medical doctors who are specifically trained to do 
those kinds of reports and the length of time that it sometimes 
takes to complete those reports. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — On the same issue, what is the average 
waiting time at present for a coroner’s report, and what actions 
have been taken to try and speed that up for some very good 
reasons? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The specific question of the average 
length of time for coroner’s report, I’ll have to take specific 
notice of that because we don’t have that figure calculated out, 
but we can do that based on the dates of the reports. What I 
would say is that the pathologists’ reports are taking an average 
of four to six months to be returned to the coroners; the 
pathologists are employees of the health districts throughout the 
province. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Dealing with the young offenders and a few 
questions in that area. Legal service expenditures is up, I 
believe 1.67 million in that area. This money is utilized, among 
several things, for the prosecution of young offenders. And the 
first question is, I know that the Department of Social Services 
administers the Young Offenders Act, but can you explain to 
me how much support, financial or otherwise, comes from the 
Department of Justice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think I can clarify for you that the 
Department of Justice is involved in the prosecution of matters 
under the Young Offenders Act, so that those issues would be 
dealt with under expenses related to policing and to 
prosecutions and to Legal Aid. But they’re not specifically 
broken out from that. And also then, as it relates to the various 
discussions around the changes that we’ve proposed to the 
Young Offenders Act, those things are dealt with in our public 
policy part of the Department of Justice. But they’re not 
specifically broken out as so many hours on young offenders in 
the whole process. 
 
I think the Department of Social Services is the department 
which deals with the various services for young people under 
the Young Offenders Act. 
 



April 9, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

Mr. Heppner: — What components of the Young Offenders 
Act have you basically given over or have they taken over, the 
Social Services part? What components are they responsible 
for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Social Services is responsible for the 
corrections component of the Young Offenders Act. We worked 
together on the social policy side of it. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — This, in the last number of months as you 
know, has been a fairly critical issue in that Social Services’ 
number one mandate is definitely not protection of the public. 
And yet you will take a young offender, and after the research 
and the conviction has taken place, Social Services gets them. 
But as I just finished saying, protection of the public is not part 
of what they see as a key mandate of theirs but it is in your 
department. And I’m wondering . . . I’d like to get your 
comments on why you don’t take over the full responsibility for 
all of the Young Offenders Act. 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well the specific policy reasons around 
that in Saskatchewan and in other provinces in Canada is 
specific emphasis on youth, a separate justice system for youth, 
which is the whole young offenders system. What we know is 
that the Department of Social Services has responsibilities 
around the aspects of young people as it specifically relates to 
the Young Offenders Act, but they also have responsibility as it 
relates to children in need of protection. 
 
And unfortunately often those responsibilities overlap in 
Saskatchewan and in a number of other provinces in Canada 
that concern for children has dictated that what we set up in this 
way. And as we’ve done it for a long time this way and it’s 
worked, I think relatively well in meeting the needs of children. 
 
And we also, though, are clearly cognizant of the concerns 
about public safety. And as you know from the information that 
we have conveyed to the federal Justice minister over the last 
number of years. One of the concerns about actually how the 
Young Offenders Act is written is that the whole goal of 
protection of the public has been de-emphasized in how the 
federal government wrote that legislation. 
 
And I would just remind you that that legislation was 
introduced by Prime Minister Mulroney, a Conservative 
government in the ’80s, and it was sort of through the 
consultation with the Premier Devine government in 
Saskatchewan during the ’80s. So it’s basically federal Tory, 
provincial Tory legislation. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Minister, it’s totally amazing how you’re 
scampering for cover behind a bunch of PCs (Progressive 
Conservative). I think that kind of indicates where your 
government happens to be at. But that doesn’t address the 
questions in the ’90s. 
 
It doesn’t address the question of the ’90s when we see the 
differences that have been happening with youth crime across 
North America, and Saskatchewan’s been no exception. You’re 
still not addressing the issue of what your department is doing 
to provide more security for the public from young offenders. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well as you have so clearly pointed out in 
your initial questions — and I appreciate those questions — we 
are increasing the budget in Justice. We are specifically looking 
at serious habitual young offenders. And we’re looking and 
promoting reform of the federal legislation, which we have 
been working on for a number of years, and we are providing 
increased coordination throughout the province with policing. 
 
And I guess what I would beg to differ with your perception 
that we’re not concerned about this, because we are . . . have 
public safety as our number one goal; and as it relates to the 
increased concern, as you rightly pointed out, in Saskatchewan 
but also across North America, we have some specific problems 
to deal with with our young people and we are taking steps to 
deal with those. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Minister, not very long ago when the 
North Battleford situation came up, you said at that point you 
were quite satisfied with the Young Offenders Act. Then a little 
later on you said, well you and your federal counterpart were 
chatting about it. Now you’re telling me you’ve been working 
on this for years. 
 
Could you pick one of those three this morning and tell us 
which one you’re really in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I’ve now been Justice minister for 
two and a half years, and I would tell you that this item of the 
Young Offenders Act has been on every agenda of ministers’ 
meetings over the last few years. And I know that it was there 
when my predecessor was the minister. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to specifically correct some 
of the misinformation that you as a member have been 
providing to Saskatchewan about my role in December in 
Montreal. What happened at that meeting was that there were 
four provinces that came forward with a proposal which they 
laid on the table without any prior knowledge. 
 
The common response — and you can read all of the 
information that came out of that meeting — of all the 
provinces was to say there are some good ideas here. We 
haven’t had a chance to review them. How we develop policy is 
to look at things, go back, discuss with our colleagues, come 
forward with positions. 
 
Out of that particular meeting and out of those suggestions we 
then worked through the various policy parts of our department 
and we came forward with the letter that we’ve sent to the 
Minister of Justice which sets out the concerns that we have that 
should be included in any changes to the Young Offenders Act. 
 
Those changes are ones that are based on quite a number of 
years of discussion and negotiation through the process that we 
in Canada have for changing our criminal law. As you know, 
the federal government has responsibility for creating criminal 
law. And the net effect of that is, is that all of the provinces and 
territories participate through federal-provincial-territorial 
meetings where policy issues around the criminal law are 
discussed. We have been participants in that around changes to 
the Criminal Code and also changes as it relates to the Young 
Offenders Act. 
 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1998 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I would have appreciated it 
if you had all that knowledge at your disposal that people of 
Saskatchewan would have known about it, they might have felt 
a bit more confidence in what was happening in the youth area. 
 
And meanwhile, it’s interesting that the people from 
Lloydminster is chirping back there about people listening. I 
would suggest she needs to listen to some of the questions 
happening in the House. Things would work along a whole 
better for her when she goes home this weekend. 
 
How much extra money is being allocated, Mr. Minister, to 
alleviate the backlog in Land Titles Offices? There is 
traditionally a number of weeks of time that people have to wait 
for that, and I’m wondering what is the average length of time? 
And I believe you’re making some changes in that and what are 
those changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The specific increase for the land titles 
department in this budget is $600,000. But I think that you 
should recognize that we’re in a position where we’re moving 
to our new land system and so we’re still using a paper-based 
system that’s basically a hundred years old. And we’re doing 
everything we can to make sure that we serve the public as 
quickly as possible. 
 
Right now our response, I guess as of April 2, which is earlier 
this week — if you want I can go through and tell you what the 
numbers of days of turnaround are. These are calendar days as 
opposed to work days and if I . . . I guess the Saskatoon area 
and Saskatoon mid-west is 7 days, so that means if it goes in on 
a Monday, it comes out the next Monday; Swift Current, 10 
days; Yorkton, 8 days; Regina area is at 13 days which . . . just 
under 2 weeks; Prince Albert, 9 days; Moose Jaw, 13 days; 
Humboldt, 9 days; Battleford, 8 days; Yorkton, 8 days. 
 
So basically our goal is to get them turned around as quickly as 
possible with making sure that we continue to maintain the high 
quality and standards that we have for our land titles system and 
we are putting the extra money that we need to do that and we 
monitor this on a weekly basis. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and as a lay person that’s had to 
wait numerous times for different land title offices, usually it’s 
been in the numbers that you’ve talked about — 9, 12, 13, in 
there some place — and it seems that the Land Titles Office at 
Prince Albert, for example, you said had 9 days. And it never 
seems to get down to 3 or 4, but it usually stays around 9, 10, 
11, 12. And I guess a simple question from a person who just 
uses it is: can’t we just get caught up at some point and say it’s 
always 2 to 3 days? Like, why are we always that extra number 
of days behind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I’m very pleased you asked that 
question because I gave you the figure for April 2, and in Prince 
Albert office it was 9 days which is quite a bit longer than 
normal for there. But what happened . . . well basically I’ll . . . 
March 5. I’ll give you the weekly totals for the last five weeks: 
March 5, 1 day turn-around; March 12, 1 day; March 19, 3 
days; March 26, 7 days; April 2, 9 days. So what happened in 
Prince Albert? 
 
Well Prince Albert experienced some computer problems 

around some power outages that happened, and they’re doing 
some training of staff, as well as there’s been an accumulation 
of staff taking some leave around this time. They’ll be back to 
full compliment of staff on April 6, which I guess was a couple 
of days ago, and it’s anticipated that they’ll bring those numbers 
back down to the one, two, three days amounts that they had 
earlier in March. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s in . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I ask that the committee rise, report progress, and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being near the hour of adjournment, 
along with wishes to all hon. members that you’ll take 
advantage of the extended Christmas break — excuse — the 
extended Easter break. Ain’t it amazing how time flies when 
you’re having a good time? 
 
Please enjoy the Easter break, and this House will now stand 
adjourned until Wednesday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................552 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................552 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................552 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................552 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................552 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................552 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................552 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Easter Celebration 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................552 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................553 
 Passover Celebration 
  Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................553 
 Regina Hospital Bed Crisis 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................553 
 Labour Force Survey 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................553 
 Easter/Passover Celebration 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................554 
 Edam First Responders 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................554 
 Health Care Concerns 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................554 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Inquiry into Channel Lake 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................554 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................555 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................556 
 Rural Health Care 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................557 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................557 
 North Battleford Emergency Services 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................557 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................557 
 SaskPower Gas Supply Contract 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................558 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................558 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Rail-Line Abandonment 
  Bradley.......................................................................................................................................................................................559 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................559 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................560 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................561 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................561 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................562 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................562 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................562 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................562 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 16 — The Certified General Accountants Amendment Act, 1998 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................562 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................562 
 Bill No. 17  The Certified Management Consultants Act 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................563 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................563 
 Bill No. 1 — The Arts Board Amendment Act, 1998 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................564 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................564 
 Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Amendment Act, 1998 
  MacKinnon................................................................................................................................................................................565 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................566 
 Bill No. 12  The University of Saskatchewan Foundation Repeal Act 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................566 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................567 
 Bill No. 13 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 1998 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................568 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................569 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Justice — Vote 3 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................570 
  Heppner .............................................................................................................................................................................570, 573 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................572 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................574 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................574 
 


