





























































Hansard: June 01, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1487 
 June 1, 1998 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wasn’t sure 
whether I had posed the question at that time when we did 
recess. Anyway, we’ll get back on that topic and deal with a 
couple other points, Madam Minister, around the closure or 
great discontinuance and the small schools factor. 
 
Madam Minister, has your department taken a look at bussing 
as far as the distances children travel? And have you had any 
studies done in terms of what might be a reasonable expectation 
of the distance that children should ride or could ride? As I have 
indicated, with great discontinuance occurring in a community 
like Theodore, there are parents there that are very concerned 
about their children. Some students currently ride a bus for an 
hour to get to the community of Theodore and now they’ll be 
subjected to at least another 50 minute to an hour ride. And 
we’re starting to look at in the neighbourhood of one and three 
quarter hours or two hours of total time spent on a bus. And I’m 
wondering whether or not there has been any study as to what is 
a goal that you’re working toward to ensure that students don’t 
spend a great deal of time riding a bus? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I think you initially 
directed your comments by talking about the distance that 
children travel and whether or not that’s something that the 
department has studied. What I can tell you is that we are more 
interested in time on the school bus than distance. You can be 
15 or 16 miles away and get to your school in fairly short order 
or you can be 7 or 8 miles away and take some time because of 
the number of students getting onto the bus. 
 
I recall as a child I was 6 miles away from the school, and I got 
on the bus at 7:30 in the morning and got off at 5 o’clock. And 
it was basically because of the kinds of back roads that we had 
to take, and the numbers of students getting on the bus. And we 
were also waiting for a bus where high school students were 
transferred to another school. 
 
We do not have a policy about time on the bus. This is an issue 
that has been left to local school boards to determine. I do know 
that school boards have reconfigurated bus routes in order to 
minimize time. And that has been quite successful in some parts 
of the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, as you are aware, a number 
of programs occur after the normal school day — 
extracurricular activities — whether they be debating classes or 
drama practices or whatever else occurs after hours. The 
concern as we start to look at distances getting greater and 
greater between schools, as the case of Theodore and Yorkton, 
where we’re now starting to look at students travelling, well 
somewhere in that neighbourhood of 35, 40 miles, or if we 
change that to kilometres we’re almost looking at the same 

distance as Regina to Moose Jaw. Those students will be 
bussed. 
 
And while there will be changes — and I know the division 
board is looking at adjusting bus routes and trying to ensure that 
students spend as little time as possible on those busses — what 
will happen though, Madam Minister, is that we will have a 
situation where there will be students who will miss out on 
opportunities. They will miss out on those opportunities 
because their parents cannot afford to have . . . and these are 
comments coming from parents who will be involved next year 
with their children travelling to Yorkton . . . these are parents 
who are indicating that they do not have a second automobile to 
provide to the students on, you know, a regular basis, two or 
three times a week. They will be missing out on a lot of the 
activities. 
 
And that is of grave concern, Madam Minister, because I think 
in your visits to various schools, you know that it is not only an 
academic program that will keep students in school; it’s a broad 
range of activities. If students can feel good about going to 
school and being involved and all of the other programs that 
schools provide they may stay in school. That’s one of the 
stay-in-school initiatives that has come across not only in 
Saskatchewan but all over Canada. 
 
And I’m wondering, Madam Minister, how do we balance that. 
How do we balance the fact that here we have a great 
discontinuance occurring, where we’re going to have students 
that are going to miss out on certain things and on the other 
side, we’re not even going to recognize the problems that the 
small schools factor created in terms of grant recognition. I 
think we have to look at a balance in saying, where do you feel 
there is an optimum in terms of the quality of education, the 
access to education, so that all students can be treated equally in 
the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well just so you understand this, we 
have changed the small schools factor. The maximum number 
of students recognized per grade has moved from 10 to 15. The 
rate per pupil for all grades has been raised from $450 and $850 
to 1,000 —regardless of what grade you’re in — per student. 
 
And the location factor remains the same. We still measure 
distance by road. Kindergarten and elementary — the small 
school factor applies to 10 to 30 kilometres; middle years, 15 
kilometres to 40 kilometres; and secondary, 20 kilometres to 50 
kilometres. And we’ve changed it so it’s no longer as the crow 
flies but it’s actual distance. 
 
You raised a question, Member, that has been a question that 
has been raised forever, particularly for those young people 
involved in extracurricular activity living in rural 
Saskatchewan. For those of us that had to catch a school bus to 
get home at 3:30, arrangements — if you wanted to participate 
in an extracurricular activity — had to be made for you to, you 
know, stay in town until your folks could come and get you, or 
you would drive home with other families that were in your 
vicinity. 
 
This is not a new question. This is a question and a concern that 
people living outside of towns, villages, and urban centres 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

where schools are located have been dealing with for decades. 
It’s an ongoing concern, and as long as we have people that live 
outside of the urban areas, which I presume we will have for 
many, many centuries into the future, this will be a question for 
those young people and their families to try and come to grips 
with. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I fully 
appreciate that this has been a discussion that’s been around, 
and we need to get our heads around that one. The point that 
I’m trying to make, Madam Minister, it doesn’t matter whether 
your changes are $5,000 per student. In the case of Theodore 
School, because of the way the formula is considered, the next 
nearest grade 10, 11, and 12 is Yorkton and the second nearest 
is Foam Lake. Those are all beyond the distances that you have 
indicated in your formula. 
 
So when we start to look at why did the Yorkdale board make 
that decision, it’s one of program. It’s one of numbers. It’s one 
of everything, but it is also finances. And if they had the 
opportunity . . . and I think, Madam Minister, you’re aware that 
those grades in Theodore — those three grades — average 
about nine to ten students per grade. And for simplicity sake, I 
think you can see the difference between ten students in a grade, 
and if we were talking about three grades we’re talking about 
30,000 potential dollars for those division 4 students, and that is 
the reason why the small schools factor was set up. 
 
Ministers of Education before you have indicated that it is more 
expensive to offer grades in a particular school. As the distance 
increases, of course, and as the grades are later on in the 
spectrum — that is, the grade 9, 10, 11, and 12 — costs become 
higher. That’s recognized in your grant distribution formula 
whereas the per pupil basis is higher for students in grade 10, 
11, and 12 because there is a higher cost. You can’t in a small 
school situation, which is a K to 12, you cannot offer the 
program at the same cost as you could in a much larger centre 
where there are 25 or 28 students per grade. 
 
So the final point that I want to make, Madam Minister, is that 
Theodore people feel that this regulation that you have in place 
was one that was unfair. It does not matter whether there is 
15,000 per student or whether or not we’re talking about 10 
students or 8 students or 12 students. The situation that was 
applied to the Theodore School was that there was no grant 
basically. It was a very small number that was allocated because 
of the choice of school buildings in Springside and Sheho. 
 
Now the other point, Madam Minister, is that when we start to 
look at the distances, as I’ve indicated, there will be 28 students 
— I think . . . is the count — of the Division 4 students in 
Theodore who will now be riding the bus for some greater 
distance. And I’m sure you’ve been on the highway, Madam 
Minister, on Highway 16. You know that that distance from 
Theodore to Yorkton is significant and the time driving that 
distance, even with an automobile, is significant. Now we’re 
going to be putting a bus on that road to have those students 
transported. 
 
Is that the kind of situation that we’re going to be looking at all 
across the province, where we’re now going to look at a 
scenario in Yorkton, for instance, that the school, the next 
closest division 4 school will be now well over 60 miles away? 

It’ll be at Foam Lake, and there will be no division 4 schools in 
between. Is that the kind of system that we’re moving to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Member, you’ll recall that you 
came to see me . . . I think it was shortly before the legislature 
was convened or shortly thereafter. I don’t know if our budget 
. . . no our budget had not yet been delivered. And I have to 
share with you, Member, that I did consult with people about 
your proposal and it was suggested to me that in order to go 
forward with that proposal, I needed to do more consultation. I 
did, as you know, talk to your school board — some of your 
members of your school board — the Yorkdale school board, 
about this matter, and I was advised that this wasn’t something 
that you had discussed with them and that they wanted to have 
this discussion with you. 
 
So this isn’t something that . . . this wasn’t a decision to 
maintain the existing policy that was taken lightly. There was 
consultation. I spoke to people at the rural congress about your 
idea and once again I was advised that I needed to consult a 
little more widely than, you know, running into a few people at 
the congress. 
 
So I have not had any letters from anybody indicating that they 
want us to change the small school factor and have it . . . sort of 
compare high schools to high schools. I don’t believe, and my 
officials have confirmed this, I have not received one letter. The 
only call for this action has come from you. And when I have 
raised it with that school division board, members of that school 
division board, this was something that they needed to consider, 
and they also reminded me that school closures or grade 
discontinuance are within the prerogative of the locally-elected 
school division board. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The concerns 
are surfacing in a wide range of areas because I think we’re 
talking about schools where the distances between the schools 
are getting greater, and I think that there has to be a perceived 
fairness that the grants are distributed equitably and fairly. And 
you’ve indicated that there is further research needed and you 
need to look at that. And I appreciate that comment. 
 
The point that I was wanting to conclude with, Madam 
Minister, is that the people in Theodore felt that for them, even 
though you might suggest there might be some changes later, 
that for them the distance has become too great. There are 
certain families that are looking at it and saying, I’m not sure 
this is in our best interests. We may have to leave — sell their 
existing facilities and move to a community where they can be 
closer to a school. And I don’t think that that’s what we want to 
have in this province. I think what we need to do is to attract 
more people and more families to areas in the province — that 
we’re not concerned about school closures and grade 
discontinuance. 
 
Madam Minister, if I could change to one other topic that 
you’ve been involved with, and that’s the four-day week. You 
made reference to that earlier on in some of your comments. 
There was a suggestion after the first year that the four-day 
week was a pilot project. I think that’s how it was described at 
Scenic Valley and I’m wondering, have you had a report on 
that? Have you had a chance to analyze the benefits of that 
four-day week — the negative things maybe that may have 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

 

come out of that? Is there a report that is already finished or is 
there being . . . is there an assessment that is taking place right 
now? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As the member may know, the first 
year of the pilot project was evaluated. We’ve extended that 
pilot project, I believe, to three, three to five years — I think 
officially three years. But we will be extending it five years. We 
have called for, — through a proposal call — a team of 
reviewers to come in from outside of the province to review the 
pilot project in terms of its success. 
 
I should tell you that I’ve had a chance to look at some of the 
research that’s been done in this field. And I think it’s fair to 
say that four-day school weeks have not lasted that long in 
many parts of the United States where it has been tried. And so 
I guess it’s fair to say that the jury is still out on the notion of a 
four-day school week. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I notice that, in 
articles from the middle to late April, you’ve indicated that 
there would be no more pilot projects until a review is done, 
and that we need to see exactly where we’re moving. I think 
there were some comments by teachers, if I recall, that indicated 
that the department should be more flexible. 
 
And I know that other school divisions are looking at Scenic 
Valley to get a better understanding of what is, what are the 
benefits, of course, to the students — number one. I think that’s 
what we have to keep in mind at all times, of course, is whether 
or not the changes do benefit the students. And as I’ve indicated 
to you, I think that we need to be very wary of school closures, 
grade discontinuances, four-day weeks, if indeed there are 
benefits to students or if there are negatives. And I think I heard 
you say that while you are awaiting a complete study, that there 
will be no further pilot projects. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the topics that you also expounded 
upon today when you gave second reading to The Education 
Act was that there have been amalgamations of school divisions 
and there are changes. And the changes as proposed in your 
amendments will decrease the number of francophone boards 
from nine down to one. 
 
I recall a newspaper article not too long ago, I think — and I’m 
not sure, I don’t have the exact quotation, Madam Minister, and 
that’s what I’d like you to explain — where you indicated to 
boards of education that this was their last chance for voluntary 
amalgamation. And I’ve had some calls from board members 
and trustees to get a better understanding of what did you mean 
by, this is your last chance for voluntary amalgamations. Are 
you suggesting that if they are not amalgamating voluntarily, 
that you have a program in place to actually make some 
changes? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think . . . let me give you the 
history of this, Member. You will recall that in 1996 our 
government underwent the largest public consultation that it’s 
undertaken in the whole area of restructuring public education 
for the 21st century. In December of 1996 after meeting with 
5,500 citizens, receiving 1,000 returns of the questionnaire, 70 
briefs from various stakeholders, and hundreds of letters from 
individual citizens, the government determined that the best 

course of action for restructuring public education in the 
province was to do two things. Obviously this decision should 
be left to local people to determine whether or not they wanted 
to restructure, and there would be strong government 
leadership. 
 
At the time, each individual school board across the province 
was to provide the department with its proposal to launch a 
discussion process in their own individual school division, and 
they were to start having discussions with their neighbours. 
 
Now it’s very sad to report that, of the 107 divisions in the 
province, I think about 60 provided a written process to the 
department; the others did not. I think it’s fair to say that some 
school boards went — we don’t have to worry about this, the 
government’s not going to impose restructuring. I think it’s fair 
to say that the government entered into a commitment with 
these school divisions where they would go through a genuine 
process of discussion at the local level. They wanted to 
determine whether or not they should amalgamate, whether it 
was in their best interests, and they wanted government 
leadership. 
 
Now what has happened is, in some cases school boards have 
begun the process of discussion with their neighbouring school 
divisions. In fact in your part of the province, I’m extremely 
optimistic about all of the work that has been done regarding 
the coming together of various division boards to begin the 
discussions at the local community level as to whether or not 
they’re ready for a larger restructuring initiative come the next 
set of school board elections in the year 2000. 
 
There are some parts of the province where, I think it's fair to 
say no work has been done. What I have said to the trustees — 
and I had some remarks that will indicate this — is that this is 
not unlike many things in life. As long as I am the Minister of 
Education in this province, there will be no forced school 
division amalgamation. Now I may not be the Minister of 
Education for ever; I’m sure I won’t be. 
 
The other thing that I said is that ministers come and go, and so 
do governments. Governments change. And so what I said is 
that I cannot guarantee that there won’t be forced amalgamation 
at some stage in our province’s history. 
 
Now if you look at every other jurisdiction in this country, 
every other jurisdiction in this country — with the exception of 
Manitoba — has seen forced school division amalgamation. Or 
in the case of New Brunswick, they’ve totally gotten rid of 
school boards. 
 
So I’m saying to school boards, we entered into an act of faith. 
The faith that we had in each other was that we weren’t going to 
impose amalgamation, but they were going to do their work at 
the local level. So I was back out this spring to remind people 
of the act of faith that we entered into, that they would undergo 
a genuine process of consultation. And I think it’s fair to say 
that that has not happened across this province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, while I recall your 
directive, I guess I’m wondering, when you say that you expect 
all 107 school divisions to look at sharing — you very early on 
this afternoon spoke about the separate system and its 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

constitutional rights — and were you expecting those school 
divisions to look at amalgamations? Were you expecting 
Regina Public, Saskatoon Public, the largest rural school 
divisions around Regina — Buffalo Plains, Saskatchewan 
Valley — were you expecting those school divisions as well to 
sit down and come up with a plan of restructuring and 
amalgamation? Was that what your expectation was? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well there’s three ways to go here. 
You can have a full-fledged amalgamation, you can have 
partnerships, or you can have sharing. 
 
Now in the case of Sask Valley, Sask Valley has already 
restructured with the Blaine Lake School Division. And no 
doubt they’re talking to other boards of education. In the case of 
Catholic boards across the province, we have many examples 
where Catholic boards are sharing directors of education and 
sharing resource personnel at the local level. 
 
An example would be North Battleford, Spiritwood, Wilkie, 
and Unity. They’ve amalgamated. And then there are other 
school boards that have entered into partnerships with other 
Catholic boards. I believe the Swift Current board and the 
Shaunavon board are speaking to each other about sharing. 
Shaunavon and Moose Jaw Catholic boards are speaking about 
sharing. 
 
This is not a new concept. There is sharing going on across the 
province and I anticipate we’ll see more. But there are some 
parts of the province where there’s been very little effort made 
to have the discussion. And I would make this point. We have 
53 primarily rural school divisions in the province. The average 
size of their school population is about 1,200 students. If you 
look at the loss of students in those 53 rural school boards as of 
September 30, 1997, when we do our count, we lost 1,200 
students from the year before. There is an enrolment decline 
trend. And so what I’m saying is school boards are going to 
have to seriously consider sharing, partnershipping or 
restructuring in order to maintain the quality of education that 
we have presently. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess it would 
be an interesting statistic to see — and that would be . . . you’ve 
indicated that 60 boards of education responded with a plan — 
as to whether or not those represented a good cross-section of 
rural, urban, large city, small city, etc., because I think that’s of 
great concern. 
 
You’ve indicated that you’re disappointed that others didn’t 
submit their plans, and I’m wondering — these are comments 
and concerns coming from school boards — what is the next 
step? 
 
While you’re disappointed, you’ve indicated that while you’re 
Minister of Education, there will be no forced amalgamations. 
There are boards of education who have amalgamated or are 
doing sharing, and they’re looking at criteria and they’re saying, 
well I wonder what the minister is looking for in terms of a 
school division. Should it contain “x” number of students? 
You’ve made reference to 1,200 students as an average in 
saying — I think presently you’re suggesting that that might not 
be a number that’s going to hold for a while — we know of 
amalgamations that have taken place where there are 1,500 

students. 
 
If the department is looking at establishing criteria as suggestive 
criteria to say to boards of education, if you’re considering an 
amalgamation, you might be considering this, this, or this. Or is 
the question from you one such that says I don’t care what you 
do. I would like to see a plan from you that says you’re going to 
be sharing or you’re going to be amalgamating and what you 
come up with is strictly your own concept. Is that what you 
were requesting from boards of education? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think, just so I’m clear, each board of 
education in this province was asked to submit a plan of action, 
to have the discussion at the local level. Each board of 
education was not asked to do nothing, you know. Do nothing 
was not an option. Each board of education was asked to submit 
a plan about how they were going to consult with their public. 
 
Let’s look at the demographics in our school division, for 
example. What’s happened to the numbers of students? Let’s 
look at programs. What programs did we have years ago, ten 
years ago; what programs don’t we offer now. What curriculum 
support did we have five years ago; what don’t we have now. 
What are the benefits of doing nothing, and what are the 
benefits of doing something. 
 
And what I can tell you is that there were literally dozens of 
boards that chose not to submit a report and that was extremely 
disappointing because they’re the very same boards that wanted 
to go through this process themselves. They wanted to 
determine what they would do. They wanted to consult with 
their public and that sort of thing. They were the people that 
were encouraging the government not to force amalgamation 
and to let them undertake the discussion themselves, and in 
some cases they haven’t undertaken the discussion and they 
haven’t submitted a plan for discussion to the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I understand your explanation, Madam 
Minister. I was wondering what you expected and whether you 
received it, I guess. You have those statistics at your disposal, I 
don’t. If Moose Jaw public for instance — with, I don’t know 
what they have for students, probably 5,000 students I’m sure, 
if they said nothing, if they determined that they weren’t going 
to talk to anyone and decided that they just didn’t want to 
amalgamate and they felt that the delivery of the program in 
Moose Jaw was essential and they didn’t submit a report — 
now you’re suggesting you’re extremely disappointed with 
them. To do nothing was not acceptable. Did the boards fully 
understand that indeed that was what was expected of them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think all of the boards 
understood because we issued a response to the public 
consultation. I think each board was presented a letter asking 
for their plans by June of 1997. So this is not a new request. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You’ve 
indicated in this House that there were a number of successful 
amalgamations and we know that those have taken place. Has 
there been a public backlash to any of those amalgamations 
from community members that you are aware of? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I am absolutely aware of no backlash to 
those amalgamations, anywhere. No one has written me a letter 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

 

since the school board elections of October 21, 1997, saying 
that this is a bad way to go. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You’ve 
indicated that the changes to The Education Act — we’re going 
to see the changes to the francophone boards, and we’ll have 
107 boards that will become 99 — are there any other projects 
or discussions taking place right now that might lead to 
amalgamations prior to the next election two and a half years 
from now. Could you give us any of those possibilities? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There is some possibility before the 
next set of school board elections, we know that for instance in 
Estevan Roman Catholic, Weyburn Roman Catholic, and 
Weyburn Central, they have a shared service agreement for 
director and assistant director. In the Estevan Rural School 
Division they are meeting with their neighbouring school 
boards. 
 
Shaunavon and Maple Creek are sharing services, and we have 
a shared service arrangement that’s being worked out between 
Herbert and Swift Current. The Davidson School Division has 
established a committee to pursue amalgamation with 
neighbouring boards. 
 
Buffalo Plains and Cupar School Division — and you said that 
you didn’t think school boards surrounding a large place like 
Regina, that’s Buffalo Plains, would restructure — well they’re 
having their discussions with Cupar. Moose Jaw Roman 
Catholic has established a committee to look at sharing services 
with the Swift Current School Division. 
 
The Shamrock School Division and Wadena School Division 
are going to share a director of education and a central office 
staff come this fall. So that’s a possibility; sharing often is 
extremely beneficial to the boards. Saskatoon West and 
Saskatoon East and Outlook are still pursuing the idea of a 
larger division. Wakaw, Humboldt Rural School Division, 
Humboldt School Division, and Lanigan School Division are 
pursuing the notion of amalgamating. Kindersley and Rosetown 
— I’m advised they’ve established a task force to look at the 
possibilities of amalgamation, the benefits. 
 
Kamsack School Division has established a restructuring 
committee, and they’re looking at restructuring. And their final 
report is to be to their board by December of ’98. And the 
Biggar School Division is also involved in discussions across 
the province. And the Northern Lakes School Division is in 
discussions with the Spiritwood Roman Catholic School 
Division, and they’ve got a facilitator that’s been contracted. 
 
So we think there’s quite a bit of activity that is happening. But 
there are some parts of the province where no activity is 
happening. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for that 
summary. Madam Minister, one of the documents that I was 
looking for — and I thank you for the responses that you have 
provided for me — is a breakdown of the number of students 
enrolled in each of the different categories, urban, rural. You’ve 
indicated 57 rural school divisions. And I was wondering 
whether I could get that information from your department 
officials at a later date. I would appreciate that. 

Madam Minister, one of the other things that we always look at 
when we look at students that are enrolled in our systems 
throughout the province, in all school divisions, is home 
schooling. And one of the articles that came about in the paper 
— just a couple of weeks ago I believe — was that parents have 
decided that, due to the length of a bus trip, they’re going to 
home school. 
 
I’m wondering what are the home schooling numbers looking 
like? Have they risen dramatically over the last little while? 
And the other question, Madam Minister, that will allow you to 
give a much broader explanation here is, what kind of 
monitoring takes place of home schooling students to ensure 
that the program that they are taking at home provides them 
with a broad enough base, I guess, to ensure that when those 
parents and students collectively decide that they will enter, you 
know, the public system, will they be able to fit into a grade 
level applicable to the current curriculum? 
 
What kinds of structures do you have in place within your 
department to ensure that the home schooling of children across 
this province is adequately supervised? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I’ll give you the numbers. You 
may know that since we introduced our home-based education 
policy in 1994, registrations for home schooling have risen 
from 1,021 to 1,498 — so a 47 per cent increase. 
 
I think that this increase may be due to the formal introduction 
to our policy in 1994 in that students, parents, have two options. 
They can register with their director of education or their local 
school board in their area, or they can register with the 
department. The director of education or the person responsible 
for home schooling in that particular division board is involved 
with the parent in determining the appropriate curricula, what’s 
going to be taught. So there are supports from various boards of 
education across the province to those parents who wish to 
home school. 
 
I don’t have a breakdown of how . . . I don’t believe I have a 
breakdown in terms of how it breaks out in terms of rural and 
urban. But I can tell you that there are many, many parents in 
urban Saskatchewan that home school. I think this is a 
phenomena that is increasing, and it seems to be increasing 
across the country and across North America. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, do you have any records 
that would indicate whether or not there is an ease of moving 
students from the home schooling area to a division 4 program? 
And I’m assuming that they’ll be probably trying to enter into a 
grade 12 or whether they’re taking their final classes at home. 
Like, do we have numbers that would indicate how many 
people move from the home schooling system into the public or 
the Catholic system and whether or not there is any difficulty in 
actually determining the grade-level placement, that maybe a 
parent determines and says well I believe my child is ready to 
take grade 11 subjects and whether or not that is actually a 
successful attempt? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are unaware of any difficulties. 
Boards of education provide the following services if that 
parents registers with that board of education and not the 
department: registering, obviously; monitoring; establishing a 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

dispute resolution process; and special-needs student testing. 
Other services are left to the discretion of the boards of 
education. 
 
And I should indicate that when students are registered with the 
board of education, there is recognition in the foundation 
operating grant for home-based students and last year — or this 
year, in the foundation operating grant we recognize 
expenditures of $2.5 million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Yes, it does 
indicate that your recognition here is for 2.4 million, and you’ve 
indicated that those numbers are growing. Do you receive a 
report from I guess the director of education, provincially, 
whose responsible for the home schooling system as to the 
reasons why that program is increasing and whether or not there 
are difficulties administering that program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have some speculation that the 
reason why the numbers have increased so dramatically over 
the last four years is because now parents can register their 
students through boards of education and the department, so 
there is quite an ease of registration. I should tell you that we 
have a home-based education review committee and they are in 
charge of monitoring this new legal framework that we have. 
And they have not yet submitted a report to myself. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, one of the other concerns that we’re looking at in all 
across Saskatchewan — we’ve talked about the Scenic Valley 
situation with a four-day week and other school divisions that 
have looked at various kinds of school years. One other one, of 
course, is referred to as the balanced school year and I know 
that it’s been tried in a lot of jurisdictions. Cities, especially 
Regina and Saskatoon, have been on a balanced school year for 
some time, I believe it’s probably three or four years. I’m 
wondering is there is a plan in place to look at whether or not 
the entire province is going to move toward a balanced school 
year, whether you’re going to allow both to continue, and I 
understand that some of the concerns that are surfacing from 
parents is where they’ll have students that will be involved in 
both, one system and the other. 
 
When you’re talking about elementary grades and elementary 
schools being in one system and high school kids being in 
another system, we have two different school years. So 
basically, we’re looking at summers that become extremely 
short when you start talking about June 30 and August 7 or 8. 
I’m wondering if you’ve had a report on the benefits or the 
negatives that have surfaced from having a balanced school 
year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You’ll recall last year when we brought 
in amendments to The Education Act, that this was left to the 
discretion of locally elected boards of education and they 
determined whether or not they want to go forward with the 
balanced school year. 
 
I believe we have four balanced school years in the province. 
Saskatoon Catholic, Regina Catholic and Buffalo Plains, and 
the balance applies to both elementary and secondary students. 
And we also have the balanced school year in Moose Jaw, and I 
believe it applies only to the high school students. 

So basically there’s four. And this is up to the locally elected 
boards to determine whether or not they want to go forward 
with the balanced school year. It’s not the intention of the 
province to move to a balanced school year for all students in 
the province. We’ve left that up to locally elected boards. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Have you had any responses . . . I note that 
you have mentioned two of the larger Catholic systems, the 
Saskatoon separate and Regina separate. Has the reaction to 
your office been one that says that this was a favourable 
decision, a more negative decision, or is it an equal split? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think it’s fair to say that it’s a mixed 
reaction. I know that I have recently received correspondence 
from a business person in Saskatoon who is involved in 
gymnastics, and this business person runs a summer camp for 
gymnastics, for students that are involved in gymnastics. And 
it’s very difficult for him because the Catholic system is not 
balanced with the public system in the city of Saskatoon. So it’s 
hard to run a gym camp for both Catholic and public school 
children. 
 
So I would say for the most part the reaction has not been 
negative, but there are some people that have expressed 
concerns about the balanced school year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And we’re 
hearing the same kind of concerns as well from parents, where 
some believe that the balanced system, balanced year, is a good 
choice, while others raise various concerns that say that unless 
you have everybody on the same system — either the old 
school year or the balanced school year — it causes great 
concern. And I know that those kinds of concerns have been 
raised here. 
 
Madam Minister, if I could turn to another area, which is the 
area of special education, especially in the area of children with 
hearing disabilities. I was surprised to read the article James 
Roots, the executive director of the Canadian Association of the 
Deaf, said — and I was surprised to hear his comment — he 
said that . . . his statement, and I quote here, “is that 
Saskatchewan doesn’t appear to have any deaf instruction.” 
What Saskatchewan has is a medical rehabilitation program, not 
an academic one. And I’m concerned that someone who looks 
at all of Canada’s systems, all the provinces, looks at 
Saskatchewan and then says that we have moved in the wrong 
direction, that we are not able to deliver an academic program 
to children with hearing disabilities. 
 
No doubt you’ve seen the comment, Madam Minister, and I’m 
sure you reacted at the time that you saw the comment. I’d like 
to hear what your reaction is to the kind of program we have in 
Saskatchewan and how did this gentleman make that type of 
conclusion or draw that type of conclusion. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think it’s fair to say that there are 
varying opinions and deeply held opinions across North 
America about how deaf and hard-of-hearing people should be 
educated. I’ve long held the view that there are three ways to 
educate deaf and hard-of-hearing people. 
 
One of the ways is through the use of American sign language. 
One of the ways is through the use of English sign language. 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

 

And one of the ways is through the use of the oral tradition 
where deaf and hard-of-hearing people learn how to speak. 
 
I believe that parents should be able to have an option as to how 
they want their children to be educated. We no longer have the 
school for the deaf in the province of Saskatchewan. That 
decision was made in 1989. And I was involved in that 
discussion in this very legislature about educational programing 
for deaf and hard-of-hearing students. 
 
There are some people in this province that are adamantly 
opposed to the use of American sign language in Saskatchewan 
classrooms. There are some people in this province that are 
adamantly opposed to the notion of English sign language in 
Saskatchewan classrooms. And there are some people that are 
adamantly opposed to the notion of children learning how to 
communicate through the use of the oral language when they’re 
deaf and hard-of-hearing. These are fundamentally held beliefs, 
and there are fundamental divisions in this country and in North 
America as to the best way to educate deaf and hard-of-hearing 
persons. 
 
I’d just like to reiterate my own personal opinion that parents 
need to be given an option, and that is not the case in all boards 
of education across this province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, there does seem to be, there 
does seem to be some inconsistency. And I think you’ve met 
Tammy Benson before. She has indicated to you that in one 
system she was denied an interpreter and then, having 
transferred her child to a second system, an interpreter was 
granted and that she felt that that was what was necessary. So 
the choice of option to her was to move the child from friends, 
from a school that he was familiar with, to one where she felt 
that that was the best choice for her child. 
 
Madam Minister, I’m wondering what kind of directives does 
your department have in terms of how the Department of 
Education is going to ensure that children with hearing 
disabilities are educated properly. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As the member will know, being a 
former chairperson of a locally elected board of education, your 
board of education could not provide all services to your 
students, and there were some cases where your student had to 
go elsewhere in order to obtain those services. So I would say 
that in the case of certainly persons living in the city of 
Saskatoon, you do have a choice. You may not get that choice 
within the same division, board of education. For the persons 
living outside of the large major centres, they may not have that 
choice within their particular division, but they should have 
those services available to them elsewhere in the province. And 
I think for the most part we do have those services available. 
 
Now I would make this comment, that if you were to look at 
every board of education across the province, I suspect you 
would not find all three choices in every board of education’s 
jurisdiction. You might find two. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, would you know from your 
officials as to the number of students who have hearing 
impairment in our current systems, whether or not we could 
break that down to be the public schools in this province and 

the separate schools? Do you know how many students are in 
our systems currently that have hearing impairments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’ll have to get that information for 
you, Member. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, as far as your grant formula, how much money is 
designated by the department to educate hearing impaired 
children? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In addition to the basic rate, this year 
we moved the rate for high-cost students from $6,750 to $7,088. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, while we’re talking about special education needs, I 
think children with autism fit very, very clearly into that. And I 
guess one of the greatest, I think is tragedies, is that we don’t 
have a clear understanding of how to deal with these children, 
how to provide the necessary plan to ensure that these children 
are handled correctly. And I know that it’s a difficulty for 
health departments and social services and education. And I’m 
wondering what services the Department of Education currently 
has in place to actually deal with children who suffer from 
autism? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I can tell the members that we 
provide no direct services as the Department of Education to 
children that are autistic. Boards of education are stuck with 
that task. And high-cost funding in addition to the basic rate per 
student, there would be an additional $7,088, the previous 
number that I gave you, Member. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I’m wondering if you 
would know from your statistics how many autistic children are 
being home schooled as a result of parents determining that 
they would be best handled in the home setting? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’ll get that information for you. I 
think we should be able to find that for you. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I’m wondering if there are continued discussions 
between your department and the Department of Health as to 
how we could better address autistic children in terms of 
planning and ensuring that there is a program in place to better 
deal with autistic children. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — For the information of the members, 
we have an interdepartmental committee of Health and 
Education as well as Social Services looking at support services 
for autistic children and their parents. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, when we deal with all 
children who require special education and special needs and 
bring a special requirement into the classroom, you have to 
have a very well-trained individual who can deal with those. 
And I’m not familiar with some of the changes that have been 
occurring at the university levels, both University of 
Saskatchewan and University of Regina in the special education 
area. 
 
I’m wondering if the program that teachers that will graduate 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

this year and next year and over the next number of years, 
whether or not there is a form of autism . . . and whether or not 
there is a section where they will deal with children who suffer 
from that special need, and whether or not those teachers will 
become better equipped to be able to teach children who suffer 
from autism. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well you ask a very good question 
because one of the things that you no doubt know is that the 
special ed department in the College of Education at the 
University of Saskatchewan has lost a substantive number of 
people over the several years to retirement, and they have not 
been replaced. As a result of the downsizing of the department 
of special education in the College of Education, this fall 
there’ll be a merger between ed psychology and special ed, 
early childhood. We’re hoping — or I’m certainly hoping — 
that this will be able to assist us in the development of special 
education teachers in the province. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that I’m extremely concerned about 
what’s happened in the College of Education with regards to 
special education because, at a time when we have more and 
more special needs emerging, we need to have properly trained 
teachers in order to deal with some of these situations. And it’s 
troublesome when you see people like Barbara Bloom, who was 
an expert in the whole area of the mentally challenged, not 
being replaced, as well as other experts in the College of 
Education in Saskatoon who’ve not been replaced. 
 
We’re hoping that we’ll see some more permanent positions 
that will go to the college of special education and ed 
psychology because we see more and more children that are at 
risk, and we see more and more need for early identification in 
order to put in preventative strategies to assist those children 
and their families. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. While you’ve 
indicated that we see a non-replacement of retiring 
professionals, there has been a concern suggested that within 
your department that there also is a situation where, since we’ve 
had the changes to the delivery of the deaf program, the 
delivery of special needs education, that indeed we don’t have 
someone supervising or ensuring that there is top quality 
education delivered to all of our students with hearing 
difficulties or deaf children. Is there such a person in place, or is 
indeed that a correct statement to make, that there is no 
departmental official who actually oversees the entire province 
and ensures that deaf children are being dealt with in an 
appropriate manner under the special needs section of your 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think you raise a very good point. In 
July of 1997, the person who was the long-term provincial 
consultant for students who are deaf and hard of hearing retired 
and that person has not yet been replaced. But what I can tell 
you is that we have a policy at present where we second people 
from the field as needed on this issue. I’m hoping that the 
government’s strategy in the whole area of special education 
will soon be transparent. We know that there is a need to really 
take a look at this whole area. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I’m glad to see the minister move in that 
direction because I think we have to have someone there for 

people who have a concern about the needs of their children so 
that they can feel comfortable being able to talk to a supervisor 
who understands the entire province. And I look forward to 
your announcement that would indicate that we have someone 
in place to take care of the retirement that occurred in 1997. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the changes that you’ve suggested is 
that, you know, we’re going to be addressing The Education 
Act and ensuring that the francophone systems are converted 
from nine school divisions down to one. I noted in your budget 
. . . in the estimates as far as the language office and the amount 
of money that’s provided there to the minority office is that 
there . . . I’m wondering if you have any concerns about the 
cost of ensuring that the francophone legislation can be 
followed and that boards of education, the francophone boards, 
have the ability to do what your legislation suggests. Will they 
be provided any financial aid or will they be expected to 
complete their amalgamation from nine down to one without 
any financial support from your department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As you may know . . . now I don’t 
know if this is your predecessors or not but the Liberal 
government in Ottawa . . . your predecessors aren’t the Tories 
and your predecessors aren’t the Liberals. Anyway . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’re the Saskatchewan Party — new 
and different. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yeah, right. Which is the Liberals and 
the Tories? It’s very easy. We can just call it your predecessors. 
 
The Liberals in Ottawa have reduced funding to minority 
languages all across the country. And in this case, this is 
basically a reduction in the capital. The capital construction is 
pretty well completed for the francophone schools. We have 
made the same commitment to the francophone community as 
we’ve made to every other school board community, that they 
will receive grants on the same basis. And they also will be 
eligible to receive, I believe it’s $15,000 to assist them in their 
restructuring initiative. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, in the subvote no. 4 under teachers’ pensions and 
benefits, I note that there’s a significant reduction in the 
expenditure for teachers’ pensions and cost of living allowances 
this year. And previously there has been always a slight decline 
in the numbers. We were into that area of 118, 120 million, 
whereas this year I see a significant decline from 116 million 
down to 105. What is the explanation for that significant decline 
in expenditure in the area of teacher pensions and cost of 
living? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are a lot more teachers retiring. 
The bulge is coming where people are reaching the age of 
retirement, which you and I will soon be at. So that’s the 
explanation. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I did expect 
that answer and as we, I think, are aware, statistics are 
indicating that probably the 12,000 or so teacher body that 
exists right now is, I believe, about 30 or 35 per cent is eligible 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

 

for superannuation over the next five or six years. Now if that’s 
true, I think we’re going to see a significant decline in that 
number, Madam Minister. And while I look at your overall 
budget in Education, and you talked about the amount of money 
that’s been allocated to the grant program through the 
foundation grant, I note also that in the area of teacher pensions 
and benefits, because of the number of teachers now in the old 
plan — that plan is steadily declining — we’re looking at a $10 
million decline in expenses if we’re . . . Do you project that that 
will occur over each of the next number of years, that we’re 
going to see that kind of savings as far as the expenditure line? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We expect it to be fairly level and 
that’s because the cost of payroll is going up somewhat with the 
changes to the collective agreement. So I’m advised by the 
officials for the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission that we 
expect the number that you will find in your blue book to be 
fairly consistent over the next several years. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I don’t quite understand that, Madam 
Minister. If last year’s expenditure was 116 million and there 
was a significant decrease and a number of people retiring — it 
dropped to 105 million — and we’re expecting those kinds of 
similar changes to the teaching force, why wouldn’t this 
number continue to decline? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Each year when people retire, it’s 
offset because you have to pay out their pension under the old 
plan. As you know, it’s an unfunded liability. And then the 
other issue is that . . . So as people retire the other issue that 
happens is that people who are left might see a pay increase in 
the last . . . and so their contributions would go up and the 
government’s contribution would go up. So I’m told actuarially 
they expect this to be fairly level. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess what I 
was wondering about is the calculations of the teacher’s pension 
under the old system is based on the top five years, the average 
of the top five, and while we see salary increases negotiated 
under the new contract over the next number of years as 
teachers retire, their pension will be based on higher levels of 
salary than what we have in place today. So I can see that that is 
where there will be some increases. 
 
You mentioned the words unfunded liability and under the old 
plan. What is your actuarial studies showing in terms of the 
unfunded liability? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well the bad news is that it’s about 2 
billion; the good news is that it’s in a lot better shape than it 
was a few years ago for a couple of reasons. As you know, 
we’ve had some remarkable returns in the market so the fund is 
earning . . . the money that is there is earning money, so that’s 
the good news. We still have an unfunded liability of about $2 
billion but it’s in a lot better shape than it was a few years ago 
because of the improvement in the stock market. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, would you have the 
numbers at your fingertips that would indicate how many 
teachers currently are in the new plan versus how many current 
teachers who are in the teaching force are still under the old 
plan? 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don’t have the exact numbers here 
so I’m going to give you an approximate, and if I’m incorrect, 
they will correct it. I’m told that we have about 12,000 teachers 
in the province. About 7,000 people are on the new plan, which 
we don’t administer — it’s administered by the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation — and about 5,000 active teachers are on 
the plan that we administer, which is the unfunded liability. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Of that 7,000 
teachers, I guess there may be some that are considering 
retirement. Is that occurring already? Do we see teachers that 
are retiring from the new plan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Very few. The new plan didn’t come 
into existence until 1980 so the most . . . the maximum number 
of years that you’d have is 18 years so that you would have to 
have started your teaching career quite late in life in order to 
begin retirement. So very few have retired on the new plan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you announced the operating grants distribution to the 
school divisions — the $384 million. You noted that there were 
some changes to how you were distributing that grant to all of 
the school divisions. 
 
One of the concerns that was raised by school divisions, of 
course, was that they felt that they were going to be receiving 
full compensation for all salary increases for teachers. And of 
course you’ve also answered in this House that based on the 
equalization or the foundation grant formula, that didn’t occur. 
And I’m wondering whether that was a confusion or whether 
you indeed suggested to boards of education that they would 
receive full compensation for their entire costs of the newly 
negotiated teachers’ contract. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think if you look at Hansard, 
December of 1997 — I think you asked the question, Member 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right. And what did I say? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m not sure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well you should read it, because that’s 
what I’ve . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it’s very clear. 
Then obviously you can’t read. No, I’m teasing you. What I 
said at the time, and I’ve said it everywhere I’ve gone, is that 
the cost of the teachers’ salary increase would go into the 
foundation operating grant. That’s what I said. 
 
If you look at Hansard, I think it’s December of 1997, that’s 
exactly what I said. There was no mistake. I said that we would 
increase the foundation operating grant by the amount of the 
teachers’ salary increase. And I said that all across the province. 
I think part of the confusion is that many people do not 
understand how the foundation operating grant works. And I 
believe that that’s where the misunderstanding is. I know that 
the partners in education had no confusion. They knew exactly 
what I was talking about. For those people who understand the 
foundation operating grant, they know how it’s distributed. But 
of course there are people who don’t because it’s a complex 
formula in terms of the distribution of the grant. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I do read and I did read 
your answer. And I also read your comments in various press 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

articles long before December which seem to suggest — seem 
to suggest — that indeed boards of education would receive full 
compensation for all costs. And we can provide you with those 
articles as well to indicate that boards of education were 
expecting the entire cost. 
 
And I also look at your breakdown of the grant formula, 
Madam Minister, where you have indicated that $21 million — 
21 million extra dollars — are being provided to education. On 
the same side, Madam Minister, I do note that in your 
distribution formula, the equalization factor that is used to 
determine how much boards of education contribute has also 
increased significantly — increased by almost a quarter of one 
mill. And, as I understand, a quarter of one mill is somewhere 
in the neighbourhood of 7 to $8 million — closer to 8 million. 
 
So your announcements that indicate that there was going to be 
a significant amount of new monies spent in rural technology 
and in transportation and all of the other things also came into 
play when, by way of formula, you’ve indicated that boards of 
education must contribute an additional $8 million of the 
recognized expenditures. So when we start to look at the 
recognized expenditure column, even though that column has 
increased significantly, you’ve also asked the boards of 
education to pick up additional costs. 
 
At the same time I think that’s maybe where some of the 
confusion has developed for boards of education when they 
started to look at their staff component — the staff cost 
component — and indicated that their teacher contract, if it 
changed by 2 per cent for 1998, which it did, was going to 
result in X number of dollars worth of additional cost. Their 
interpretation was that they were going to get at least that kind 
of grant support. 
 
However, when you put in all the factors into place — the fact 
that the boards of education have been asked to contribute $8 
million more, that you’ve indicated the assessment situations — 
those boards of education in fact didn’t even receive the monies 
necessary, or the increase in their grant isn’t even sufficient to 
cover the cost of their teachers. And there are some boards . . . 
I’m sure you’ve received the phone calls and letters from those 
boards. 
 
At the same time they incurred a 6.9 per cent increase in the 
cost of their natural gas back in January that’s built into the cost 
this year, the full year will be borne now as far as additional 
costs. 
 
They’re looking at all of their other costs at their local level. 
The salaries that they’ll negotiate with bus drivers, all of those 
additional costs including curriculum costs, including increases 
in the cost of living, including costs of increases of products 
that they purchase, materials that they purchase — all of those 
kinds of things have gone up. And in the end result is that the 
amounts of moneys that you’ve indicated is sufficient to cover 
the salary increases, in fact isn’t enough. And boards of 
education as you are aware are indeed . . . have some concerns, 
have serious concerns that now they have to pass on those 
additional costs directly to their local taxpayers. 
 
(2015) 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — For the record the equalization factor 
was increased by .13 mills. So it went from 14.67 mills to 
14.80. This is an increase of .9 per cent, but inflation . . . .9 per 
cent — in terms of . . . it wasn’t 1 per cent or 2 per cent or 3 per 
cent or 5 per cent. The increase in the mill rate was .9 per cent. 
And we believe that this will be less than the rate of inflation. 
 
Now as you know, having been a chairperson of a board, and 
having been the president of the SSTA, (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association) the increase ensures a level of 
equalization across the province. And it is true that some boards 
receive no increase. Even though there was $21 million increase 
to the foundation operating grant some boards received none of 
that. 
 
And why is that? Because they are highly assessed areas. They 
have lots of oil and gas or they may have a potash mine. They 
may be making a significant amount of money from a particular 
industry. And they would get lots of assessment dollars relative 
to the number of students that they have. 
 
There are some places in this province where they may have 15 
students and they have a huge assessment. With 15 students 
they can have three teachers. You know it would be pretty nice 
to be in a classroom of one or two students because they have 
such a huge assessment. Well that is happening in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would say to you that this is about equalization; it’s about 
fairness. And those boards that have more students and have a 
smaller assessment get more money from the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, I’m fully aware of how the 
grant formula, and why the grant formula, is distributed in that 
fashion. There also was some concern expressed around the 
province that the foundation grant formula was a formula 
designed at the time when the cost of education was split 60/40: 
that is 60 per cent from government and about 40 per cent from 
the department. And it has almost completely reversed that 
amount and there seems to be some degree of uncertainty as to 
whether or not the formula is actually achieving what it was 
intended to do. 
 
And you’ve indicated that by suggesting that there are boards of 
education, due to the assessment, are at the point of 100 per 
cent of their funding; yet at the same time we are aware, as you 
are aware, that they have very little say in terms of how 70 per 
cent of their costs are passed on to them. So when we take a 
whole look at the formula and determine how assessment comes 
into play there are difficulties. 
 
When we look at assessment, Madam Minister, I’d like to have 
your comments. You indicated that you were adjusting, I think, 
the cap that you had placed last year. There was a 25 per cent 
cap on any reduction to school divisions and you were going to 
extend that to at least this year, but that it was not going to 
continue into next year. Is that accurate or are there . . . are you 
planning to continue with the 25 per cent cap beyond 1998? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It continues until 1999. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, a 
couple of questions here that have been brought to my attention 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

 

that I’d like to raise and get responses to. 
 
First of all, on capital construction, Madam Minister, the group 
that was here this afternoon, you’ll remember the . . . when I 
talked about education, the process that was taking place in the 
Assembly. There was a group here from Langbank, the 
elementary school. 
 
And a number of years ago two schools got together — actually 
two school divisions. One decided to release school after a fair 
bit of, not just lobbying, but after a vote that was taken within 
the area. And two schools amalgamated and the one carried the 
K to 6 and the other carried the 7 to 12. And they certainly have 
been . . . in the one school; the 7 to 12 school has needed a fair 
bit of work. That work has not been completed or even done, 
but there’s . . . the board has now reached a position where both 
schools are in a situation where substantive work needs to be 
done. 
 
And when it comes to . . . at the time I don’t believe, Madam 
Minister, any requests have come forward. But the question I’m 
asking is a hypothetical question. When it comes to capital 
construction and it comes to a request being put forward to a 
division and the division then putting forward the request . . . 
number one, what percentage of the construction, if it’s given 
the go-ahead, would be covered by the department? And 
number two, I guess, would be the — probably it should have 
been the first question —what are the criteria that the 
department is going to look to before they give approval for 
capital construction? Or is that capital construction strictly 
limited in the department’s hands, or is it a joint agreement 
between boards of education and department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If the board engaged in this project 
today, their share would be 43.7 per cent of the cost of the 
project. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, if the project is given approval 
to go ahead, am I taking it that the local board has the final 
approval, or does the Department of Education give a final 
approval as to whether a capital construction project would 
move ahead? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Department of Education gives 
approval because public funds from the province are involved. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And what are the criteria that the department is 
going to look for when it decides whether or not to give 
approval for a capital construction project? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Health and safety would be an 
important consideration, the condition of the building, the 
numbers of students in the building. Is this facility going to be 
here ten years from now? Will the population be there to sustain 
the facility? 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess, Madam Minister, those were some of the 
areas that were being discussed, and that was one of the reasons 
that a meeting was called about two weeks ago — a public 
meeting — because of the fact that you’re aware in this case, it 
just so happens we have two communities that have taken quite 
a while to finally work out their differences, get together and 
provide one school. The question now is it might be very 

difficult to justify the work that was needed as both schools 
have some health and safety areas that . . . some problems that 
are arising. 
 
And so the discussion has been, well in making this proposal 
it’s probably only legitimate to consolidate into one facility, and 
that’s something that the communities are currently working 
towards. And I believe there seems to be a consensus looking at 
longevity of the school and the fact that you can give more 
reasons to work with one unit by having K to 12 in one 
community versus the two communities. So I’m sure you’ll be 
hearing about this project in the near future. 
 
But those are some of the areas I wanted to bring forward 
because some of the questions that were being raised to me as 
the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) — what is the 
department going to be looking for? What are we going to have 
to do in making our proposal . . . first of all going to the local 
board and then working with the local board in making their 
proposal to the department? 
 
The second thing I believe as well, Madam Minister, and I 
believe you chatted a bit with my colleague, the member from 
Canora, is regarding the four-day school week and the Scenic 
Valley experiment. I believe Broadview, the Broadview School 
Division, has toyed with the idea. I’m not exactly sure whether 
their ratepayers have given a real nod. I know they’ve looked at 
it significantly especially since the last budget came out in 
trying to deal with some of the budget realities. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I believe you indicated earlier that the 
further expansion of the four-day school week is on hold. 
You’re waiting for, if I understand it correctly, a review. I’m 
wondering, Madam Minister, is this review under way? And 
when do you expect to have something back in regards to the 
four-day school week, and how well it has worked? 
 
Just for your information, the Grenfell School group that was in 
this afternoon are part of Scenic Valley. And I certainly asked, I 
didn’t get any negatives from the school group having . . . 
certainly the teachers, even the parents who were quite, most of 
them, were quite pleased with the program, how it’s been 
working to date. 
 
What I’d like to know from you is what process do you have in 
place right now in regards to reviewing how the process has 
worked before you look very seriously at maybe expanding or 
allowing the expansion of the four-day school week? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’re at the end of two years. We had 
an evaluation done by a Dr. Burgess at the end of the first year. 
We’ve extended this pilot — I think we’ve given them formal 
approval for three but it will be extended to a five-year 
approval. And at the end of five years we will have an 
evaluation done. 
 
As I’ve said to your colleague, we’ve called for a proposal for a 
group of evaluators to come in from outside of the province. 
Part of the problem when evaluating yourself is we all know 
each other. So we’re going to have an external reviewer engage 
in the process of looking at whether or not the four-day school 
week works from an academic point of view, and also a 
sociological point of view. 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

I will say that some of the research that I’ve looked at, 
particularly in the United States, the four-day school week 
lasted for a while and then it was gone. So we’ll see. At the end 
of five years, I mean, people could tire of this. The financial 
situation may be much better. The school board may be feeling 
better about things. And they may, at the end of the day, decide 
that they don’t want a four-day school week. 
 
On the other hand the evaluation may show that this is sound 
academically, or the evaluation may show that it’s not. So we’ll 
see what the evaluation shows us. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So, Madam Minister, I guess what I’m hearing 
you say, Madam Minister, is this is a five-year review. So until 
that review basically has been completed in the five years, 
we’re at a standstill. Scenic Valley will continue to function in 
its four-year role, and you’ll assess how it works over five 
years. You’ve looked at one year; you’ll have the second year 
now to look at very shortly, and to review and see how it’s 
working. 
 
Madam Minister, one other question I need some clarification 
on. In regards to — and I’m not sure whether it’s called family 
life and education, the program — but a recent call came 
regarding a letter that went out from one of the local schools 
and some concerns raised by some parents. 
 
And the question I have, Madam Minister, what resource 
materials does the department have? Have you given approval 
to a number of different types of resource materials? And I 
guess one in particular that comes up, and that was raised in this 
one local school, is the Degrassi Talk series. What I’d like to 
know is, is there approval for the whole Degrassi Talk program 
to be utilized in the schools as resource-based material or how 
much . . . what all do you have as far as resource material for 
the family life program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don’t have our curricula personnel 
here, but we will get that for you. So we will be able to tell you 
what support materials there are for the family life education 
curricula. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, when it comes to the family life 
education formula, I believe we discussed this before. Now I’ve 
just mentioned the one that was brought to my attention just 
recently which I have no knowledge about other than a little bit 
of information that went to the parents. One of the criteria . . . I 
think in our discussion even last year, I think, it seems to me if I 
recall correctly and . . . or need a clarification, that when it 
comes to that curriculum, as I understand it, each school board 
makes the final decision as to the program that they would 
endorse or would work together with using . . . working 
together with parents. Is that correct or is that just a program 
that all school districts follow or do they use different types of 
teaching materials? I’d like to know. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think the member’s talking about 
sexuality education in Saskatchewan classrooms. We do have a 
family life curricula in high school, and what I can say is that 
the kind of sexuality education or sex education used in 
Saskatchewan classrooms is something that’s determined at the 
local level, and there’s a lot of work that goes on between the 
school and parents to determine what’s appropriate for that 

particular community. And so I would say that, if sex education 
is being taught in a community, I suspect that they should have 
talked to the local people to see what’s acceptable from a 
community standard point of view. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Chair, thank you, Madam Minister. I 
guess that was the question I was going to ask and bring to your 
attention. I think that’s one of the suggestions I made to a 
number of parents that did call — to call the board and sit down 
with the local board and if there are areas that they’re concerned 
about, if there are areas of this sex ed program that are being 
offered that they feel that they can accept, to pass that on. 
 
I know talking to my colleague, the member from Rosthern, 
he’s indicated to me that certainly in his area, when he was the 
principal, before they really went ahead they took time to 
converse with a number of parents and determine which was the 
best route to follow in regards to the sex education that they 
eventually went forward with in our school. And I guess that’s 
the type of information I think parents need to know. I think 
some parents feel at times, when they get a letter that’s sent 
home from the school, and I think the letter is sent home in 
good faith, they feel that they’ve been boxed into a corner rather 
than asking for and sitting down to go over what’s being 
proposed. And they may find at the end of the day that some of 
the . . . maybe they’ll have some problems with some of the 
material, but maybe by sitting down and conversing, you can 
come to a common understanding and agreement where 
everyone is comfortable and the program still is presented. 
 
So I appreciate those comments, Madam Minister, and, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
just a few questions for you this evening. As I travel around the 
province and certainly in my own constituency, the school 
division is one of the things that we talk about — and that the 
school boards want to talk about — is the additional services 
that school divisions and schools in general happen to provide 
these days. Is it your general principle, your wish, that schools 
do provide more services or do you think that there are many 
services getting sloughed off to the schools that the teachers 
have to provide on a daily basis? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think the member’s observations 
are correct, that school is being expected to provide more and 
more services. And one of the things that we’re trying to do as 
government is to have the school board, the district health 
board, and social services come together in an integrated way to 
begin to coordinate and integrate those services so that the 
school isn’t totally responsible. 
 
And we have an associate deputy ministers’ forum, bringing the 
various government departments together, as well as regional 
inter-sectorial committees, where the regions are sitting down 
and trying to put together in a coordinated and integrated 
fashion, services for children and young people. 
 
And I think this is in response to the schools saying, look, we’re 
teachers and yet we’re being expected to become health 
workers, social workers, provide all kinds of supports to 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

 

children and families. So I think it’s fair to say that your 
observation is correct, but I think it’s also fair to say that there 
is much more coordination today than there was a few years 
ago. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Madam Minister, I guess with all these 
services comes a price tag. And as the education budget on the 
government side is shrinking and it’s increasing on the local 
taxpayers and the land base, property base, that’s an 
ever-increasing problem. 
 
I guess I would ask you — you really didn’t answer my first 
question — do you feel that that’s the way that we should be 
going or is it simply because of a funding crisis that the ship is 
heading that way? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I’ve had this discussion earlier 
today; obviously you didn’t hear the discussion. But I’ll repeat 
it. 
 
You’ll know that we’ve just had an exercise in this building 
around health reform, and keeping the Plains hospital open. 
And as I said to the member earlier today, this is a government 
that has tried to provide a balanced form of government in 
terms of balancing the budget, balancing the budget with the 
notion of tax reductions which you just talked about, and 
balancing the budget with the notion of tax reductions and 
improvements in social spending. 
 
Now if you look at how we’ve spent our money — and all you 
have to do is look in the blue book — a vast majority of funding 
increases have gone to the Department of Health, the very area 
that you’re protesting — $88 million increase in the Department 
of Health. 
 
If you look at the Education budget this year, there is an 
increase in the Education budget of $21 million in the 
foundation operating grant and $7.8 million in capital, so close 
to $30 million increase going to school boards. 
 
Now I don’t know how you can have it both ways. On the one 
hand, you complain about the burden of taxation at the local 
level. On the other hand, you complain about health care reform 
that has to do with saving money and shifting that money into 
other services. So I would say that if you’re going to be a critic 
— and I understand that that’s the role of the opposition — 
please be a balanced critic. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I did 
indeed hear your lecture earlier in the day. I didn’t care for it 
then; I don’t care for it now. And had you been listening to my 
question instead of turning around and talking to the people in 
the back benches, you would have understood my question a 
little better. 
 
It had very little to do with the funding. What my question was, 
is what are your views as to these services? Should they be 
provided by the school, or are they being forced on the school 
because of the funding crisis in other departments? My question 
to you is, do you agree with that, that the schools and the 
teachers should have to be providing more services? Or in a 
perfect world, should it be the other way where the services are 
provided and paid for by other departments? 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Just so you understand, I think what I 
said was that there is more and more pressure on the school to 
provide a host of services. This has been happening forever. 
Schools are expected to administer drugs, provide health 
services because that’s where children are . . . social services, 
guidance, mental health services, and so on. 
 
What I can say is that at a time when there was all kinds of 
money in this province, schools were still expected to provide 
those services, and now what we’re trying to do is get health 
boards — which I think you were involved with at one stage — 
involved in providing services at the local school level. That’s 
what we’re trying to do. 
 
Now is it happening? In some places people aren’t getting out 
of their boxes. They continue to want to operate from their little 
box. In other places it’s quite successful. We just had an 
opening of a facility at Nutana Collegiate in Saskatoon where 
the Health Board is going to have addiction workers there — 
mental health supports. Social Services is moving over a couple 
of social workers because 80 per cent of the students have some 
interaction with the Department of Social Services. 
 
So we’re beginning to see the notion of full-service schools 
where those services are located in the school. Is it happening 
everywhere? The answer is no, because some people are still 
operating out of their little boxes. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I’m sure some of the school divisions, the 
school boards and the teachers will be happy to hear that. I 
guess the question is do you agree with that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’ve been one of the lead ministers, Mr. 
Member. 
 
Mr. McLane: — So I take that as a yes. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I said, I’ve been one of the lead 
ministers on introducing the notion of a child action plan and 
integrated schooling services. I think that the community has to 
be much more involved in providing services from the school. 
So obviously I agree with it. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you. That wasn’t so hard. 
 
One of the other things that I’ve been hearing as I’m scooting 
around the province talking to the school divisions around the 
province, and in my own constituency as well, is the problem 
with the funding and the 60/40 split and the trend toward more 
government funding than local funding. And of course to 
compound the problem what you did earlier this year was to 
hijack the protocol agreement and force your views and your 
bargaining team upon the local taxpayers in this province, so 
that you could have your wishes for a settlement reached much 
easier than if you had us poor old landowners out there fighting 
back with you with our locally elected school trustees. 
 
I guess my first question on that issue would be is what kind of 
a relationship do you have with the SSTA these days? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think I have a good relationship with 
the SSTA. 
 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

Mr. McLane: — I guess I hope that’s a sincere answer because 
I’m almost positive that that isn’t the view from the other side 
of it. And if you’re reading from the School Trustees’ 
Association I think you’re very much off the mark on that one, 
Madam Minister. 
 
However, one of the things that you have done is, as I said, 
taken over the protocol agreement and forced your wishes upon 
local taxpayers. And certainly one of the problems that that has 
been created is that you’ve forced many of the school divisions 
into talking about raising taxes and local tax rates. 
 
I wonder, Madam Minister, if you could tell me how many 
school divisions does this province have a cap placed on their 
funding? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I don’t want to appear too 
defensive, Member, but I think I have a pretty good relationship 
with the Saskatchewan school trustees across this province. 
There are moments when we’ll disagree, and there will be 
moments when they will write letters, and there will be 
moments when we will just have to agree to disagree. I think 
that fundamentally we have a good relationship. We have a 
great deal of respect for each other and there will be times when 
we have a difference of opinion. 
 
In terms of the cap — now just to be clear what the cap means 
— the cap came about last year as a result of reassessment. And 
with reassessment, as you know, some school divisions saw 
their assessment increase seven times, which meant that their 
ability to raise taxes locally increased because of the value of 
their property, which meant that the foundation operating grant 
was reduced to their particular division. The cap affected 23 
school divisions across the province, and it represented $6.6 
million in actual money that school boards have, but if we 
hadn’t put the cap they would’ve had it taken away from them. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I’m sorry, Minister, I don’t know if you said 
it or not, is how many school divisions have the cap? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Twenty-three. 
 
Mr. McLane: — One of the problems with the funding 
arrangement was the fact that when you put some dollars into 
the education budget it was enough to cover the teachers’ salary 
but it wasn’t enough to cover a support staff. What are your 
suggestions to the school divisions to cover off that 
expenditure? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Just to refresh the member’s memory, 
we increased the foundation operating grant by $21.8 million, I 
believe. In addition, grants in lieu of taxes went to boards of 
$1.6 million. So, in fact, school boards across the province 
received close to $24 million increase unconditional funding; 
the teachers salary increase represented $15 million. So, in fact, 
schools across the province saw an extra $9 million. How they 
choose to spend that money is totally within their discretion. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Now many school divisions, Madam 
Minister, are telling me that the increase difference between 
what the teachers received and the total amount of the grants, 
does not cover off the same types of increases for the support 
staff. So that being the case, what is your suggestion? What are 

you telling the school divisions as to how to raise the money to 
keep those salaries in line? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As the member will know, the way we 
fund school boards in the province isn’t unlike the way Ottawa 
funds provinces. Wealthier provinces do not get an equalization 
factor; poorer provinces do. 
 
In the case of school boards across the province there are some 
school boards that receive very little money from the province 
because of their capacity to raise funds locally. Other boards 
receive a great deal of money from the province because they 
do not have the capacity to raise funds locally. So in some 
cases, school boards would have seen a significant increase in 
their grant that would have more than offset the cost of the 
teacher salary increase plus other costs, and some boards would 
have seen very little increase which meant that they would have 
had to cover the cost of teachers’ salaries locally. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Could you give us an example of school 
divisions that don’t have the capability of raising money and 
those that need very little money from the province. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, two examples of school boards 
that receive very little grants from the province are Weyburn 
and Leader. 
 
Two examples that would receive a significant amount of 
money from the province are Northern Lights which is in the 
northern part of the province with Cumberland House, La 
Ronge, Pinehouse, La Loche. And the other area would be 
Northern Lakes which is part of the forest fringe area of the 
province. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Could you tell us why the two divisions that 
get very little money don’t? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The answer would be very high 
assessment and relatively few students relative to their 
assessment. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Minister, could you tell me how long the caps 
that are on the 25 school divisions are in place? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — They’re in place to 1999. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Until April 1, 1999? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We introduced the cap last year. It’s in 
place to the next assessment which comes in the year 2000; so 
’97,’98, and ’99 school year. 
 
Mr. McLane: — What preparations are you making for those 
school divisions when that cap comes off? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I understand that school boards 
are planning for the eventuality of the cap coming off, so they 
have three years to plan. And I know that I’ve heard from some 
school boards with a cap that are beginning to increase their 
mill rate this year because, as you know, the money won’t be 
there once the cap comes off. 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

 

Mr. McLane: — That in fact is the only option that school 
boards have to recoup that money is to raise the local mill rate. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well that’s right because they’re 
getting more money than they’re actually entitled to. I mean, 
this is all about equalization and fairness, and while they’re 
getting $6.6 million, they have more money than they’re 
actually entitled to which means that the rest of the provincial 
boards have less money than they’re entitled to. So it’s about 
fairness, Member. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Yes, that’s right; it is about fairness. And 
fairness didn’t occur with the reassessment. 
 
I guess on a particular incidence, say a school division is 
looking at down the road of a shortfall of some three-quarters of 
a million dollars and aren’t prepared at this point in time, can’t 
go back to the local tax base to raise that money, what will 
happen at the end of time when all of a sudden they’re faced 
with a huge deficit position? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, just so I’m clear, Member, those 
23 boards of education on average have a smaller mill rate than 
other boards of education across the province. 
 
And I know you understand how assessment works. An 
example would be that if I’m — regardless of where I live in 
the province — and I have a $100,000 house that’s assessed at 
$100,000, I should be paying the same amount of school tax 
across the province; that’s what I should be paying. But if I’m 
living in the capped school division areas, I no doubt will be 
paying less because my mill rate is subsidized by the cap. 
 
Mr. McLane: — That’s right. However, because of 
reassessment some of these school divisions have been put in a 
bind. And you have capped them, so that takes away the 
problem for now and for last year and for next year. 
 
But what if a school division chooses not to look after the 
problem now, as you’re suggesting that they have three years to 
look after it. What if they can’t? What if they choose not to? 
What if the people that elected them are saying no way, we’re 
not paying any more and we want the province to come up with 
this money? And in three years time, in the year 2000, all of a 
sudden, whammy, there’s a school division sitting with 
three-quarters of a million dollars, looking for help. What’s 
going to happen? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well they’ve been given ample 
opportunity to make the adjustments necessary. They were told 
they were capped for three years and at the end of three years, 
with new reassessment, the cap was ending. So I would say that 
they would put their taxpayers in a predicament three years 
from now. 
 
I know in the city of Saskatoon, for instance, they phased in 
their increases in property taxes. And here’s an opportunity for 
those school boards that are capped to begin to phase in an 
increase to the mill rate, not unlike what the city of Saskatoon 
has done. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Are you and your department monitoring the 
school divisions to see if they indeed are preparing for the year 

2000? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are monitoring the situation 
through our regional directors. I think it’s fair to say that many 
school boards are phasing in an increase in the mill rate and 
other school boards aren’t. 
 
Mr. McLane: — If you’re monitoring them then, and watching 
to see them handle — and there are many that aren’t or if they 
are — is there any action that your department will be taking, or 
the government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don’t have any legislative authority 
to force them to do anything other than what they want to do in 
the area of the mill rate. They can’t deficit budget. There is that 
provision in the legislation. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I’m sorry. Madam Minister, I was interrupted 
there, and I didn’t quite hear all your answer. Would you mind 
repeating? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have no legislative authority to 
force school boards to increase their mill rate in order to deal 
with the cap that comes off at the end of 1999. What I can tell 
you is our regional directors — and we have regional directors 
in all parts of the province in the Department of Education that 
work with locally elected boards — and they are aware of the 
situation. 
 
Many school boards have begun to increase their mill rate. 
Some have not. But those that have chosen not to increase their 
mill rate have the right to make that decision. They can wait 
until the year 2000 to deal with the cap. 
 
Mr. McLane: — On amalgamation as well, some of the 
meetings that I attended with some of the school divisions in 
my constituency, one of the common themes that I heard from 
some of the local ratepayers and parents of children was that . . . 
the question was asked, first of all, what are the benefits of 
amalgamations? And most often we didn’t hear a lot of 
advantages. If two school divisions were amalgamating, there 
was a saving of one director. But then there were also a couple 
of assistants brought on line, so there wasn’t huge savings. 
 
And one of the things that I thought were quite odd was a 
number of the people, certainly with school-age children, were 
saying that . . . is our school closing? If we don’t amalgamate, is 
there a threat of our school closing? If we do amalgamate, will 
our school stay open? 
 
If the answer to those was both, no — your school is safe; we’re 
not closing your school in this particular community — then 
they really didn’t give two hoots about whether there was 
amalgamation. Does that cause you any concern to hear those 
types of comments? And I’m sure you’ve heard them in many 
places. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think it’s fair to say that we’ve 
just begun to see the benefits of amalgamation because boards 
of education were just elected on October 21, 1997. So we’re 
only about eight months old in terms of the benefits. 
 
I do know that certainly those boards of education that have 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

amalgamated believe that there are many benefits — not in 
terms of saving money. They have not saved money. But what 
they’ve been able to do is redirect the advantages of only 
having one director of education, one secretary-treasurer and so 
on . . . redirect those funds into supports for students. 
 
And I know in the case of Blaine Lake — and this is the one 
that I’m most familiar with — when they amalgamated with 
Sask Valley they had access to the curricula support people, 
their special education people, their technology people; all of 
those people were available to support those students and 
teachers. I think the same can be said when it comes to the 
Battlefords-North Battleford amalgamation. All of those 
teachers and students in the rural part of Battleford now have 
access to all of those services that urban kids have had for 
years. And that’s part of the advantage of that particular 
amalgamation. 
 
But certainly we are just doing a follow-up to restructuring. I 
think we’ll have that information by the end of June where 
we’ve asked school boards to specifically indicate to us what 
benefits do they believe that their students received this school 
year as a result of school board restructuring. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Some of the things that you’ve just related 
here, is there anything in place that’s sent to people when they 
are questioning what are the advantages of amalgamation? How 
does the message get out that there are more advantages than 
just the combining of a directorship and adding a couple of 
secretaries on to handle the extra duties? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Once we’re familiar with all of the 
benefits, which we should have by the end of June, it’s our 
intention to send this across the province to boards of education 
so that they can actually see what restructuring has meant. And 
I just want to make the point that restructuring may not work in 
all parts of the province, and maybe what some parts of the 
province will want to do is look at other kinds of sharing or 
partnershipping. But certainly restructuring can work in areas 
where there is more of a population. I’m not sure it works in the 
south-west part of the province where there are few students 
and large distances, but it certainly can work when you have the 
town of Humboldt, for example, that I think has four school 
boards located in the town. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Some of the problems that school boards have 
talked to me about with amalgamation are certainly . . . many of 
them are economic. Some school divisions are in very good 
financial shape. Some school divisions are ahead in their 
curriculum they tell me. Other school divisions maybe own 
their own buses. So what role does the government play and 
what role as minister in your department do you play in helping 
the school divisions to overcome that? Where you have a very 
rich school division trying to marry up with the pauper on this 
side and of course this one doesn’t want anything to do with 
this one and this one would love to go with this one? What do 
you say to them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I just went on a little tour around 
the province talking to school boards about this very thing. And 
I indicated at the time that we have said that we’re not going to 
force school board amalgamation. I’m not going to force school 
board amalgamation. The people are given a real opportunity 

here to work out the various arrangements on their own and 
some day some other minister and some other government — 
maybe yourself, Member — will decide that these folks had a 
long enough time to discuss this. They could have got it done 
on their own and they haven’t; and you know, the boundaries 
will be drawn for people. 
 
I think people have a real opportunity to do it for themselves. 
They asked to be able to do it for themselves and now what they 
need to do is cooperate with each other. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Of course in this province there’s been many 
rifts from community to community for years, whether it’s 
resulted from hockey or baseball or all those types of things. So 
we know what kind of problems that’s created. 
 
We saw it in health reform and certainly we saw what 
happened, I guess, because of your government’s wellness 
model and its plan to reform health. We saw many people from 
the Department of Health running around the province trying to 
convince and coerce communities, people, boards, into going 
along with the reform model and forming up some boundaries 
— of course today many of which make little or no sense. And 
of course it’s a system that’s caused your government a great 
deal of problems, certainly not only in the last three years but 
more lately in the last year — huge problems because we have 
an ailing health system. 
 
I guess my question would be — as I heard you talk earlier 
today, you’re not in favour of forced amalgamations and you 
will never do it as minister — do you genuinely believe in that 
or is it simply because of what happened with your 
government’s exercise in health care reform? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No, I genuinely believe in the notion of 
community development. I genuinely believe in the notion that 
people can make decisions for themselves and they don't need 
Regina telling them what to do. I genuinely believe, though, 
that people, when they say that they want to make the decisions 
for themselves, then they need to make the decisions. They 
can’t use it as a delaying tactic. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. McLane: — So I’m glad to hear that you have that 
commitment. I guess I’m just wondering, how do you go about 
tackling some of these problems that we just talked about, then, 
of the rich sister and the poor sister and all those types of 
things? And what’s your plan to see that that proceeds? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think one of the things that we 
did just recently was we went around the province and had 
meetings with school boards. And we had meetings in Swift 
Current and the people from the south-west corner came in — 
Weyburn, Yorkton, Melfort, Humboldt, Rosetown, Spiritwood 
— I think that’s all. So all of those folks came in and we had 
another discussion about this. One of the things that I believe in 
is talking and you talk and you talk and you talk. 
 
I would be extremely disappointed if there are some people that 
are into obstructionist tactics, and I think that it’s fair to say that 
there is a view in some parts of the province that some trustees 
and directors of education are into obstructionist tactics. So I 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

 

have spent several weeks in April and part of May, I think part 
of March as well, talking to trustees about getting on with their 
plans to have the discussions at the local level and to keep 
talking. And there are many examples in the province where 
trustees and directors of education are sharing services and are 
talking, and I think we’ll see many more restructuring 
initiatives that will have been done by the people themselves. 
 
As I said earlier, we’ve moved from 119 school boards to today 
when we introduced the legislation where we will have 99 
school boards. That’s pretty good progress in a matter of a year, 
and I think we’ll see many more by the time we have our next 
set of school board elections. But it’s not going to happen 
everywhere in the province. 
 
Mr. McLane: — I think of course the reason that . . . I guess I 
shouldn’t speak for you, but I probably, I’m quite assured, that 
the reason that we were interested in seeing things move on 
amalgamation would be for the benefit of the students of this 
province. And certainly that’s my goal and I’m sure it’s yours. 
 
However, if there are some real benefits for the students in 
amalgamations, then I want to know about them. The parents 
out there want to know about them, the parents tomorrow want 
to know about them, and certainly the school divisions will 
need to know about them as well. So if there are some real 
benefits for our students, and I’m not talking about closing 
schools because I don’t like that either and having less access 
for our rural kids to get to school in particular, then we all need 
to know about that. 
 
Then the question is, is how do you go about ensuring that if 
those benefits are real and they’re there and they will help our 
students out in getting a better education in rural Saskatchewan. 
If somebody doesn’t want to go that way . . . we all know that 
the numbers are down for local school elections. Nobody wants 
to run to begin with and when they do, you have trouble getting 
people out. We see that with health boards; we see that with all 
sorts of things. As a matter of fact, we have even seen that with 
the last provincial election. 
 
So having said that, how are we going to go about ensuring that 
these positive changes that may mean a better school system in 
rural Saskatchewan are going to be done because of 
amalgamation? How are you going to do that without actually 
forcing anything? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think information is extremely 
powerful and influential and that’s why we want to have a real 
good description of what amalgamation has meant for students 
and their teachers in classrooms across the province. And I 
think once parents see what the advantages are of restructuring 
— and it doesn’t have to mean loss of services and that it does 
not mean school closures — I think that parents will put trustees 
in a position where they will have to begin the discussion about 
amalgamation. And there are many, many trustees in the 
province that know of the benefits; they’ve already seen them in 
talking to fellow trustees; and there are many boards in the 
province that are beginning to have this discussion at the local 
level. 
 
There are some boards however that haven’t had the discussion, 
don’t want to have the discussion with their folks. But I think 

once more information is out and once we can really show 
people that there are advantages for students, I think that many 
more people will be interested in restructuring than we now 
have. And I know that the member from Canora — his area has 
gone through a restructuring initiative — and I think that we are 
starting to see the fruits of the collective labour of the people 
out there in terms of better programs for students. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Yes, I know the trustees are talking and 
sometimes that doesn’t translate into the local people, the moms 
and the dads. I’ve been on local boards and I know what that’s 
all about; you sometimes get all caught up and you think that 
you have a lot of the answers, but they don’t relay it back to the 
local people. 
 
As I’ve said earlier one of the things that I was hearing as I 
went to some of these amalgamation meetings was the fact that 
the parents’ biggest concern was that their school was going to 
close. If the school wasn’t going to close then they didn’t care 
about amalgamation. If somebody would’ve said to them, well 
you have to amalgamate and that’ll save your school, then they 
would’ve been all for amalgamation. Otherwise they were 
indifferent; they couldn’t care less. 
 
My question is how do we get that out there to the moms and 
the dads? That’s where it needs to be, not necessarily at the 
trustee level because they’re in it everyday — they deal with it 
all the time. How do we get it to the moms and dads? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well every board of education was 
asked to put forward a proposal to the department about how 
they were going to talk to the public about the very issues that 
you talk about. And 60 boards of education in this province did 
that — they submitted their plan to the department — and they 
are either just beginning or have been involved in a discussion 
with their public. 
 
The other boards did not — they did not submit a plan for 
whatever reasons, I guess they don’t think that they have to 
have this discussion with the public — and I think that’s one of 
the disappointments in this whole process. Because if someone 
who does believe in community development, that local people 
can make good solid decisions for themselves, it’s 
disappointing when you enter into a process with people and 
they don’t keep up their half of the bargain. And their half of 
the bargain is to begin the discussions with the folks at the local 
level to talk about what could restructuring mean. Could it 
mean better services for our students? Here is what they did in 
P.A. (Prince Albert) rural. Here’s what they did in 
Wilkie-Kerrobert. Here’s what they did . . . and start to show 
people that there are advantages. 
 
But you’re right. Some people don’t want to go through the 
process and that’s disappointing. But I think once the message 
gets out, and more and more boards have the discussions, and 
more and more ratepayers are aware of those discussions, 
they’ll demand it from their boards of education, to involve 
them in this kind of process. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Do you have a list of those bad boys, and is 
that a public list? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It’s not a public list yet. 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and welcome, 
Madam Minister. I just want to express for a few moments 
please, if I may, a couple of points I want to raise on northern 
Saskatchewan issues. The particular point I want to pick up on, 
Madam Minister, is the fact that you alluded to my hon. 
colleague here from Arm River the fact that you in essence are 
subsidizing the North in terms of some of their educational 
needs. Is that a correct assumption that you’re making at this 
point in time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. I believe that we provide about 90 
per cent of the funding to the northern part of the province to 
provide educational services for their kindergarten to grade 12 
students. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The reason 
why I’m bringing up that point, Madam Minister, is that it 
certainly lends a lot of credence to the whole myth out there in 
Saskatchewan that the government is offering extra dollars to 
northern Saskatchewan. It’s doing all it can for northern 
Saskatchewan. When the fact of the matter is, to be very clear 
and to be very fair, northern Saskatchewan does not take part in 
revenue sharing. They do not have any income directed right to 
the local school boards from mining, from the forestry, from the 
tourism activity, from the personal income taxes, from the 
hydro generation. 
 
So it’s very unfair of you to stand up in the Assembly today and 
give the impression that northern Saskatchewan is being 
subsidized to the tune of 90 per cent. I think the key thing is that 
a lot of northern communities don’t have a tax base. And I think 
in general, northern Saskatchewan should not be put in that 
perception that they are in essence being subsidized to the tune 
of 90 per cent. Would you want to comment on that, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Subsidy is absolutely the wrong word, 
Member. I never used the word subsidy. Here is how the 
foundation operating grants work. I’ve mentioned this many 
times but I’m going to mention it once again. 
 
The foundation operating grant is the grant that is in the blue 
book of some $384 million. This is the money that the province 
transfers to school boards to help educate our young people in 
this province. 
 
Now what determines the amount of money that the school 
board gets? The answer is, if I am a school board in Leader, 
Leader School Board, I’ve got lots of oil and gas and there are 
property taxes and school taxes on those wells. I have 
agricultural assessment. I might have light industrial. I will have 
my towns and villages where people pay property taxes and 
education taxes. Now Leader has a tremendous capacity to raise 
money locally through the assessment system. They also have 
few students so they would get a small amount of the 
foundation operating grant from the province. 
 
Now Northern Lights School Division — Northern Lights 
School Division has some places that pay no taxes, no property 
taxes. They have some places that pay property tax such as 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Pinehouse, La Ronge, and Air Ronge. Some of 
the communities pay property taxes or education taxes. There’s 
a great deal of Crown land. Well taxes are not paid on Crown 

land. 
 
The fact of the matter is the North has many students, many 
children. The population is growing. They have a small capacity 
to raise money from local assessment so they get more money 
from the province. Ten per cent of their money is raised locally 
through assessment on property, privately owned property, and 
90 per cent comes from the province. They are considered a 
low-assessed, high-grant-from-the-province area, as is Northern 
Lakes and other parts of the province. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think the key 
thing here is, as you’re probably aware now after three years of 
me sitting as MLA for Athabasca, I become very defensive 
when I hear the word that’s often spoken in this Assembly — 
the impression that the North is being subsidized by southern 
Saskatchewan. And on many occasions the member from 
Cumberland has used a phrase that for every dollar we take out 
of the North we put a dollar-sixty back in, when in fact nothing 
could be further from the truth. 
 
So the fact of the matter is here — I want to be very fair and 
very forthright with you, Madam Minister — is that no matter 
how the formula works, and I understand the formula in terms 
of what you want to talk about here this evening . . . the fact of 
the matter is I do not want to leave anybody in the province of 
Saskatchewan with the impression that the North does not 
contribute anything to the province in general and that they’re 
being subsidized 90 per cent on education. They’re being 
subsidized . . . for every dollar we take out; we’ll put $1.60 
back in. That myth has to stop. It’s got to stop. The North has 
contributed significantly to the province of Saskatchewan and 
the economic fortunes of Saskatchewan. And that, Madam 
Minister, is the bottom line. 
 
So that’s the reason why I took exception to your comment 
about you guys taking care of 90 per cent of the educational 
costs of northern Saskatchewan. The fact of the matter is yes, 
you’re right, absolutely correct. Because of the economic 
misery in some of these northern communities, there isn’t a 
high tax base. There isn’t a tax base that we can tap into and 
readily fund some of our educational needs. 
 
However northern Saskatchewan, as I mentioned, accounts for 
half the land mass of the province. They have made a 
significant contribution to the province of Saskatchewan. And 
that’s the point I want to make very clear this evening, Madam 
Minister. 
 
And the other fact that I want to talk about is that, as you’re 
probably aware, northern Saskatchewan does have a lot of 
capital needs. And for the sake of some of the teachers perhaps 
or perhaps some of the people that may be watching this 
evening, if say Pinehouse needs a new school, they come to you 
and they say, Madam Minister, we have a whole pile of students 
here. Our buildings are ageing. There’s some concern about the 
fire department having regulations or rules that we can’t meet 
— all in all, all these are very good arguments, very good 
points. What’s the process and what’s your response to them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What Northern Lights School Division 
would do is make an application to the department which they 
already have. The department would assess the criteria. They’d 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

 

be put on the list in order of priority. Pinehouse will know 
where they are on the list, and as the money becomes available, 
they’ll be funded. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The second 
part of the equation is . . . the other example is Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
They also have a growing population. I believe it’s something 
like 500 students in that small school. And there has not been 
any major construction in Ile-a-la-Crosse for a number of years. 
And in fact, Madam Minister, as I speak today, there are 
portable trailers set up outside of the school in Ile-a-la-Crosse to 
accommodate the ever-increasing student population. And yet 
of course there’s been a long list of processes that the school 
board has followed, and the people of the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse have also talked about some of the needs of a 
newer facility. The whole community needs a brand new 
community gym. 
 
All these different concepts, and yet year after year, we hear a 
number of arguments that there’s processes. There are budget, 
there are things to follow. And yet when it’s available to you to 
use the whole process to your advantage as Minister of 
Education, be it consulting and negotiating with professionals 
out there, you can do what you want. But the people of these 
communities continue to wait. 
 
And the other fact I want to raise here today is the fact that at a 
P.A. meeting when Ile-a-la-Crosse eloquently spoke about the 
need for the new school and Pinehouse spoke about the need for 
the new school, your comment was well, unfortunately, 
Ile-a-la-Crosse and Pinehouse are not priority at this point in 
time. Could you elaborate on that statement you made in P.A.? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Obviously you weren’t there, and 
obviously you’re not getting the right information. What I said 
is that Pinehouse is on the list. Pinehouse will get a school, as 
the money becomes available. And in fact I’m going to be 
visiting Pinehouse to look at their school. 
 
I should tell you that as of April 30, 1998, no formal request 
had come from the Ile-a-la-Crosse School Board for a major 
capital project at Rossignol School. So just to set the record 
straight member, as of April 30, 1998 — now maybe 
something’s come in in the last month — no formal request has 
come from your Ile-a-la-Crosse School Board for a school or a 
renovation at Rossignol School. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well Madam Minister, according to the 
school board meeting, you know, that I attended, they have tried 
on numerous occasions to approach your department to ask for 
some specifics on some construction of a school in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, for improvements to the school system. Now I 
guess the problem that I have today is that you indicated to me 
that there has been no application as such as of April 30. And 
certainly the information that you’re providing me today will go 
back. 
 
And the question I have is that in the event that they do apply 
— if it’s Pinehouse or Ile-a-la-Crosse or any other school in 
northern Saskatchewan — how long would they have to wait 
before they get some kind of formal answer from your 

department as to yea, they are getting some capital construction 
dollars in these northern communities, or nay, they are not? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The answer for this year, if they get 
their application in, will be no because all of the money has 
been spent. They’ll be put on the list. And I can tell you this 
that Pinehouse will get a facility before Rossignol School gets a 
facility because Pinehouse is in much deeper need for a school. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I most 
certainly agree with your comment that Pinehouse is in dire 
need of a new school. They have talked at great lengths with 
you on that, and that goes to my other part of the question. Has 
Pinehouse since submitted an application for a brand new 
school, and what was the submission all about, and how soon 
will they find out whether they are getting this new school or 
not? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, just for the record, Pinehouse 
does have their application in. We’re going to have to see a 
significant increase in our capital budget in 1999 in order for 
Pinehouse to be approved in 1999. Obviously it all depends on 
the money, and obviously it depends on, you know, where 
health care is . . . or education is in terms of the public’s mind 
when it comes to health care. Because basically, you know, 
people are really talking about health care, and health care 
always seems to get all of the money in our budget . . . or a lot 
of the money in our budget. So I would say it would depend on 
where the state of health care is in the province whether or not 
there’s a huge increase in my budget. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Madam Minister, could you say today that at 
no time did you indicate to any school division, Ile-a-la-Crosse 
and Pinehouse, that you need not apply for capital construction 
dollars because there is no money available? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — People can apply, but it doesn’t mean 
you’re going to get your project approved this year. 
 
Let me tell you how the list works. It’s not like the old list 
under the former Tories. It’s not like that. It’s like this. You 
make an application to the capital planning department in the 
Department of Education. Based on criteria they put you on the 
list, and as the money becomes available, you go down the list 
and you fund it. And sometimes a crisis might happen and you 
go up the list. You might jump ahead because you got a huge 
occupational health and safety issue or you might have a huge 
increase in population. But that’s the way it works. 
 
I have never told anybody, don’t apply because you’re not 
going to be on the list. You can always get on the list. It 
depends on how much money is available whether or not you 
get your project funded. It may take . . . you know, as I said, 
there’s $300 million worth of applications. We may have to find 
$300 million in new capital before you get on the list. Do you 
understand? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess the 
question I asked you answered for yourself. But at no time did 
your officials or your department tell any community in 
northern Saskatchewan, which includes Ile-a-la-Crosse and 
Pinehouse, you need not apply because there is no dollars 
available in the capital construction budget? Is that correct, 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I have not said that. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — And how about your officials and various 
departmental people that you have available to you? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, I guess I’d have to take a canvas 
of them, and they’re just not all here. So I can’t speak for my 
officials, but if you can tell me whether one of my officials said 
this, I’d like to know their name. So you know if you’re going 
to make the allegation that one of my officials said this, you 
give me the name and then I’ll find out if the allegation is right. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well, Madam Minister, we will certainly find 
out the information. When the information does come available 
I’ll certainly present that to you. 
 
I guess my argument, what I’m trying to get at, Madam 
Minister, is — we made the point, and I may have belaboured 
the point in the last three years, in fact — that the northern part 
of Saskatchewan contributes a significant amount to this 
province as a whole. And secondly, that there have been 
ongoing, continual capital construction needs in northern 
Saskatchewan, in particular Pinehouse and Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
They have been talking about this for a number of years. 
 
And the fact of the matter is, Madam Minister, is I don’t do this 
from a political perspective. I’m not trying to do this to try and 
prop up my future political endeavours, Madam Minister. I’m 
fair to the process and I want to make sure that the people that 
are out there certainly get their concerns heard here. 
 
And I guess what I’m trying to do here, Madam Minister, is I’m 
trying to speak on behalf of the teachers that are living in 
northern Saskatchewan. And as of this year talking to a number 
of teachers . . . I understand there’s going to be a significant 
amount of teachers leaving northern Saskatchewan and seeking 
employment opportunities elsewhere, primarily because of a 
number of reasons. Frustration is one of them. It just seems 
there’s a lack of appreciation for some of their skills and some 
of their commitments in some of these settings. 
 
And the other fact of the matter is the huge amount of students 
per classroom, primarily because some of their capital needs 
have not been met for the last 5, 10, 15 years. Would you care 
to comment on that, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I do know this, that there’s no 
question that there are people that have been teaching in certain 
parts of the province for, you know, several years because there 
weren’t opportunities available in other parts of the province. 
 
And as I mentioned earlier, we have a large number of teachers 
that are retiring. And when large numbers of teachers retire then 
that opens up their positions in various centres across the 
province. So I think it’s . . . two observations I think we will see 
people moving around the province because of retirements, I 
also think we’ll see a number of new teachers coming into the 
field because of retirements. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Madam Minister, I think a lot of teachers are 
leaving northern Saskatchewan, not so much in Ile-a-la-Crosse 

and Pinehouse — not to have those two communities dominate 
the discussion here — but in general across the North there are 
a significant number of teachers leaving northern Saskatchewan 
this year and seeking employment opportunities elsewhere. 
 
And the one primary reason I didn’t mention was the fact that 
the cost of living in northern Saskatchewan has increased a 
significant amount of dollars over the past years and those 
dollars are coming at the expense of the teachers. And all of a 
sudden the attraction of working and living in northern 
Saskatchewan as a teacher is no longer there. 
 
So first of all, you have all these problems associated with 
substandard facilities, overcrowded classrooms, a lack of 
appreciation for some of their skills, and then you turn around 
and you talk about the fact that many of the incentive packages 
to attract people to northern Saskatchewan — which is a vital 
part of this province, Madam Minister, for the resources they 
put into this province — there’s nothing there for them, to keep 
them there. 
 
Now have you got any idea how serious that problem is in 
terms of facing the teachers of northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think it’s fair to say that this is not 
something that the teachers’ federation raised at the bargaining 
table with the government-trustee-employer group — that this 
was a major problem, where teachers were finding it more and 
more difficult to teach in the North because of the cost of living. 
 
I’m reminded that there is a northern allowance on top of the 
teacher’s salary. But I would suggest to those teachers that 
you’re talking to that they need to take this up with their 
teachers’ federation so that the next time they go to bargain the 
next collective agreement, which comes in a year and a half, 
this is something that they can discuss at the table. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well, Madam Minister, I’ve spoken to a 
number of teachers and one of their primary concerns is the fact 
that there is a great concern on the part of a lot of teachers 
leaving northern Saskatchewan and it’s primarily because of the 
cost of living in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We spoke about the power rates. We spoke about the gas rates 
here. We spoke about some of the heating costs, and the list 
goes on and on. So the fact is that if the average citizen were 
paying those costs in northern Saskatchewan then of course 
your average teacher would also be paying those costs. 
 
And I guess the important issue that I want to raise here is that 
one of the biggest challenges northern Saskatchewan has, 
Madam Minister, is keeping the qualified and committed 
teachers in our communities. And we have a number of 
examples in Ile-a-la-Crosse alone, and I say this now, Madam 
Minister, because I don’t really know all the teachers in 
northern Saskatchewan but I say it from my own personal 
perspective. 
 
Back in Ile-a-la-Crosse we have a number of teachers that have 
throughout the period of time contributed a significant amount. 
Some of these people are local people like the Bouviers — 
Karen and Glen. Others are like our vice-principals, Barb Morin 
and Vince Ahenakew. All these people have contributed a 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

 

significant amount to their community. 
 
And we also have people coming into the community like the 
Schommers and the Zingers. They come and add to our 
community as other communities have also witnessed other 
teachers adding. 
 
So Madam Minister, when you get some qualified teachers that 
are dedicated to community service and that are doing all that 
they can to try and make Ile-a-la-Crosse and La Loche and 
Pinehouse and Beauval and Buffalo Narrows a better 
community, then your government should recognize that. And 
respect some of their demands, and respect some of their wishes 
by being able to teach in decent-sized classrooms, in decent 
facilities, with the respect that they need . . . and the fact of the 
matter, with the incentives they need to stay in these northern 
communities. 
 
These teachers are very, very valuable to us and we want to 
keep them there. And, Madam Minister, some of the policies 
and some of the directions you’re taking are simply not 
complementing the wishes of those people that want to keep 
those teachers there. 
 
So I urge you today to give me some kind of response as what 
are you going to do to specifically address the challenge of 
many teachers leaving the North? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think the member will acknowledge 
that he has a locally elected board of education in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse and Northern Lights. Will the member 
acknowledge that? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Yes I would. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, he acknowledges that he has a 
locally elected board. The other point that he needs to 
understand and recognize is that we pay about a third more to 
Northern Lights, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and Creighton for students 
because of the northern factor — a third more of the recognized 
expenditures. 
 
So if you were in the South you get 100 per cent; in the North 
you get 133 per cent more, okay? So there it is . . . this 
government does recognize the importance of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would say to you, if you have trouble keeping teachers in the 
North, you have representatives from each of your communities 
on that Northern Lights school board. You live in the 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse, where all of the people on that 
school board are from the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. Those 
people . . . if you’re so concerned about it, you have an 
obligation to go to those people and ask them — given that 
huge amounts of money come from the province for education 
— to see if there’s something that they can do to keep their 
teachers in their communities. 
 
We don’t negotiate collective agreements at the local level — 
we do provincially. We’ve just succeeded in negotiating a 
provincial collective agreement which teachers have ratified. 

And as I said, we give lots of support to rural students in rural 
Saskatchewan through the small-school factor. We had that 
discussion earlier. We also give lots of support to northern 
students by recognizing all of the expenditures and giving them 
a third more than anybody else. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Madam Minister, here we go again. Again, 
the impression you’re leaving is that you’re doing all these 
great and wonderful things for northern Saskatchewan. The fact 
of the matter, Madam Minister, as I’ve said before and I’ll say it 
again and I’ll continue saying it, the North contributes a 
significant amount of dollars to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we’ve got to learn here in Regina is we’ve got to 
learn to stop apologizing for what the North gets and start . . . 
what the North gets and start finding what the North needs. And 
the key thing here, Madam Minister, is rural Saskatchewan is 
much the same as northern Saskatchewan. These specific areas 
are seeing depopulation. They’re seeing some economic 
challenges in certain sectors. 
 
And as a government you should recognize that and respond to 
that, respond to that with innovative and exciting approaches 
that people can help you design. And all it takes, Madam 
Minister, is a little bit of effort on your part to really sit down 
and hammer home a plan. Okay Pinehouse, instead of saying if 
the sky is blue tomorrow, we might get you a facility. Well 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, I’m sorry, Pinehouse is first on the list. If the 
sky is blue tomorrow, then maybe by Wednesday it’ll be 
overcast and you’ll get your new facility. 
 
Madam Minister, we need more than “if.” Madam Minister, we 
need more than a list. We need commitments that within five 
years, within ten years that you’ll have some serious projects in 
northern Saskatchewan to address what I’ve been talking about 
here for the past half-hour. Would you comment on that, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You know what I find so interesting 
about the member’s comments is that he doesn’t acknowledge 
anything, any of the good work that we’ve done. For instance, 
there are now community schools all across the North. In fact 
your school boards and schools have written me letters thanking 
the province very much for putting in place northern 
community schools. 
 
There was a huge conference in La Ronge, and people from 
your community — where you grew up and represent — all 
communities across the North were there. I didn’t hear any of 
them talking like you’re talking. They were talking in a positive 
way. They were talking about all of the collaborative work 
that’s being done across the North with communities and the 
province and local governments coming together to provide 
important public services to those communities. 
 
So, Member, I hope you’re not misrepresenting what 
communities are saying because that’s certainly not what I’ve 
heard. 
 
I guess the final point I’ll make to the member is that, you know 
there’s only so much money. There’s a huge commitment in last 
year’s budget and this year’s budget to northern community 
schools. There is a huge commitment in terms of increased 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

capital spending, $7.4 million. A big commitment in increased 
spending of $21.8 million in the operating grants to school 
boards across the province; that’s $30 million. 
 
But I think I remember that this member is one of the people 
that’s going to chain himself to the Plains hospital to save the 
Plains. He wants more money put into health care. And I would 
say, as you’re putting more money into health care, Member, 
there’s only so much money that goes around. We can put all 
the money into health care, but there isn’t going to be a school 
in Pinehouse. There isn’t going to be a renovation at 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. And there isn’t going to be everything else that 
you want. 
 
So I would suggest to you, Member, make up your mind. Are 
you going to represent your northern residents, or are you going 
to represent the supporters of the Plains hospital? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Madam Minister, I must say that I was very 
confused by your response and those types of petty politics 
obviously don’t work — they never work. People in northern 
Saskatchewan will not be fooled by these very feeble-minded 
efforts of trying to direct or misdirect the questions we have 
today. 
 
I guess my point, Madam Minister, is that much like you stand 
up today and say this is what we’re committing to northern 
Saskatchewan, and today as I’m speaking and asking a question 
and you’re not paying attention here. But however, Madam 
Minister, the key point I want to make today is that you cannot 
convince me that we have the same level of commitment to 
education and the same playing-field and educational field in 
northern Saskatchewan that you do in the rest of the province. 
That’s my argument to you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’ll take this commitment that we’ll do 
everything we can to enhance the status of education in 
northern Saskatchewan and all across the province. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well, Madam Minister, I guess the point I’m 
trying to make today is that if you are doing all that you can to 
enhance education in northern Saskatchewan, then: 
 

(a) We must have some serious commitments in order to 
meet some capital construction dollars, some capital 
construction projects; 
 
(b) We need to make sure we retain some of our teachers 
and some of the staff, the support staff in northern 
Saskatchewan; 
 
(c) We must also make sure that we begin to work with the 
parents with the boards of education to make sure that 
some of these things are real that I talk about today, they’re 
not something that we’re making up in our mind. 

 
And, Madam Minister, the point I’m trying to make above all 
else is that we have to have a plan. Northern Saskatchewan, you 
don’t hit and miss. You sit down and you make a serious plan. 
 
And I guess the point I’m trying to also clarify here, Madam 
Minister, when you look at northern Saskatchewan 
communities, there are serious housing problems, Madam 

Minister. There are serious employment problems. There are 
also some serious challenges facing the community socially. So 
as a result of all those challenges, there’s two places that these 
challenges show up — one is in the court system and the other 
is in the school system. 
 
So the point we’re trying to make here, Madam Minister, is that 
that is the reason why we need to make sure that education is 
prioritized. Education is something that we feel is very 
important to northern Saskatchewan people, and that we begin 
to appreciate the efforts of the local school boards and the 
teachers to try to get an economy going, to try to get the people 
educated so they’re able to fight for what they believe is right, 
and fighting with the proper education is the first step that they 
feel is necessary. 
 
So, I think the key point I’m trying to again stress here, Madam 
Minister, is that northern Saskatchewan, to me, is probably the 
one area that your government has not paid enough attention to. 
And you can stand here and you can spout off numbers all night 
if you wish, you can talk about all the great things you’re doing, 
but until you begin to realize that there are some serious 
shortcomings in northern Saskatchewan because of your 
allocation in terms of the budget dollar, then that problem will 
continue to fester, and of course the teachers will continue to 
subsidize other areas that haven’t been taken care by the 
government. 
 
And I guess the couple points I want to make before I sit down, 
Madam Minister, is that one point I, we always speak about in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, is the amount of teachers that have lived in the 
North and the many years that they have stayed there. And you 
should talk to them teachers sometimes, the teachers that have 
served 20, 25 years in northern Saskatchewan. And they’ll tell 
you about the frustration that they face. They don’t get up from 
their home, drive to work at 8 o’clock and come home at 4 
o’clock, and their day is done. Many times, Madam Minister 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who does? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — A lot of people do. Many times . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Teachers? Teachers? I don’t think so. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Madam Minister, these people are up at 9, 
10, 11 o’clock at night talking to young children about certain 
things in the community. It’s very frustrating. It is very 
frustrating to talk to a child about education when they have a 
housing problem or to a youth when he has got a crime problem 
or to a young parent trying to come back when he hasn’t got an 
employment opportunity. 
 
The bottom line, Madam Minister, is that the North, the only 
commitment I see to education, Madam Minister, are the 
teachers, the school boards, the parents, and the students. I 
don’t see any of the appreciation coming back from this 
particular government when we talk about the Pinehouse 
situation, the Ile-a-la-Crosse situation, and all the other 
communities that have capital needs in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And the one person that I want to pay some tribute to this 
evening, Madam Minister, is the principal that has seen most of 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

 

that happening in his school, and the principal’s name of course 
is Stan Chomey. And Mr. Chomey’s leaving Ile-a-la-Crosse this 
year, and certainly we’ve gone through the pleasure of having 
him at a supper. We’ve spoken to him about his contribution 
and his service. 
 
And one of these days, Madam Minister, talk to Stan and ask 
him what are some of the unique ways that we can handle 
education in northern Saskatchewan. What were some of your 
frustrations as a principal of a northern school? What are some 
of your challenges? Spend five minutes with him and ask him, 
and he’ll tell you about the challenges because he was there 
most of the mornings talking to the teachers. He was probably 
there being a referee between the administration services and 
between the teachers’ disputes. He was probably being a referee 
between a parent and a child and perhaps maybe between a 
school board member and a teacher. 
 
So, Madam Minister, when you go North talk to the long-term 
teachers like Stan Chomey that has put a lot of time and effort 
into their home community, and ask him, what can we do 
different in northern Saskatchewan that would help you as an 
educator and help the other staff that are coming or hoping to 
come North to make the northern part of our province a better 
place to teach and thus create a better student? Ask him that. 
 
And what we will not tell you, Madam Minister, you won’t 
stand up and you won’t say oh, I’ll go chain myself to the 
school. Those types of politics don’t work. They never have in 
northern Saskatchewan. So I’m quite surprised, Madam 
Minister, that you brought that up. 
 
So the point that I’m trying to again clarify, Madam Minister, is 
we need unique, fresh, and innovative approaches. And today 
I’d like some kind of commitment, some kind of indication 
from you as to what you’re going to do to address some of those 
problems that long-term teachers talk about when they talk 
about the specifics of working and teaching in northern 
communities. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I acknowledge the problems that are 
distinctive to the North. And I think it’s fair to say that we’re 
committed to addressing them with the communities in the 
North. And I expect that I’ll be attending the round table with 
northern leaders in the fall to have this very discussion. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
we may as well clear up a couple of things before we begin. I’m 
not planning on chaining myself to the doors of any hospitals. 
And I might chain myself to a school if it were the right one, for 
the right reason. But you know, I think the member makes a 
valid point when he says that when you claim that there’s only 
so much money and you have to choose between the hospital or 
the North, that that’s not fair politics because I don’t think you 
can mix the two. 
 
I want to follow up on the member’s discussion about the North 
because I think in a lot of cases we don’t, in the South, take 
enough time to try to understand these folks. So would you tell 
me, alluding back to his conversation, do the resource sectors 
like mines and lumbering and that type of thing, do they pay 
education tax, and who collects the taxes, and who gets them? 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The forestry companies, the natural 
resource companies, do not pay any property or education tax 
. . . or they do not pay school taxes to the Northern Lights 
School Division, or the Creighton School Division, or the Ile a 
La Crosse School Division. They don’t pay those kinds of 
taxes. Royalties are collected by the province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — So why aren’t they paying taxes on their 
properties the same as the oil and gas industry does? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — These resources are located on Crown 
land. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Madam Minister, are you suggesting 
that oil and gas wells in The Great Sand Hills, that are located 
on Crown lands, do not pay education tax? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Just to familiarize the member, if they 
do pay school taxes, it’s part of their ability to raise revenues 
locally which means that their foundation operating grant from 
the province is decreased. If they don’t collect the money, that 
means that they can’t raise that money locally which means that 
their foundation operating grant is increased from the province. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Madam Minister, there’s no use you trying to 
jump ahead of me with your answer because you’re not even 
close to the question that I’m about to ask. The reality is that in 
the South the resource industry pays taxes, and those taxes go to 
local communities, and local communities have the sense of 
self-respect of being able to choose for themselves how they 
spend some of that money even though you set all the wages 
and those kind of things. The reality is that, in the North, you 
collect all the monies through resources and resource taxes. 
You take all of the money. Then you give it back to the 
northern people and you say, you should get on your knees and 
be grateful to us because we’re big brother, giving it to you. 
And you have taken and stripped away the dignity and the 
self-respect of those people. 
 
And if you were to collect those taxes in the North exactly the 
same as you do in the South and then give that money to those 
school boards and those school units, they could then 
administrate that money for themselves and their school units 
and their school boards, just like people in the South. And they 
would have that feeling that they have done something for 
themselves and that they haven’t had their hat in hand, begging 
from the government all the time. 
 
So, Madam Minister, do you have any plans to restore the 
dignity and the self-respect of northern people by putting into 
their hands the education tax from the resource sector that 
should be theirs to deal with exactly as it’s done in the South? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think it’s fair to say that this issue has 
been raised with our government in the past, and it’s certainly 
something that we’re prepared to examine. I will say this, that 
potash mines, oil and gas industry, coal mines, diamonds, gold, 
any natural resource pays royalties, and all of that money is 
accrued to the province, and then it’s redistributed through the 
General Revenue Fund. So it’s certainly something that we’re 
aware of, that potash mines in the South pay school taxes and 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

uranium mines in the North don’t. And that’s something we 
need to take a look at. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate 
your finally conceding that this does need to be looked at 
because it seems to me in having listened for a number of years 
to people in the North, what they’ve really said to us is not that 
they want to rule as an independent nation, they only want to 
have some respect. They wanted to be treated, I think, with 
some feeling and feelings given to them that they have some 
self-worth of their own, some ability to handle the money in 
their systems that everybody else handles within their own 
structures and systems, and to allow them to have the money 
from the resource sector to spend in their school boards and in 
their school units the same as school boards and the school units 
in the South do. Even if they made a few mistakes and spent a 
little bit of this money wrong to start with would not necessarily 
be a bad thing because they’re naturally going to have that 
adjustment period. 
 
And I think it’s important that your government take a look at 
doing that because it almost seems to me that after many years 
of listening to our native people in the North asking for more 
from governments, they are saying now, at this point in history, 
we no longer want to live that way. We want big brother to stop 
being big brother. We want to now have the right to handle our 
own money and to show to you that we achieved enough 
education and enough ability to be able to do that. 
 
And therefore I’m led to another area of course in the North 
which is lumber. And again, lumber is a major industry up 
North, and I think we could be looking at the encouragement of 
more private lumbering operations where we would encourage 
people to go back out into the woods and harvest small amounts 
of trees as individual groups and resell them to the big timber 
companies. 
 
And now I know that that has been done in the past, but it 
seems somehow we’ve lost that up North. There’s a few 
operations left, but not nearly enough of that sort of 
community-based or family-based sort of enterprise that should 
be encouraged. And then we could expand that for a tax base 
for the North, a tax base that Northerners could then use to 
build that self-respect and dignity that they’re after. 
 
Madam Minister, we talked the other day to people in the 
Department of Agriculture. There’s a huge need in this province 
right now . . . And I guess I could throw in right now that by the 
end of this week the Minister of Agriculture is going to want to 
trade you jobs after I heard the weather forecast. But the reality 
being that we in the South up until this last couple of days have 
been facing a drought in this province. 
 
In those discussions, Madam Minister, we talked about how 
could we solve some of those problems. And this goes right 
back to the North, because we said in the North we could be 
expanding community pastures especially in those area where 
we have logged out some of the timber. Why not put some of 
that ground into grass and have the native people operate it as 
community pastures and have a tax base there and pay taxes in 
lieu of the properties to those native communities so that they 
would develop a tax base. I believe there’s a lot of expansion 
for that sort of area. 

Madam Minister, in the area of renewable resources like fishing 
and hunting, we pay taxes, education tax, on licences when we 
buy them, do we not? Does any of that money then of course 
accrue back to the school units? 
 
I’m just trying to feed you ideas of how you can put money 
legitimately — that you collect from the people in the province, 
and now in this case from the people in the North — 
legitimately say that’s tax money that we can legitimately now 
put into the hands of northern communities in order for them to 
have the dignity of saying this is money that we have earned 
from our properties, from our enterprise, from our industries in 
the North, and we are not taking handouts from the South. 
 
These are monies that we have to use because we earned them 
up here and the government simply put them into our hands 
because they were the collection agents. And that would give 
you a whole different perspective on the dignity and the 
self-worth that people would feel in the North. 
 
And I guess I should let you comment on that before I ramble 
any further. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I really am interested in the member’s 
comments. I think that the member is right. And certainly the 
member from Athabasca is aware of this — that Northerners are 
looking at a way to generate their own revenue, to create a 
revenue base and an economic base in order that they can be 
more in charge of their own future. 
 
So any ideas that you have, certainly our government would 
welcome discussing those ideas with you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. We have 
quite a few ideas. The member from Humboldt is going to ask a 
few questions after my next one because of course it’s only 
proper that she should have a chance to talk about education 
that concerns her community. 
 
I do want to talk to you, Madam Minister, a little bit about 
problems of isolationism. Naturally I think you will understand 
that a constituency like the Cypress Hills where we have 10,000 
square miles within the constituency, there are five different 
school units and miles and miles, as I’ve said many times 
before, of miles and miles . . . low population and a long ways 
to go. 
 
We face many of the same problems of isolationism and the 
feelings of isolationism that people in the North do. You can 
feel isolated; you can feel lonely and depressed and cut off 
surrounded by prairies just as easily as you can surrounded by 
trees. In fact maybe sometimes it gets worse if you get a winter 
snowstorm where you’re blocked right in and you can’t see for 
more than a couple of feet with miles and miles of snowstorm 
around you. 
 
So we want to talk about those kind of things and what you do 
to cope with teachers staying in those atmospheres and 
maintaining their sense of balance, their ability to remain in 
those areas long enough to get to know the school units and the 
children. And what programs do you have to counsel the 
teachers or to bring them some kind of relief from those kind of 
pressures? 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

 

I’ll let you allude to that. And of course I want to talk a little bit 
then about the Cypress Hills. But after you answer this 
question, I’ll let the member from Humboldt ask her questions 
first. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — For the teachers in the province who 
are experiencing duress and stress, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation has an outstanding program of teacher-support 
services whereby there are folks available to support teachers 
when they’re experiencing difficulties. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam Minister, I 
would just like to ask you a couple of questions referring to 
home schooling. In my constituency I have a number of people 
that are doing this and a number of people that are 
contemplating it. 
 
Madam Minister, earlier you were speaking with the member 
from Canora-Pelly, and you did indicate that there’s a portion of 
money, I believe, that is allotted to divisions for home 
schooling, if there’s home schooling taking place in those 
divisions. 
 
I’m wondering who makes the determination of how much of 
that money is in fact targeted towards home schooling. And is 
there a certain portion of that, that money, that must go directly 
to parents? Or is that at the discretion of the division board as to 
how much they choose to give out? 
 
I guess in addition to that question, I would ask if parents chose 
to home-school, must they follow the curricula of the school 
division or do they have some leeway as to what subjects they 
would teach their children or could teach them in any given 
year or at any given level? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The parent would have to follow the 
provincial curricula as approved by the director of education. 
As I indicated earlier, there is a sum of money that is given to 
the school board in terms of recognizing that they have some 
involvement with the parents of the home-based student. 
 
The school is expected to provide support to the parents as they 
home-base their student, particularly in the area of, you know, 
standardized testing, special needs assessment, and so on. I 
know that there’s been some difficulty with some boards of 
education where they haven’t wanted to provide some of the 
materials, use of library, use of gymnasiums. But it seems to me 
that those kinds of disputes are becoming less so. And more and 
more boards of education, the directors of education, and the 
home-based parents are working out their various problems. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
the next question I have is referring back to another comment 
you made earlier this evening. And you were referring to your 
method of interdepartmental sharing of all services within a 
school division or a school that may be needed as far as services 
that students need nowadays — social services, health, etc. 
 
I’m just wondering, again with the distribution of funding for 
that, is that above and beyond the allotment for each student — 
the foundation grant? Is there money above and beyond that or 
is that the money that is allotted to a school division for each 
student? Do they have to deal then also or use that money for 

extra social services or extra health needs that may be a part of 
their services? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Now in the case of . . . I’ll just give you 
the example of the Nutana high school. The department did . . . 
It has its normal way of funding the local school division and 
then funds are directed to the schools, Nutana being one of 
them. The department did provide $160,000 which includes 
$50,000 for getting the project going. At the end of the day, 
there’ll be $110,000 per year from the department for the 
Nutana full-service school. 
 
The health board is going to provide a person to help in the area 
of addictions because we’re finding that lots of young people 
have issues of addictions. 
 
As well, the Department of Social Services is providing two 
people from the department into the school to support the 
students. So these are resources that don’t come from the school 
board. They come from Social Services, they come from 
Health, and they come from the Department of Education. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, I’d just like to close this evening 
with a comment. I have received certainly some opposition to 
the bargaining that is going on and the way it is going on. The 
members of division boards are really very, very unhappy with 
the fact that at the end of the day government will make the 
decisions on what happens as far as bargaining goes. And any 
grievances they may have are, they feel, going to be sort of 
pushed to the side. 
 
I wonder if there’s anyway that you could — I’m sure you hope 
that this is going to work — so I’m wondering if there’s 
anything that you would like to say this evening or that you 
could say to give them some assurance that their concerns will 
be honoured and that they will not simply be sidelined. 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think what I can say about this 
issue is that we introduced second reading of the education Act 
today, and that’s where the whole issue of grievances are dealt 
with; and when we go to the Committee of the Whole we could 
have a discussion around the education Act. 
 
I will say this, that I know how important it is for the trustees of 
the province and the government to work in the most 
collaborative way that we can. There are times when we just 
can’t agree — we meet and we meet and we meet and we meet 
and we just can’t seem to solve the problem. And sometimes 
government just has to take a leadership role and make the 
decision. 
 
We try not to do that very often in education. We try to be as 
collaborative and enter into as many partnerships as possible, 
but sometimes you just have to solve a problem by making a 
decision. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ve been listening to 
this with a great deal of interest as I’m sure that people who 
may be watching. On some of these new programs, earlier you 
were talking about the four-day school week, Madam Minister. 
There is another program that I have some interest in and 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

people in my area. It’s called a balanced school year program. I 
wonder if you might just be able to explain that for us just 
exactly what type of a program that is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The member will recall that last year 
during the session of the legislature we introduced amendments 
to The Education Act whereby school boards could make the 
decision to go to a balanced school year without receiving the 
approval of the Minister of Education. What the balanced 
school year is, is a school year that runs from about the middle 
of August to Christmas, and that would be called one semester. 
And then the next semester runs from January 1 to about the 
middle of June. 
 
So in fact instead of students coming back around the first week 
of September and leaving school around the third or fourth 
week of June, the school year ends earlier and begins sooner. 
 
Mr. Osika: — I understand that that is in place in some of the 
school districts. Have you had any feedback on the. . . any 
comments or any feedback from those areas? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It is in place in the Regina Catholic 
elementary and secondary school system and the Saskatoon 
Catholic elementary and secondary. Buffalo Plains, which is a 
rural school division, has the balanced school year and one 
school, the high school in Moose Jaw, Vanier, has the balanced 
school year. 
 
The feedback that I’ve got, the initial feedback at one stage was 
this: the high school students had the balanced school year in 
the Catholic division but the elementary students didn’t. It was 
a real inconvenience for parents. They had kids leaving school 
the middle of June, then the end of June, going back in the 
middle of August, and at the end of August. And so there was 
basically only a six-week holiday where the family could all be 
together. 
 
That was one issue, but I think the boards have worked that out 
whereby the elementary and the secondary systems are both on 
the same school year. 
 
The only other difficulty that I’ve experienced is from a person 
— a business person in Saskatoon — that runs a gymnastic 
camp. It’s a highly sophisticated camp for young people 
involved in gymnastics. And it makes it difficult to run a camp 
when you only have a six-week period, really . . . Or yes, closer 
to five, right. So if you want to run a two-month camp or a 
month camp and a month camp, it just makes it very, very hard. 
And that, from a business point of view, it’s difficult; but also 
from just trying to administer point of view, it’s difficult. 
 
Otherwise, I haven’t really heard any complaints from people. I 
know that some parents don’t like it, many parents do. Some 
teachers don’t like it, many teachers do. So I would say it’s 
been somewhat mixed, but overall people like the balanced 
school year. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. So I take it the information with 
respect to that type of a program is strictly the responsibility of 
the school district with no input from your department 
whatsoever. At what point, if there’s a real impasse and it 
creates a great deal of animosity or becomes a problem, is there 

at any time at all that you or your department would get 
involved to balance the scales, either promote or at least make 
an effort to bring the sides together in a global picture to say, 
calm down; perhaps there’s been some misunderstandings and 
here’s what we’d like to give you the opportunity to do? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are many times when the 
department, through our regional directors or other personnel in 
the department, assist boards and communities in resolving 
difficulties. So if the community were to request the department 
to be involved in trying to assist people in coming together, 
certainly we can be involved in a facilitative way. 
 
Our department does a lot of facilitating, mediating, and 
working with, you know, people that have disputes with each 
other. That’s something that we do quite regularly. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you. I was just wondering if in fact the 
feedback that you get from those places that are trying out these 
new types of programs, not unlike the earlier questions to you 
about the four-day school week where you’re now into the 
second year and you said that at the end of five years . . . Do 
you not funnel or is there not a report card funnelled to you that 
you could pass along to other areas that may be interested? That 
might be one way of perhaps even fending off any 
misunderstandings. 
 
I guess what I’m suggesting is the more information people 
have . . . It’s always the fear of the unknown that primarily 
causes consternation and confrontation. I was wondering if 
there was any way that you might be able to, in advance of any 
of these programs even being discussed, promote it through 
your department to school districts, to parents in a way that 
might alleviate in the event that you’re moving at a different 
direction. Again as I mentioned that it’s fear of the unknown 
that people oftentimes create a great deal of consternation and 
concern. 
 
So if there was that kind of a program . . . Is there one being 
thought of, or are there any plans to report on any of these new 
initiatives, perhaps experiences from other areas that your 
department may be aware of, and to give people some comfort? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — A very good suggestion and I’m sure 
it’s something that we can actively look at. I think that there is 
some experience in the province with the balanced school year, 
and that could be shared with other boards or communities that 
are looking at going that way. 
 
I should say this: that the balanced school year is difficult for 
those boards of education that do not have accredited teachers, 
where they don’t have departmental exams. Because we haven’t 
quite got the departmental exams balanced in terms of the 
balanced school year. I think we have five sets of departmental 
exams throughout the year but this would require another set, 
and it’s quite costly. I think it’s about $300,000 to write another 
set of exams. 
 
So the balanced school year for those school boards that do not 
have fully accredited teachers is not quite operational yet 
because of the whole issue of departmental exams. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

 

a few minutes ago we were talking a bit about things that are 
going on in the Education department. And I wanted to allude 
to how these are going to affect the school boards in south-west 
Saskatchewan, in the Cypress Hills constituency. 
 
For example, I visited in the past couple of months with four 
out of the five school boards that are operating in that 
constituency, and at those meetings, Madam Minister, we had a 
sort of almost unanimous common call for action in the same 
areas. Each meeting, I would go there and I would sit down and 
I would say, here I am, what would you like to tell me? And 
they would quite happily tell me what was on their minds. And 
it turned out that just about all of them were telling me exactly 
the same thing without having me say what I’ve heard before 
from the others. 
 
And what they were saying to me is basically that they were 
unhappy with the way that the negotiations are done these days. 
That was one of the areas — the way that negotiations are done 
on their primary cost, and that of course being the salaries of 
teachers and those things that are related to it. 
 
They indicated to me — and I’m sure you’ve heard this before, 
but from the south-west maybe they say things differently — 
they said to me that when you set the wages in Regina for the 
teachers, you must forget that the janitors and everybody else in 
the system ties their salary to those adjustments, and that those 
adjustments come 100 per cent out of the pockets of the local 
taxpayer because that wasn’t included in your formula or your 
attempt to address the equalization of your formula. 
 
Have you done anything to correct that in the last few days? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’ve had this discussion earlier this 
evening, or was it this afternoon? It’s been quite a lengthy 
discussion. 
 
We increased the foundation operating grants to school boards 
by $21.8 million. Teachers’ salaries represented $15 million. In 
addition to the increase in the foundation operating grant, we 
also brought in a program called grants in lieu of taxes of $1.6 
million to the school boards. So in essence we’ve got close to 
$24 million in new money for school boards — 15 million of 
that goes to teachers’ salaries; $9 million of that can be used 
unconditionally for whatever else school boards want to fund. 
 
So I would say that generally across the province we saw an 
increase, a significant increase. This is the largest amount of 
money that we’ve had in the foundation operating grant ever, 
and it’s a lot better than the old days when we were reducing 
our grants and not increasing them. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The other issue 
that was common was the method in which negotiating is done. 
And they complained bitterly that they felt that they did not 
have enough input into the process. Have you any plans to 
change the methods that you’re going to use in the future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’ve had this method of the 
trustee-government bargaining team, I think, since 1973 — 25 
years. We’ve never had a general strike in this province. We’ve 
always been able to negotiate provincial collective agreements 
without a general strike. 

In the last round of bargaining, in order to get a provincial 
collective agreement, it was important that we adjust our 
mandate. We held nine meetings, nine meetings to try and see if 
we could change our mandate — this is nine meetings between 
the government and the trustees — and at the end of those nine 
meetings there was absolutely no change in position. 
 
And at the end of the day the province decided we needed to 
have a new collective agreement with the teachers. It’s a 
responsible collective agreement. I haven’t heard any trustee 
say that it’s a bad collective agreement. It didn’t give away the 
store. It’s quite meagre relative to some of the increases that 
you see in the private sector, and we paid for it through an 
increase in the foundation operating grant. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Madam Minister, you say you haven’t had a strike, and of 
course I think some people would argue one way or the other 
that the reality is that the reason you haven’t had a strike is 
because school boards don’t go on strike and they’re the ones 
who had their rights taken away from them. It wasn’t the 
teachers that had their rights taken away — it was the school 
boards and school boards don’t go on strike in this province; 
they don’t have the facilities to do that, and it would be 
ridiculous to suggest that you have success because there was 
no strike when in fact the people who represent the taxpayers on 
the school boards just don’t have that vehicle available to them. 
So I think your answer really is a non-answer. It’s not related to 
the question whatsoever. 
 
I wanted to ask a bit about the building program, Madam 
Minister. You indicated earlier that you have the grant formula 
which equalizes the funding. I wonder how that applies to the 
building programs that you have in the province. Are the 
building programs equalized so that communities get equal 
amounts of dollars spent on new buildings and renovations? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, in terms of the 
capital expenditures, it’s been indicated to me by the deputy 
that those areas with less ability to fund capital projects actually 
get a greater proportion from the province. And as you debate 
the position of the teachers versus the trustees, what the changes 
that have been implemented do is really revert to what has been 
in place for most of the last 23 years. So when you talk about 
radical changes, really what you’re talking about is moving 
back to what has been historically the status quo. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, obviously 
the status quo is not what is making people very happy, so 
perhaps you ought to take a look at trying something different 
for a change and make the school boards in this province happy 
as well. And I’m sure that you would want to do that. 
 
Madam Minister, you alluded to the fact that there’s $300 
million being spent this year on new construction in this 
province for the schools. And you talked about a list. How 
many millions of dollars worth of expenditures are represented 
on the list that you now have? What criteria is required to be 
met in order for people to qualify to either get on the list or to 
get up the list? And how many school units in south-west 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1998 

 

Saskatchewan — of the five school boards in the Cypress Hills 
— have applied for any construction, and how many of them 
have you either granted or refused? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It’s region 2 part of the province. The 
Herbert School Division received some funds for improving 
accessibility and washroom renovation. Christ the King in 
Shaunavon, an upgrade of the gym and the east wing as well as 
ventilation and temperature control. Shaunavon at Val Marie, a 
mechanical upgrade. 
 
Swift Current Catholic School Board at St. Patrick’s, which is 
formerly Dickson School, a mechanical upgrade. Eastend, 
Frontier School, . . . (inaudible) . . . drainage, replacing the 
furnace and ducts. Prairie West at Vanguard, two relocatable 
classrooms and Swift Current at the O. M. Irwin School, roof 
replacement. 
 
In addition, there were some announcements of capital projects 
— that’s called block funding — and there were capital projects 
announced across the province. Approvals continued for the 
North Battleford joint-use facility of 1.7 million; Estevan, joint 
use, 1 million; Yorkton, joint use, 2.5 million; Central Butte 
School, 680,000; and Biggar, 2.6 million. 
 
In addition, Vanier Collegiate in Moose Jaw, 1.7 million; 
Neville Gossin Lloydminster, 1.2; Consul and Eastend, 
600,000; Father Gorman in Lloydminster, 1.1 million; Estevan 
Public School Board, 250,000; Brunskill, 250,000, and a new 
high school was announced, 250,000. The 250,000 are for work 
to get the architectural plans, and all of the plans in place. 
 
In addition, there is some money that’s been set aside for some 
projects that have not yet been determined. But the Meadow 
Lake area, the school division there is looking at a joint-use 
facility along with the Flying Dust Band. It would be a 
co-managed high school in the town of Meadow Lake. It would 
be the first time that a band and a school division jointly came 
together to co-manage a school. 
 
In addition, there may be a potential of a joint-use facility in 
Regina. And there’s some money that’s been set aside for that. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That certainly 
was much more detailed than I required in that area and we do 
appreciate that. We will certainly send a transcript of that to the 
school units in my constituency so they can be aware of what’s 
going on. 
 
I think they would like to know that I have asked you, once 
again, what criteria is required to get on the list and to be 
elevated up the list as you alluded to earlier. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It’s issues like occupational health and 
safety, joint use, as well as enrolment pressures. Those will 
determine whether you get to the top of the list. There are some 
places like Lloydminster where they’ve had tremendous growth 
in the population. Those schools could not handle the numbers 
of students that have come into the city of Lloydminster and 
that’s why those schools were announced this year, because of 
the tremendous enrolment pressures in the city of Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister, a few days ago 

on the news we watched reports that hamlets in the central part 
of this province were considering disbanding in order to save 
themselves tax money. They alluded to problems with SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) and what 
not. But basically what came out of that that concerns the 
Department of Education, I think, is that if they do disband, 
they won’t have to pay education tax on those properties. And 
now, how would those monies be made up, and of course I have 
a couple of hamlets that now are saying, would this benefit us? 
And I would ask you to answer their question for them. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If a hamlet voted to disintegrate, it 
would become part of the rural municipality. Obviously their 
taxes would go down because they would be, depending on the 
amount of land, they could become part of 331(q)’s. If their 
school taxes were to go down, then obviously the revenue to 
that school division would go down and their grant from the 
province would go up. 331 (q)’s are under review at the present 
time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — I’m sure somebody’s going to ask you what 
those are and you can answer that when you next stand up to 
answer a question, because if I don’t throw that in somebody’s 
going to phone me up tomorrow and I’m going to have to say I 
haven’t got a clue. 
 
You alluded to the education Act that you introduced earlier 
today in your discussions tonight. How will that affect home 
schooling, religious groups, and those kind of, I guess, what 
you would consider out of mainstream educational processes 
that are currently occurring in my constituency, which is 
Cypress Hills. We do have quite a bit of that type of educational 
process because of our vast area. How will this affect our 
community and the people in it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The amendments to the education Act 
do not affect home schoolers or those members who are 
involved with the religious schools. There’s no impact 
whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chairman, 
I’m sure that the people in the south-west will be happy to hear 
that. We, of course, will fax the Act to them tomorrow morning 
and get their response from the school unit boards and then 
we’ll talk to you about that at that time. 
 
I only have this one last question, Madam Minister, for tonight 
before I promise to allow the Liberals another opportunity to 
get in to this debate and discussion. The universal testing 
program has been, of course, something that we’ve talked about 
a lot and you have acceded that you aren’t really, I think, in 
favour of that. Have you changed your mind about that, and 
have you given any consideration to a universal testing 
program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The province participated in what’s 
called the school achievement indicators program which is a 
program of the Council of Ministers funded in large part by the 
federal government. 
 
We have just finished participating in the English language arts 
and the French language arts testing. We participated in 
mathematics last year and science the year before. At the end of 



June 1, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

 

this participation in the three core subject areas, we’ll determine 
whether or not we want to participate in the future. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I 
know the hour is getting late and we have just a few more 
minutes. But you did raise some thoughts that I had to question 
you about and I guess we’ll likely have to come back another 
day and finish them all. 
 
But you were quoting some statistics to our colleague from the 
south-west a little while ago on capital projects. And I did have 
some concerns expressed to me from the folks in the 
community of Central Butte about a school project that was 
going on there and that maybe the commitment that was made 
wasn’t being adhered to. I’m wondering if you have the 
statistics on the Central Butte project and how long it was 
initially scheduled to take and the funding that was pledged for 
that project, and if indeed there is a problem with the slowing 
down of that project to date? 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Education — Vote 5 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1487 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1487 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1496 
  McLane ..........................................................................................................................................................................1498, 1515 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1504 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1513 
 
 


