





























































Hansard: March 17, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 153 
 March 17, 1998 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to present a petition on behalf of many 
residents in the province of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call for an independent public inquiry to find 
all the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from the 
communities of Wolseley and Whitewood. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I also have a 
petition today. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call for an independent public inquiry to find 
all of the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Langbank, Moosomin, 
Whitewood, and Kipling areas, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I too have petitions to present to this Assembly and I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the Moosomin, 
Kipling, Langbank areas of the province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I also have 
petitions to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 

And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the town of Whitewood. I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province of Saskatchewan 
in an immediate effort to end the destructive and dangerous 
practice of night hunting in the province for everyone 
regardless of their heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And these come from people in Spalding, Rose Valley, 
Saskatoon, Kelvington, Prince Albert. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 
to present today. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
cancel any severance payments to Jack Messer and to 
immediately call an independent public inquiry to find all 
the facts surrounding the Channel Lake fiasco. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Whitewood 
and Kipling. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I have 
petitions as well to present. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with aboriginal and Metis leaders and the wildlife and 
sportsmen organizations in the province in an immediate 
effort to end the destructive and dangerous practice of night 
hunting in the province for everyone regardless of their 
heritage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from Spalding, Annaheim, 
Naicam areas of Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions on 
behalf of citizens of this province. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains hospital by 
enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 

 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

And the signatures are from Glenbain, from Stewart Valley, 
Swift Current, and other small communities throughout rural 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present 
petitions on the issue of the Plains hospital: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that this Hon. Assembly may 
be pleased to save the Plains hospital by enacting 
legislation to prevent the closure, and by providing 
adequate funding to the Regina Health District so that 
essential services provided at the Plains may be continued. 

 
I so present, as your petitioners come from the Assiniboia, 
Mossbank, Wood Mountain, Rockglen, and Meyronne and 
Limerick area of the province. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Plains hospital. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
be enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Those who’ve signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities throughout Thunder Creek — Claybank, Avonlea, 
Cardross, Spring Valley, Briercrest. Also from the city of 
Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding for the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people who have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re from places like Assiniboia, Lafleche, Limerick, 
Mossbank, Glentworth, Gravelbourg, and all throughout the 
land; and I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health District 
so that the essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the people from 
Assiniboia. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleagues in presenting petitions which would bring it nearer 
the 100,000 that have been presented in this legislature to date. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to save the Plains Health Centre 
by enacting legislation to prevent the closure, and by 
providing adequate funding for the Regina Health District 
so that essential services provided at the Plains may be 
continued. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
from Swift Current, Wymark, and several pages from the 
Coronach area. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reach necessary agreements with other levels of 
government to fund the twinning of the Trans-Canada 
Highway in Saskatchewan so that work can begin in 1998, 
and to set out a time frame for the ultimate completion of 
the project with or without federal assistance. 
 

These come, Mr. Speaker, today mostly from Maple Creek, but 
there are some from Eastend, and Regina, and Robsart I see as 
well, and I’m happy to present them today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to cause the 
government to cancel severance payments to Jack Messer 
and to call an independent public inquiry surrounding 
Channel Lake; 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
cause the government to provide for underground power 
lines and natural gas for all rural people at original rates; 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to enact legislation to 
provide natural gas service to northern Saskatchewan at a 
cost similar to southern recipients; and 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to fund the twinning 
of the Trans-Canada Highway, to save the Plains Health 
Centre, and to ban the practice of night hunting. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

I shall on day no. 12 ask the government the following 
question: 

 
What are the total funds to date obtained through the fee 
paid by Saskatchewan customers to the SaskPower 
reconstruction fund? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to all 
of the members of the Legislative Assembly, it’s my great 
pleasure today to introduce eight special guests from O’Neill 
High School. These are work experience students and with 
them of course is their teacher or chaperon, Bill Allen. I very 
much look forward to meeting with this group after question 
period. In fact my note says from 2:30 to 3 o’clock we’ll be 
meeting in the members’ dining-room. And I very much look 
forward to that time. I ask all members to join me in welcoming 
this group from O’Neill High School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to the Assembly today a group of nine visitors 
from the Cancer Patient Lodge in my constituency. I hope that 
you enjoy the proceedings today. I think it would be fair to say 
that you’ll find them interesting; and we certainly wish you well 
in your course of treatments at the lodge. 
 
And we’ll be meeting in the Speaker’s boardroom for 
refreshments after, where I could answer any questions that you 
might have about the House or other matters. 
 
And as well, although they may be introduced additionally to 
myself, I’d like to also introduce a constituent of mine between 
her international travels, Allie Irvine, and I apologize for not 
remembering your name, sir, her husband, recently married, and 
welcome them and hope you enjoy your visit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 
introduce to you today a constituent of mine who is in your 
gallery, Susan McQuarrie. She’s joined by a very special visitor 
to our Assembly today, Mr. Pacifique Manirakiza. Professor 
Manirakiza is from Burundi; he’s a refugee. He is in Canada, 
has been for about six months now, and was telling me that 
although the climate is somewhat less hospitable, I think that he 
is finding our hospitality and the people of Canada most 
friendly. 
 
I’d ask you to join with me in welcoming him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to introduce to you and members of the Assembly today, 
seated in your gallery, two individuals who are here 
representing Nutrition Month. Michelle Klassen, who is a 
dietician from the Regina Health District, and Julie Johnson, 
who’s the nutritionist from the Regina Health District. And I’ll 
ask us to stand in a moment to acknowledge them. 
 

But this year’s theme is . . . our Nutrition Month is: “Making 
Nutrition Come Alive; It’s All About You.” And the purpose of 
Nutrition Month is to help all of us make healthier food choices 
which fit into our busy lives. 
 
And when I look around the Chamber, Mr. Speaker, there are 
probably a number of us who can benefit from visiting and 
speaking with our nutritionists. And making healthy food 
choices for ourselves and for our children is a wise and simple 
investment, and helping ensure good health throughout our 
lives. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and all members of the Assembly — 
if you don’t mind just standing — welcoming both Michelle 
and Julie to the Chamber this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’m pleased to introduce to the Assembly 
today a visitor from my constituency, who is seated in your 
gallery, who happens to be the most beautiful woman in Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. Her name is Betty Calvert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Agriculture and Food Week 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, March 
the 15 to the 21 is Agriculture and Food Week in Saskatchewan 
and it enables us to recognize the contributions of agriculture to 
our community and our province. 
 
Agriculture has been faced with many changes — especially 
with the loss of the Crow, rail-line abandonment, and 
deregulation of the rates. But agriculture has responded to these 
changes by being innovative and creative, by diversifying with 
pulse crops, spice, potatoes, and also raising bison, elk, ostrich, 
and others. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Ag-Food department has responded to 
this by investing nearly 80 million to this end. Recently, 
Agri-Food Innovation Fund approved 8.5 million for the 
launching of the Saskatchewan Food Industry Centre. The beef 
development fund was established to encourage research in the 
beef industry. Since 1995 the beef development fund has 
funded some 22 projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ag and food had sales of $8 billion in 1996 — 60 
per cent of those were exports and, Mr. Speaker, 40 per cent of 
all the jobs in the province are related to the ag and food 
industry. It is through the hard work, the determination, and the 
originality of our toilers of the earth that agriculture is, and will 
remain, the mainstay of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to say thank you to 
our farmers. It is because of their quick and . . . their 
determination to succeed, that agriculture will continue to be a 
mainstay. To the farmers and the people in agri-food . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member’s time has expired. 
Statements continue. 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is both my great 
honour and privilege to rise today as a member of the 
Legislative Assembly and also as a member of the agriculture 
community to recognize Agriculture Week in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It is important, Mr. Speaker, that the members of this Assembly 
and the residents of Saskatchewan truly recognize the driving 
force the agriculture industry plays in this province. As one of 
Saskatchewan’s primary industries, agriculture accounts 
directly or indirectly for most of the jobs, most of the wealth 
creation, and a large part of the well-being of this great 
province. 
 
The men and women associated with agriculture deserve a large 
show of our appreciation for their efforts during the week. The 
weather today, Mr. Speaker, with a large snowfall forecast, is 
going to provide a lot of hope for farmers out in the south-west 
part of Saskatchewan. In a few short weeks the annual largest 
megaproject will begin with millions of dollars of inputs going 
into the ground to provide what we all hope will be a bountiful 
harvest. 
 
This week we celebrate agriculture’s contribution to 
Saskatchewan and we salute the thousands of men and women 
for their part in Saskatchewan’s agriculture both past and 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Patrick’s Day 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to address 
this House on this very special day, March 17, more commonly 
known as St. Patrick’s Day. And being the member of the 
caucus here with a name beginning with O, I thought it would 
appropriate that I just address that event. 
 
A well-known Irish event, Mr. Speaker, is the Irish 
Sweepstakes. This year the people of Saskatchewan know who 
won the sweepstakes, although very few of them will be 
congratulating him. Jack O’Messer has just won $300,000. Yes, 
he was a long shot — what odds. But having the luck of the 
Irish, he was left holding the winning ticket while the rest of the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) were left holding the bag. 
 
Mr. Speaker, leprechauns are also a big part of Irish myth. They 
are supposed to be mean, evil little creatures. Perhaps Jack 
O’Messer is part leprechaun. Perhaps that may explain his pot 
of gold at the end of the NDP rainbow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this day was named after St. Patrick, who drove 
all the snakes out of Ireland. Aye, ‘tis a pity that St. Patrick 
doesn’t work for SaskPower — or perhaps he does. If so, he 
still has a lot of work ahead of him. 
 
But in all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, this is a day for the Irish to 
celebrate their accomplishments. In the last couple of years, 
there’s been a great resurgence in Irish music and dancing. The 
famed Riverdance show is here in Regina this week and has 
been sold out for a very long time. There is no better credit than 

that. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues and I, we do sincerely wish the 
people of Irish blood the very best on this, their special day to 
celebrate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Nutrition Month 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, March has 
been declared National Nutrition Month. This year’s theme is 
“Make Nutrition Come Alive; It’s All About You.” 
 
Nutrition of course, is a key component of good health, as is 
exercise, Mr. Speaker — and I am trying. The message this year 
emphasizes that nutrition information such as Canada’s Food 
Guide to Healthy Eating can be personalized to fit individual 
needs and tastes. 
 
Saskatchewan Health works with a number of partners to 
develop policies and support programs which assist the people 
of the province to eat well. An example of such collaboration 
can be found in Yorkton. Through a provincial wellness grant, 
the Yorkton Body Image Group developed the “Body Image 
Kit.” This is an educational tool designed to assist educators 
when discussing healthy body image in their grade 7 to 12 
classrooms. A second provincial grant has been designated for 
the Lloydminster Health District in my constituency for a 
similar program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other ways in which Saskatchewan 
Health supports and works with nutritionists and dieticians in 
our mutual quest for a healthier, happier population. We are 
honoured by the presence of our guests and to affirm to them 
and the people of Saskatchewan this government’s continued 
commitment to wellness. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Businessman Wins Dealer of the Year Award 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too would 
like to commend all of those men and women who contribute so 
much to the agricultural community throughout the world, and 
more specific today I would like to recognize an outstanding 
Humboldt businessman, Mr. Gerald Hergott, who has done his 
share in contributing to that community. 
 
Mr. Hergott, general manager of Hergott Farm Equipment Ltd., 
was recently chosen as the winner of the Bill Lipsey Merit 
Award for dealer of the year. The western Canada award is 
given by Canada West Equipment Dealers Association. Mr. 
Hergott was one of 12 business people nominated for the award 
from board members across western Canada. The award winner 
must be an association member, have equipment business 
involvement, and be active in the association and in their home 
community. 
 
Mr. Hergott’s community involvement includes having been a 
town councillor, chairman of the Humboldt Recreation Board, 
chairperson of the first local housing authority, member of St. 
Elizabeth’s Hospital board, and member of the Carlton Trail 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission. 
 
Mr. Hergott has also served on Case IH committees and the 
Saskatchewan-Manitoba Implement Dealers Association Board. 
 
Congratulations, Mr. Hergott. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Patrick’s Day 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I recently came across an 
interesting-sounding, scholarly book titled, How the Irish Saved 
Civilization. The jacket cover, Mr. Speaker, said that towards 
the end of the first millennium A.D., western civilization as it 
had been developed through the Greeks and Romans would 
have been destroyed by the right-wing hordes of the day had it 
not been for the courageous and dedicated efforts of a few Irish 
monks in scattered monasteries around the Emerald Isle. 
 
Today a person with Irish roots like myself would say, yes, and 
what else is new? After all, we have been saving and then 
enriching civilization ever since St. Patrick came ashore. Few 
peoples have a legacy so rich in legend, in learning, in poetry, 
and in music. At the same time, few peoples in the west have 
had as sad a history of deprivation, discrimination, and 
dislocation as the Irish. 
 
All of this, Mr. Speaker, is a long winding road to announcing 
that today is St. Patrick’s Day, the day people around the world 
celebrate the gift of cultural enrichment given us by the Irish. 
And it’s also the day when those of us who are descendants of 
the Irish immigrants to this new land of opportunity remember 
that this contribution has often been in the face of great odds, a 
fact which makes today’s celebration all the more poignant and 
necessary. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as St. Patrick himself said to the Irish on his 
deathbed to alleviate their sorrow, “Do the rounds and wet the 
Shamrock." Erin go bragh. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tribute to Allan Blakeney 
 

Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, last night the Regina Lodge of 
B’nai B’rith Canada held its 42nd annual youth services dinner. 
This year’s dinner featured a tribute to the Hon. Allan Blakeney 
for his outstanding citizenship and statesmanship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately I was unable to attend that dinner, 
but had I been invited to speak, I would have said the following. 
 
First, as I said in a private members’ statement three years ago, 
Allan Blakeney is a person who by the deeds of a lifetime gave 
real definition to the term, public service. We sometimes forget 
that before he was an MLA, then premier, then leader of the 
opposition, that he was first a civil servant of the highest quality 
for many years. 
 
To what I said then about his leadership, his integrity, and his 
inspirational love of ideas and collegiality, I would add the 
following. 

In the last few years Allan Blakeney has shown all of us, with 
his customary particular precision and absence of flamboyance, 
that retirement from one field is not the end of a phase so much 
as the beginning of another. 
 
His international work these days is the source of social 
democratic inspiration for many, as was his visionary leadership 
in his three terms as premier. 
 
For a superb statesman and an intellectual giant like Al 
Blakeney, life just gets more and more interesting. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Sale of Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). Mr. Minister, 
you’ve provided only partial answers to the questions we have 
outlined for you this morning. However you’re still withholding 
vital information and I would like to ask some further questions. 
 
You clearly indicate that in addition to Lawrence Portigal, Ken 
Christensen and Larry Kram reviewed the draft and signed the 
final draft. Will these two individuals be fired for negligence, 
and will civil action be taken against them for recovery of 
funds? Or are you going to greet them with a big fat severance 
package as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in my 
letter back to the member dealing with the issue and questions 
that he raised — and I wanted to quote from that letter because I 
think it’s important — I indicated that, first let me observe that 
your caucus seems remarkably reluctant to proceed with a 
timely review of these issues in the Public Accounts 
Committee, and there will be many who will ask why that is the 
case. 
 
And so it was interesting this morning when the member from 
Regina Dewdney, the member from Regina Dewdney suggested 
that March 31, March 31 be the day that we commence the 
Public Accounts Committee, and that letter was sent to your 
members and you, sir, as well are a member of that committee. I 
wonder if you could commit to the House today, if you could 
answer this question. Will you be there on March 31 to attend 
that committee meeting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
what we need is your commitment to the House that you’ll 
provide the necessary information, and I’ll continue to ask for 
it. Mr. Minister, you’re refusing to come forward with some 
important documents — the legal opinions that point to who 
was negligent. You cite solicitor-client privilege. You are the 
client. The people of Saskatchewan should be the clients. And 
the client only cites solicitor-client privilege when they have 
something to hide. What are you hiding, Mr. Minister? Will you 
release these legal opinions? 
 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to quote again 
from the letter because he has the information in front of him. 
But I’m not sure — either he hasn’t read the material I’ve given 
to him or he’s having a difficult time standing and asking the 
questions that he should be asking. 
 
But I want to say to you, sir, this. You asked in your earlier 
question whether or not I was going to fire people in 
SaskPower. I want to make it clear that that is not the duty of 
the minister in charge, to fire and hire people in the SaskPower 
Corporation. 
 
But I want to say to you, sir, the more interesting question is 
this: why you seem so reluctant and what could be the possible 
reason that there could be for your party to be reluctant to come 
to the Public Accounts Committee meeting. Can you tell us 
today, can you tell us today whether or not you will be there on 
March 31 in order to conduct the business of the meeting and to 
ask the questions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The legal opinions 
that you are hiding speak to the actions of Lawrence Portigal, 
the conduct of SaskPower officials, including Jack Messer, and 
who was at fault. The legal opinion dealing with the topic 
summary deals with who made the mistakes in the final sale 
agreement. We need that opinion to prepare for Public 
Accounts. 
 
If you are sincere about letting the Public Accounts Committee 
do a thorough investigation, then table this opinion. What are 
you hiding, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, that’s about the lamest 
excuse I’ve ever heard for a member not coming to a committee 
meeting. That’s the lamest excuse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think if you tap the member sitting 
in front of you on the shoulder, the Conservative from 
Moosomin, he may be able to tell you why you’re hesitant to 
come. 
 
And I say to you, I say to you, sir, as a member of the 
Conservative Party, you should come to the committee and ask 
the questions that you want to ask. But if you’re interested 
about the reluctance, tap the member on the shoulder who’s 
sitting in front of you, the former Tory from Moosomin. He 
may have an idea why you’re hesitant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we 
also need to see the Rob Garden report on the matter of Jack 
Messer’s severance. Jack Messer allowed Channel Lake to 
speculate in gas contracts in spite of specific instructions by the 
SaskPower board not to do it. Then Jack Messer hid $8 million 

in trading losses from the SaskPower board. And he lost another 
$5 million because he allowed a contract to be signed without it 
even being read. 
 
Yet you concoct a legal opinion to say he deserves severance. 
Jack Messer was negligent from start to finish. He shouldn’t 
have gotten one dime of severance. Mr. Minister, why don’t 
you table the Rob Garden opinion. What are you hiding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I say to 
the members opposite about their lame excuses for not coming 
to the committee and asking the question, it gets pretty obvious. 
It gets pretty obvious. I say again on the severance of Mr. 
Messer — and I’ve answered this question as many times as 
you care to answer . . . to ask it — it’s this: Mr. Messer decided 
to part ways with our corporation on a mutual agreed 
arrangement arrived at by Mr. Milt Fair and legal counsel — a 
legal issue and one that you want to make political. And I 
understand why you want to make it political but try to 
understand why it’s a legal issue from my point of view. 
 
But I want to say to you, sir, the question you should be asking, 
the question you should be asking the other members of your 
caucus is why are they advising you not to come to the 
committee meeting on Public Accounts? Why are they advising 
you of that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Brian Kenny of MacPherson, Leslie, and Tyerman reviewed the 
handling of the sale of Channel Lake. And you have now 
admitted that he found contributory negligence on the part of 
Ken Christensen and Larry Kram. Will you table that legal 
opinion and what action are your taking against Christensen and 
Kram? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I said earlier that the issue of 
management of the Power Corporation . . . If the members care 
to listen to the answer, if you care to listen. The issue of other 
members of the management team at SaskPower, the issue of 
looking at the management of the corporation, will be dealt with 
by the new CEO (chief executive officer). And I think you 
understand that to be the case of how a corporation should be 
managed. 
 
But I come back to the fundamental question of my letter to 
you. Why is it, sir, that you are worried about coming to the 
Committee on Public Accounts where all the questions can be 
asked? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
contributory negligence has to extend to Jack Messer and the 
former minister responsible. The responsibility goes beyond the 
staff of SaskPower; it goes right to the minister’s office. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you be recommending to the Premier that the 
former minister responsible for SaskPower be removed from 
the cabinet? 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s 
position is clear. All of the relevant information on the 
substantial fact has been tabled to this House, to Deloitte & 
Touche, and to CIC . . . (inaudible) . . . report. It’s there. 
 
In addition to that, we’ve agreed that the Public Accounts 
Committee should be holding its hearing, as the Deputy Chair 
has asked, on March 31. That’s 14 days from now. We want to 
have this matter heard openly now and not months or years 
from now. Why won’t you join us? Come and join us for a 
Public Accounts hearing. That’s what he asked you to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Examination of Channel Lake 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed at the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, the minister and yourself have just 
demonstrated that you have no intention — no intention 
whatsoever — of cooperating in the Channel Lake 
investigation. 
 
The legal opinions point to a smoking gun with Jack Messer’s 
hot little fingerprints all over it. And everybody knows it. 
 
We need the answers to these questions in these documents to 
prepare for Public Accounts, and the minister and you aren’t 
prepared to give them. Why would we expect to get more from 
Public Accounts than we’re getting from you right now? Why 
would we expect that? 
 
There is no one, there is no one in Saskatchewan who trusts an 
NDP committee to get to the bottom of NDP wrongdoing. It’s a 
cover-up. It’s a cover-up, it’s a whitewash, and you know it and 
everyone else knows it, Mr. Premier. 
 
Will you launch a real investigation into this Channel Lake 
fiasco? Will you do the right thing and hold a public inquiry 
and get to the bottom of this thing so everyone in Saskatchewan 
knows that Jack Messer is fully liable for this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Sir, can you imagine the audacity of 
that member standing up in his place in this House, and 
knowing full well that his seat mate, his Saskatchewan so-called 
Tory Party seat mate, is the Chair of the Public Accounts 
Committee. And the member from Melfort is a member of the 
Public Accounts Committee, and he says that they have no 
confidence in neither one of those two members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair is having much 
difficulty being able to . . . Order. The Chair is having much 
difficulty being able to hear the response being put by the 
Premier. I will ask all the members to cooperate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, let’s get on with the job 
now. Fourteen days — let’s get on with subpoena-ing 
everybody. Anybody who is relevant to this case, anybody who 

needs to be speaking to this issue, anywhere they’re located, no 
matter what the connections are, let’s get the additional data 
right now. That is your challenge; why aren’t you doing it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’ll ask all hon. 
members, I’ll ask all hon. members on both the government and 
official opposition side to come to order. 
 

Plains Health Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order! Order. Now I have asked the hon. 
members from both the official opposition and the government 
side to come to order to enable the hon. member from Thunder 
Creek to be able to put his question. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal opposition is hitting a nerve and the NDP is into 
damage control over the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
We understand that NDP hack, Garf Stevenson, will be taking 
his dog and pony show on the road soon to try and sucker health 
district boards in southern Saskatchewan into accepting this 
government’s plans to close the Plains Health Centre. 
 
Will the Premier explain why the road show? Why is Stevenson 
not holding public meetings, so people have a chance to express 
their concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I could believe it of 
some of the members of this House, but I have to say quite 
frankly, not of that member. When he gets up and calls Mr. 
Garf Stevenson, who has been a long-time former president of 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, elected by 56,000 delegates of 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, directly or indirectly, who has 
served this province in every capacity, loyally, truthfully, and 
honestly, has conducted his job as Chair of the Regina District 
Health Board in close consultation with the public and in full 
support of the reforms in health care that we’ve launched in the 
province of Saskatchewan . . . I find this a very, very sad day 
for the legislature. 
 
This member should get off the business of trying to destroy 
reputations of people and get on with the building, of building 
health care for people. That’s what you should be doing. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, this government has shocked 
the people of Saskatchewan by refusing to listen to the 
thousands upon thousands who have signed petitions opposing 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre. Even more disturbing is 
the fact that there’s never been a survey of doctors and nurses 
— our health care professionals — to determine their feelings 
on your goal of closing the Plains Health Centre only 230 days 
from today. They’ve never been consulted. 
 
Mr. Premier, who knows our health care needs better than our 
doctors, nurses, and the thousands and thousands of people who 
signed petitions opposing the closure. Why do you believe that 
your people in the Finance department and NDP hacks know 
better? 
 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I urge the hon. member 
— I urge all members of this House — to understand that the 
reforms and the improvements that have taken place at Regina 
General and Pasqua Hospital, the elevated quality of service 
which is now emerging, the additional space which is there as a 
result of reforms, makes Regina and southern Saskatchewan, to 
those areas, coupled with new technology, leading centres of 
health care for Saskatchewan, if not Canada — part of the same 
as Saskatoon. That is the reality of the circumstance. 
 
And I want to remind the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government has done this all the while that the federal Liberal 
government has cut back on health care from 50 cents on the 
dollar to 13 cents on the dollar. All the while that this member 
gets up and asks the questions, his colleagues in Ottawa have 
been hacking and slashing at health care, rather than building. 
Don’t direct the questions to us or to Garf Stevenson, direct 
them to Allan Rock and to Jean Chrétien and your own Liberal 
party for a change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier by now 
knows that Dr. Borden Bachynski, who is the head of 
orthopedic surgery in Regina for 20 years, opposes your plan 
just like other health care professionals across the province. 
 
And do you know why? Because he sees the stretchers lying in 
the hallways of our hospitals. He sees patients having to wait 
hour upon hour for surgery because there are no beds. In fact he 
tells us that there’s not been a single hospital bed available in 
the entire city of Regina on at least two occasions in the past 10 
days. 
 
Mr. Premier, you’re calling for a moratorium on rail-line 
abandonment — and we support those efforts — but isn’t it the 
health of Saskatchewan people that should be more important? 
Will you support our private members’ Bill which would place 
a moratorium on the closure of the Plains hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member said 
that he’s been in support of this government’s call for a 
moratorium on further branch-line abandonment. I tell you, he 
has been calling it so loudly that I can’t hear anything that he 
says. 
 
The silence of the Liberal caucus is absolutely deafening. It’s 
about as deafening as the silence of the Saskatchewan Party is 
with respect to whether or not they’re going to attend or 
whether they’re going to have to be subpoenaed to attend the 
Public Accounts Committee respecting the incidents 
surrounding Channel Lake. It’s been deafening. 
 
The member opposite knows full well that it was the NDP, the 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), that invented 
medicare for Saskatchewan. We know what medicare’s about, 
we support it; it was opposed by the Liberals, opposed by the 
Tories over there — opposed by the Tories and the Liberals — 
and we’re going to defend it and promote it well into the 21st 
century. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Board Dismissal Vote 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Will the Hon. Premier, will the Hon. Premier confirm or deny 
that while Doug Anguish was the minister responsible, the 
board of Saskatchewan Power voted unanimously to dismiss the 
then president, Jack Messer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I can neither confirm 
nor deny because I do not know the circumstances involved. 
But I will tell you one thing in any event, if it was there it did 
not happen. Mr. Messer remained, as we know, the Chair of the 
. . . CEO of the SaskPower Corporation, and Mr. Doug Anguish 
remained as the chairman of the SaskPower board and the 
minister in charge as is par for the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Note that the Hon. Premier did not deny that in 
fact occurred. I also note that Doug Anguish in fact did not 
remain as the minister responsible. He’s up in the Northwest 
Territories the last I heard. 
 
Did that motion to dismiss Jack Messer, and what subsequently 
happened to make it go away, have anything to do with Mr. 
Anguish’s present residence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, one would have to ask 
Mr. Anguish, but I can tell you that when I spoke to Mr. 
Anguish at the time of his resignation, it had nothing to do with 
his departure. Mr. Anguish, at the time of his departure, had 
another job opportunity involving the Northwest Territories and 
its various agencies, and took it. And I explored that aspect of 
it. 
 
I would have loved to have Doug remain with us as a member 
of the caucus, as I would have of Bob Pringle. It was a career 
decision that he made. That’s the simple fact of the matter. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I thank . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I thank 
the member for Lloydminster, but I really don’t think the whole 
thing was a plot to get me into the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government would have us believe that 
December of ’97 was the first time they saw the red flags over 
Channel Lake, but we know that the auditor said there’s some 
problems there as early as his fall report 1995. 
 
We are told that the Ernst & Young audit report of SaskPower 
flagged concerns over Channel Lake, ’95 and ’96. It is clear that 
in order to prepare for Public Accounts, the Ernst & Young 
reports on Channel Lake will have to be made available to all 
members of the committee for review at that time. 
 
Will the minister responsible make these reports available now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I say to the member opposite 
that when I made my statement in the House last week — I 
believe it was last Tuesday — I commented on the fact that 
when the auditor spoke to the issue of Channel Lake in late 
1997, we immediately asked officials at CIC to review the 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

complete file. 
 
Following on that, Deloitte & Touche did an extremely 
extensive report which has been tabled here in the House — and 
excruciating. I say to the member opposite that it was a very 
detailed study. That was tabled. The report from CIC, all of this 
material has been referred to the Public Accounts Committee. I 
understand the meeting is scheduled now or should be 
scheduled for March 31. And I say to the member opposite, I 
believe you’re a member of that committee and we welcome 
your attendance, and all and any questions can be put at that 
time and we’ll do our best to answer all the questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Teacher Salary Increases 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the Minister of Education. Madam Minister, 
I have five school divisions in my constituency, all of whom 
have either met with me in person or delivered personal 
messages to me about the same subject matter. It is best 
described by quoting from one of the letters that I have 
received, and I’ll quote briefly to you. 
 
Madam Minister, I quote: 
 

It is our belief that virtually all decisions of the 
government’s trustee committee regarding the conduct of 
bargaining and the contents of the new provincial 
agreement were made by the five government appointees 
on the nine-member committee. Our biggest concerns with 
this tentative agreement is the 3 per cent increase in 
salaries for the 1998 budget year and the further increase of 
2 per cent in January 1999. 
 
The Minister of Education has stated on several occasions 
that any increase to teachers’ salaries would be covered by 
the provincial government. It is our understanding from 
these statements that such coverage would occur under the 
foundation grant. Quite frankly, this means very little to 
our school division in terms of support. I would like to 
state to your government that this . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The hon. member 
has been very lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask the hon. 
member to put his question directly now. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
are you prepared to address the increase in teachers’ salaries by 
creating a formula which delivers such funds fairly to all boards 
in the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as all members of the 
legislature will know, we have a tentative agreement with the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. I understand that the 
teachers will be voting on this tentative agreement in the next 
two days —I believe the 17th . . . (inaudible) . . . and tomorrow; 
March 17 and 18. 
 
It’s our intention to, and we’ve stated this to trustees, that we 
are going to cover the cost of the teachers’ salary increase by 
increasing the foundation operating grant in the appropriate 

amount, and we will handle that increase in the way that we’ve 
handled it in previous years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A supplemental to 
the same minister. Madam Minister, you know very well that 
the foundation funding formula is capped and those people who 
have reached the cap as a result of increases in assessments will 
receive no extra money from your government whatsoever 
unless you circumvent this particular funding formula. The cap 
makes it impossible for these people to receive their funding. 
 
Will you commit today, Madam Minister, to doing whatever is 
necessary to make sure that all of the people receive the money 
that you have promised to them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I just want to make the point that it is 
true that there are school divisions in the province that received 
an assessment-related cap for the 1997-98 school year. It’s an 
assessment-related cap. It does not mean that if the school 
division is entitled to funds coming from the foundation 
operating grant for the ’98-99 school division that they will be 
capped. 
 
So I just want you to wait to the budget. And I just want to 
assure the school divisions that have been capped, it does not 
necessarily mean that you will not receive a funding increase, 
because the cap is assessment related and it’s not related to 
other factors in the foundation operating grant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Supplemental to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Madam Minister, we take it then that you have seen 
the problem and will correct it on budget day and we take that 
as your promise. If not, you’ll be hearing from us. 
 
Have you also considered the possibility of reimbursing people 
in the education system for the increase in costs that are 
naturally going to flow to janitors and secretaries and directors 
of education and all other people that are involved in the 
education system. Once you promise somebody 3 per cent in 
one area, automatically everybody in the system wants the same 
increases. There is no allotment for those kinds of expenses that 
are going to increase the mill rates and the costs to the people 
who own property. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The member is asking a budget-related 
question. What I can tell the member is that it’s our intention on 
budget day, which comes on March 19, to indicate to all school 
divisions in the province of Saskatchewan what their funding 
will be for the 1998-99 school year. And I know that the school 
divisions are waiting very eagerly because they have to set their 
mill rate. 
 
So I can say to the member that on March 19, as the budget is 
being read in the legislature, all school divisions in the province 
will receive their grant information for the ’98-99 school 
division year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 230  The Plains Health Centre Preservation Act 
(“Save the Plains”) 

 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 230, The Plains 
Health Centre Preservation Act, short title, “Save the Plains,” 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise 
pursuant to rule 46 to seek leave of this Assembly to move a 
motion of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for Thunder Creek requests 
leave under rule 46. I’ll ask him to very briefly outline why he 
feels the Assembly should set aside its regular business and to 
advise very briefly to the House the motion he wishes to have 
us consider. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Closure of Plains Health Centre 
 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just propose to 
read the text of the desired motion. It reads as follows: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the provincial government to 
act decisively to save the Plains Health Centre from 
imminent closure, currently scheduled for 230 days from 
today on the afternoon of Saturday, October 31, 1998, by 
providing adequate funding to the Regina Health Board; so 
that the winding-down of services and procedures at the 
Plains may be halted in order that the Plains Health Centre 
may continue meeting the health care needs of people in 
the Regina Health District and all of southern 
Saskatchewan by returning to its fully active status as the 
area’s single standing trauma centre as well as the centre 
for cardiovascular care, surgery, neurology, pediatrics, 
obstetrics, gynecology, and urology; so that the 
unacceptable delays in surgery now being suffered by 
Saskatchewan residents may be reduced. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the main reason why this is of such pressing and 
urgent necessity is one that I outlined earlier in question period; 
the very fact that within the city of Regina in the past 10 days, 
there’s not been a single hospital bed available for a sick 
person. That in itself indicates the pressing and urgent need for 
this debate. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Hamilton, seconded by Mr. 
Ward, and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Krawetz. 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To continue with 
the discussion that we worked through yesterday on the Speech 
from the Throne. Since then, there’s a few other things that 
have come to light that I think need to be brought to the 
attention of the House. 
 
We talked briefly about the health situation in Saskatchewan, 
and I would suggest that it would be a good idea for all 
members of the House today sometime to take a copy of the 
Rosetown Eagle and find out what’s really happening in our 
health care, when you have people who need an operation that 
lasts approximately an hour — can’t be done in Saskatchewan. 
They’re sent to Edmonton, they stay there for days and weeks 
waiting for the operation, spending tens of thousands of 
taxpayers’ dollars to do an operation that is not very expensive 
and doesn’t take a long period of time. Something is way out of 
whack, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when I talked yesterday about our health system having 
not just two tiers, as the Liberals go for, but many, many tiers, I 
think this is what it’s all about. When we take our people in 
Saskatchewan, we can’t deal with them, we send them out of 
the province, and we spend a fortune taking care of them some 
place else when we should be able to do that in our own 
particular province. 
 
Another interesting point that’s showed up since yesterday. It 
appears that the government, on the Young Offenders Act, is 
slowly coming onside, deciding that something needs to be 
done. 
 
But the question, Mr. Speaker, is: after it’s become so blatantly 
evident across this province that the Young Offenders Act has 
to be dealt with — and we know it needs to be dealt with, and 
bit by bit people have been coming on side from the other side 
of the House after they realize that it needs to be worked 
through — why, Mr. Speaker, do we have to spend money on a 
government poll trying to find out what the Young Offenders 
Act actually is as far as the people of this province are 
concerned and whether they want to go ahead and support that? 
 
They knew that, Mr. Speaker. It’s a waste of money. That time 
and effort should have been spent taking care of the Young 
Offenders Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning when I showed up, I found out that I 
had some e-mail. And I would like to read some of that and I 
will make some changes, Mr. Speaker, because where it refers 
to a specific member in the House, I will insert the constituency 
that he comes from. And the letter’s not long, but I think it 
states and goes to the hub of the issue that we’ve debated today. 
It says: 
 
(1430) 
 

I’ve never written to an MLA on any issue before. The 
Jack Messer payment totally outrages me. I have written to 
the member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood this morning to 
express my displeasure. What contempt Roy and his band 
of cheats and liars has for the people of Saskatchewan. No 
new money for health care and highways, but for their 
friends, there is no limit. 
 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

The man squanders almost a million and a half on offshore 
deals that were doomed from the start, and then untold 
millions in the Channel Lake deal. And Roy tells us they 
have learned from their mistakes and it’s time to move on. 
Well it’s time for Roy, Eldon and Dwain to move on. Keep 
up the fight for Saskatchewan taxpayers that has to pick up 
the tab . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member has quite 
respectfully volunteered in the beginning of his statement to not 
refer to hon. members by their proper names, but then has 
reverted to doing that, and I’ll just simply caution him. I think 
the hon. member knows the guideline for debate, and I know 
that he’ll want to do it within the rules of the House. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that bit of help. 
But I think the key line was the last little part that says, “Keep 
up the fight for the Saskatchewan taxpayer that has to pick up 
the tab for all of this incompetence.” 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, that’s what we’ve seen the last 
couple of days, is this blatant incompetence that seems to 
permeate the other side of the House. When we had questions 
asked on Jack Messer, and when we actually had answers to 
those questions, answers that weren’t pleasant at all, Mr. 
Speaker, for the people of Saskatchewan, back-benchers tended 
not to applaud. And I don’t blame them, because they knew 
they had to go back to their own constituencies and face those 
people, trying to answer that question. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we had some more answers on that issue, 
but they didn’t divulge any more information. They basically 
said that information isn’t going to be given. And now suddenly 
we have a stream of applause and enthusiasm from the 
back-benchers out there again, feeling so good that maybe all 
the stuff that’s out there won’t actually come out. 
 
Those are the things that have happened since yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s time to go on with the other things that I need 
to say on the Speech from the Throne. 
 
As I intimated yesterday, there was very little there except a lot 
of huff and puff. When we looked for details that were going to 
help deal with the problems, come up with solutions, those 
weren’t there. 
 
And I’d like to deal with one and that is the effort of the idea 
and the concerns that exist in Saskatchewan about hunting, 
about game management, about gun laws, and all those sorts of 
things. It’s a topic that is still very alive throughout 
Saskatchewan. I believe the government would hope it would 
go away. 
 
On night hunting, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are 
not in support. It is too dangerous. It is too dangerous to expect 
that someone, regardless how much natural light there happens 
to be out there, can go ahead and fire firearms into bushes and 
brush and hope that in that dark bush and brush there’s not 
going to be something that shouldn’t be hit. That’s too 
dangerous. That needs to be stopped. It needs to be stopped 
completely. 
 
And along with that same topic, Mr. Speaker, are the 

populations that we see in our province for game management, 
how those populations are dropping. We had the antelope 
season, Mr. Speaker, shut right down this year because there 
weren’t enough to be hunted. I was out the previous year and I 
knew the numbers were way down, and I wasn’t surprised. And 
in spite of that, Mr. Speaker, there were people hunting antelope 
this year — people who this government has said, well if they 
don’t need a licence, so be it. That’s not good enough. 
 
When we have the populations of our game in Saskatchewan 
brought down to the point that their very existence becomes 
critical, then we need to say that takes priority over anything 
and everything else. 
 
Another similar example is the moose population in 
north-eastern Saskatchewan where there are certain tracks that 
used to be very highly and heavily populated with moose. The 
moose are almost gone. And aircraft flying over these days see 
snowmobile tracks still out there and kill sites still in place in an 
area where the moose are just on the verge of extinction. And 
yet, what is this government doing about that? I suggest to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that on those issues, they’re doing absolutely 
nothing. 
 
Yes, they may not be selling any more hunting licences, but 
there are still people hunting. There are moose still being taken. 
The population is still being destroyed, and this government 
continues to do nothing. We need to look at that. We need to 
look at that. 
 
Meanwhile, we have people chirping from the other side about 
politics. I suggest to those people that a moose cannot tell an 
NDP apart from a tree on the average day, except when the last 
one goes, they may put that mark on the last moose’s 
tombstone: guess who is responsible for killing the last one of 
us? 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at this issue of 
hunting, of night hunting, of game populations, there are other 
provinces that have systems that work. We need to use those. 
They are there for the taking, those ideas. 
 
As I mentioned yesterday when we were talking about the 
disastrous results of the math scores, this government wasn’t 
prepared to look anywheres else for an answer. They again 
seem to be willing to look nowheres else for an answer. 
 
We need to realize, Mr. Speaker, that if we’re going to protect 
the game in this country, make sure that we have that part of 
our natural resources protected for ever and ever, we need to 
make sure that, under certain situations and for some of these 
things that I have mentioned, there is no hunting without a 
permit, by anyone. And do what happens in other provinces, 
that people who feel they need that hunting privileges for a 
matter of sustenance, that they have to prove that need for 
sustenance. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Minister, in those cases we need to look at 
our social services and other areas, that we do provide those 
living funds that are needed, that hunting does not have to be a 
part of that. And especially, Mr. Speaker, when it destroys a 
wildlife, as it is doing. 
 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

And while we’re on that issue of wildlife and hunting, I think 
this government needs to look at some other regulations that are 
a disaster presently. If in fact, Mr. Speaker, we are going to 
allow people in this province to hunt at any time of day or 
night, at any time of the year, where does that leave the rest of 
the population that may be out there in nature for photography, 
for a walk, for a drive, for all kinds of other very legitimate 
recreational reasons. 
 
We’re out there walking with the kinds of wearing apparel that 
we wear outside of hunting season — our browns and our 
greens and our yellows. And yet at the same time there’s people 
out there that are hunting. Mr. Speaker, during hunting season 
we very specifically require that anyone out there hunting wears 
the protective gear with the coloration that needs to be there to 
protect them. And yet by letting people hunt at any season, any 
time of day, all year round, all the rest of society is suddenly put 
at danger. 
 
And there are many little quirks within our regulations that we 
have that do need to be addressed, and I would hope, Mr. 
Speaker, as we go through this session, we’ll address those as 
well. 
 
One other little one that came to mind in the past two, three 
days is someone who’s on a quad-runner hunting, needs to wear 
the protective colouration of gear, but he’s also suppose to wear 
a helmet due to safety regulations. Now which law supersedes 
which law? And which one is he going to break? Because he 
can’t keep them both. So those things need to be dealt with. 
 
Okay, back to my constituency, Mr. Speaker. And I was 
covering certain areas in my constituency yesterday and I’d like 
to continue with that. 
 
One of the areas that needs to be addressed, and we’re spending 
some time on highways, is the intersection that takes place at 
Warman Road and Highway 11. There’s a cut-off there where 
you turn off Warman Road to get onto Highway 11, and the 
signage is terrible. All that has to happen, Mr. Speaker, is for 
someone to go through there and see all the skid marks of 
people who go in the ditch because the curve is there and yet 
there are no proper signage . . . there’s no proper signage there 
for that. 
 
It’s going to end up costing some lives, Mr. Speaker. I brought 
this to the attention of the Highways minister at another time 
and at this point nothing has been done. Those kinds of issues 
we hope will be taken care of in this session. If all that we hear 
about the rest of this session is the same kind of information 
that we’ve got from the Speech from the Throne, it won’t be 
happening. 
 
Highway 312. I gave this government a compliment yesterday 
on the twinning that’s taken place on Highway 12 and Highway 
11, and that’s good. But there’s also Highway 312 that needs to 
be looked at. It’s a highway that’s riddled with potholes because 
it hasn’t been finished. And when it’s patched, if it’s patched, 
only the holes are patched and the area around it, which is 
sinking — it’s soft — cannot handle that traffic. 
 
Highway 312, Mr. Speaker, has a lot of traffic. What it doesn’t 
have in numbers it has in weight. Because the people that bring 

or haul their grain from between those two main highways that 
go through my area, basically all of that grain comes out along 
Highway 312. Also with the area across the river to the east, 
with the fact that their elevator system isn’t intact to the same 
extent that it was, that the railway track is now for sale, a lot of 
that grain, Mr. Speaker, comes across the river, down 312 and 
onto Highway 11. 
 
And so that Highway 312 is a great feeder system, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s been let go, literally in this case to pot after pot after 
pothole. It’s full of them. And it’s going to be worse. It’s going 
to be worse. 
 
Highways 11 and 12 may be among the better ones in the area, 
but Highway 312 is going to get much worse if it isn’t finished 
off and taken care of properly. 
 
The grid roads in the areas which feed highways such as 312, 
Mr. Speaker, the RMs (rural municipality) are responsible for 
and, as we well know, with the tax structure that’s happened to 
them, the funding that’s gone down, the fact that they can’t do 
major projects, where they can do three-year projects in one 
year to get some good bids on it, has resulted in the fact that the 
grid roads are also suffering. And if we can’t even keep up with 
the maintenance of them, which that means that in a number of 
years they’ll be virtually destroyed and almost have to be 
rebuilt. And I suggest that we need those kinds of things dealt 
with. 
 
We have some unusually heavy traffic, Mr. Speaker, on 
Highways 11 and 12, specifically on Highway 11, and that’s 
traffic that’s been designated a special situation going up to 
uranium mines. These, Mr. Speaker, are nine-axle trucks. They 
are allowed to be overweight and there’s a funding agreement 
between the companies that run them and the Department of 
Highways so they do put some of the money back into the 
system. 
 
And I think we need to be assured, Mr. Speaker, that all of that 
money goes specifically to that highway and that the money 
that comes in is adequate to cover the extra heavy usage that 
those highways suffer because of that traffic. If that is the case, 
then the program may be warranted because, especially when 
they go further north on frozen roads, that weight may be 
allowable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was mentioned this afternoon on a number of 
occasions about this being Agriculture Week. Agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, is one of the true creators of wealth in this country 
because for decades people have taken that land, put seeds into 
that land, raised the crops, and put money into our economy. 
And so as we spend some time talking about agriculture this 
afternoon, I think we need to realize that it is one of the key 
things in this particular province. 
 
Not only key in the fact that it is the basic source of creation of 
wealth in this province, it also happens to be a very exciting 
part of wealth creation in this province, and also has the other 
component that we’ve long looked at, and that is one of those 
things that families tend to do together. And I think that’s one 
of the things that almost everyone in Saskatchewan supports in 
a major way. 
 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

Farming has become very difficult, Mr. Speaker. It’s become 
difficult because our transportation system is in decay and part 
of that blame goes to the federal government and what’s 
happened with the railways. It means that the highways have to 
pick up that slack and we have to make sure we stay ahead of 
that program, because the further behind we get, those are costs 
that tend to escalate very rapidly if the roads eventually get 
totally destroyed. 
 
The farm community is a totally different community, Mr. 
Speaker, than it probably was two or three decades ago, decades 
ago where people used the same piece of equipment year after 
year after year. They used it, Mr. Speaker, until it was worn out. 
Well in an effort to go ahead and keep their head above water, 
financially speaking, Mr. Speaker, farmers have had to have 
been very innovative in the last numbers of years. 
 
(1445) 
 
And any time another piece of equipment that comes along, that 
means they can just squeeze an extra penny out of those already 
very thin margins. They’re almost forced to use those, Mr. 
Speaker, not necessarily because they always want to spend the 
money on updating, on equipment, but because of the 
possibility of being able to go ahead, as I just finished saying, 
squeeze a slightly larger margin out of their operation. They are 
forced to go to this new equipment. That has put a great strain 
on the finances of our agriculture communities. 
 
The input costs, Mr. Speaker, that farmers have to deal with are 
horrendous. The cost of fertilizer, chemicals, herbicides, 
continue to escalate rapidly. And unfortunately we’ve seen this 
year that the price of the product is actually going in the other 
direction. It’s going down, which means that the margins have 
virtually disappeared. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne, as I recall, said next 
to nothing about agriculture, and I’m very worried that as we go 
through this particular session, this government in the Speech 
from the Throne and in its budget, will not have anything for 
that segment, the segment that is so critical to our well-being as 
a province, so critical also to our lifestyle, not just to the 
financial welfare of this province. And I believe that this 
government needs to spend some serious time looking at that. 
 
I would like to spend a little bit of time, Mr. Speaker, on the 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) situation. I have in 
my constituency, as we all have in our constituencies, people 
that have suffered from this concept of no-fault, which must be 
a misnomer, Mr. Speaker, because it seems that somebody 
should be at fault. 
 
We know when there’s an accident there’s some fault there. We 
know when someone has some fault to bear, there’s some 
payment that’s needed. And we have people who are suffering, 
Mr. Speaker, because of accidents that they had no fault in. And 
yet no one seems to be taking any responsibility for that and 
they’re left with very poor care, a very poor settlement, 
settlements that basically sometimes say, as I said yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker, just go down to the local spa and get some care. 
It’s happening. 
 
While we’re dealing with roads and traffic, we need to say a 

word about STC (Saskatchewan Transportation System), Mr. 
Speaker. STC performs a very important service in our 
province, especially when we’re dealing with rural 
Saskatchewan. It provides an opportunity for people in some of 
our communities to get out of those communities and to travel 
to cities if they need some medical care, which has become a 
much bigger issue in the last year or two than it ever has been 
before. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we have a system such as STC and that 
serves a purpose, then we find out that it’s run in such a way 
that the bills aren’t even being sent out. And then we wonder 
why it runs in the red. And how are we going to cover the cost? 
Well we’ll just go ahead and hit the taxpayer up. And whenever 
STC falls short, we’ll just cough up the difference — taxpayers 
will just get after it; they’ll take care of it. That is not good 
enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In a private industry, when that sort of thing happens, the 
company goes broke and goes under and someone comes along 
and replaces it and gives good service and maybe better service. 
If that doesn’t happen, they can’t just run up to somebody else 
and say, we’ll increase the prices, because some competition 
will come along and do the same job better and for less. And 
yet STC is allowed to do that. Not to send out the bills, Mr. 
Speaker, and then to expect the taxpayers to cover up the cost 
— it’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I spent a little bit of time yesterday going around my 
constituency and explaining to members of this House some of 
the strengths that are out there. And I’d like to continue with 
that briefly this afternoon as well. 
 
Some very exciting communities in my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. And the fact is, if we compare the communities in my 
constituency with most other communities in Saskatchewan, 
we’ll find something unique in that these are communities that 
almost without exception are growing communities — 
communities in rural Saskatchewan where the population is in 
fact increasing. And why is that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
There are many reasons for that, but I’ll suggest probably one 
of the most obvious reasons. This constituency, Mr. Speaker, 
has never voted NDP. And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, when we 
look at that particular fact and say, does that have something to 
do with the ability for those people and the insight of those 
people to go ahead and ensure that their communities grow and 
thrive? That ability to do it themselves. 
 
It’s a shame that sometimes they have to do it themselves. It’s a 
shame that sometimes this government chooses to dole out 
money to other communities and leave some of these on the 
short end of the stick, and we’ll mention a few of those as we 
continue this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Martensville, close to Saskatoon, has always been one of our 
faster growing communities in Saskatchewan. A rapidly 
growing community because of the way this community sticks 
together, creates facilities for its young people, the schools that 
it has, the teachers that are there. It’s a community that people 
want to live in, and that’s why it’s grown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately one of the benefits that has always been there for 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

Martensville, and that’s that the tax incentives will always be 
lower, is one that this present government has removed from 
them with the assessments, increased costs of education that are 
there. They’re suffering through that taxation thing as every 
other place in this province is as well, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
really hitting rural Saskatchewan. 
 
One of those many titles, as my colleague says, is called 
downloading. And I guess the word down is probably the key 
part of that. It’s just a real kick, it’s a put-down to the people 
that live in those particular communities. 
 
Not long ago, Mr. Speaker, I believe within this last month, I 
spent some time in the community of Warman. I looked at some 
of the facilities they needed and I went to a fund-raising scheme 
to provide some of those recreational facilities for their 
community. Warman’s another one of those exciting 
communities that’s growing. Unfortunately they needed some 
of these facilities; there was no help there again because it 
seems if you live in rural Saskatchewan there is no money there 
for them, and they were again trying to do this on their own. 
 
A great community, Mr. Speaker, and I would hope that one of 
these times we can go through the community of Warman with 
that program for our students as well because I’m sure you 
would enjoy that community. 
 
Osler, a small town that’s grown very rapidly, had another 
major expansion this last year, and I believe almost all of the 
lots that they had opened up for expansion are already taken. 
And yet, I had an expression of frustration from the people in 
Osler in the last two or three weeks. 
 
That community, totally on its own, Mr. Speaker, has raised 
some money, a lot of time and effort, into their own museum. 
And as this government has, there’s a bit of a program for 
grants for museums. They applied for it, the grants were sent 
out, Osler museum was given none. Maybe they’re too small, 
maybe they’ve done too much on their own, we’re not sure, but 
they’re very frustrated. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they’re very bitter, 
those people in the community of Osler, because they put all 
that money into it and they see other museums getting benefit 
for their communities but nothing going to this particular 
community. And that isn’t fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We talk about industry in our small communities in rural 
Saskatchewan. The community of Hague — would you drive 
through that on the highway, will see there are a number of new 
businesses right on the road. There used to be a car dealership 
that isn’t there any longer. The building stood empty for a short 
period of time and a major facility, business, moved into there, 
building structures for farming communities and for business. A 
good idea that they had there. 
 
A new welding shop is coming up. It’s an area where there’s 
growth; there’s enthusiasm. And that’s because they’ve got the 
attitude that if they have to do it by themselves they probably 
will. It’s a very independent community, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re surviving. 
 
I come to my own community, Mr. Speaker, and as I mentioned 
with the other ones, my town, the town of Rosthern, is also on a 
fund-raising scheme. It seems that every town in rural 

Saskatchewan is raising funds one way or another just to try and 
stay alive. What do they need? Well, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
needed this facility for decades. It’s a gym for their elementary 
school. 
 
They have no gym in the elementary school; didn’t even have a 
play area inside. It was just all classrooms. At one time they 
didn’t even have an office for the principal. He was basically in 
a dust closet and they just had to renovate and work with that. 
And yet every time they applied to the provincial government 
for help for building, it seemed some other community gets 
ahead of it and Rosthern is left trying to do it on their own 
again. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like every other community in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — That’s right. And so they’ve spent the last 
two years trying to raise funds for an elementary gym. They 
need that, Mr. Speaker. The Education minister has received 
numerous calls to say that this facility needs to be at the top of 
that list, not at the bottom of the list. But for some reason it 
always seems to stay down there, and the funding for that gym, 
after decades, Mr. Speaker — not just years but decades — still 
is not in place. 
 
And then we move slowly down Highway 312 because that’s 
the way, in my constituency, we travel down Highway 312, is 
slowly. And you’ll notice that I didn’t even use the word, drive. 
I used the word move, because you’re never sure if you’re 
skidding or rolling or what you’re doing, but you manage to get 
from end to the other eventually. 
 
You get to the community of Laird. It has a very neat slogan. 
It’s a community that pulls together, and probably more than 
any other community in Saskatchewan. It is one of those that 
works together 100 per cent for everything that happens there. I 
attended a time of recognition for one of its citizens there, Mr. 
Speaker, about a month ago, for a Mrs. Hinz, who spent 
numbers of years working on their housing authority, and as so 
many other people in Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan, 
working on those kinds of organizations to help make their 
communities a better place to live. And Laird is doing that as 
well. 
 
Community of Waldheim, Mr. Speaker, the community of 
Waldheim has had a few key issues that have crossed their table 
in the last year. Issues that aren’t solved to this particular point. 
They need a skating rink, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker. They 
are looking at different ways of raising funds for that as well. 
 
But they do have another problem. They have a home in there 
for some of the citizens of this province that we’ve seen fit, and 
I’m proud to say we have seen fit, to take care of. It’s the 
Menno Home. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a very special situation in 
Waldheim where the clients who live in the Menno Home can 
just go down the street a short distance to another facility called 
Menno Industries and provide meaningful work, things to do to 
give them a feeling of self-worth, a feeling of confidence in 
themselves. It’s been a source of pride for the people of 
Waldheim, what they’ve done there for these individuals. Now 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

what’s happened is, it seems, that through some of the 
conclusions of groups such as social services and health, have 
decided that the Menno Home needs to be closed. 
 
Well the first conclusion they came up with was, well these 
people will have to go wherever there is room. Well the 
community of Waldheim is also a growing community. There 
weren’t any empty homes for these people to go to, so they 
would have to leave the community of Waldheim, which would 
mean, Mr. Speaker, they would have to go to communities 
where there weren’t facilities such as Menno Industries, where 
the only life would consist of getting up in the morning, sitting 
in front of the television, waiting for night to come and go back 
to bed. 
 
And we have members from the government side saying they 
could have the little lunch in the afternoon called faspa. Well I 
would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that just to tell these, because they 
get faspa, that that’s enough to go ahead and carry them through 
and that’s enough dignity in life — I suggest not, I suggest not. 
 
In fact, as I would . . . it would be nice, Mr. Speaker, if that 
particular member could go down to the community of 
Waldheim and tell them that faspa is enough for these 
individuals and I would suggest they would strongly disagree 
with them. 
 
(1500) 
 
Anyways, Mr. Speaker, bit by bit it seems that the organizations 
that are responsible, health and social services, have changed 
their minds so many times on this issue that the community 
isn’t sure exactly where it is at, and I would hope that as we go 
through the Speech from the Throne and we look at the budget, 
that there is something in there that tells these people: no, we’re 
not going to take you from the home that you’ve lived in, with 
the Menno Industries where you’ve worked, where you’ve 
found some value in your life. We’re not going to take you 
suddenly and just throw you around the province and say, there 
you are, that’s it, we’ve done our duty. 
 
The duty is to let these people be in a community where they 
are accepted, where they can go down to the rink and watch a 
hockey game. They can go down to the local coffee shop and 
have a coffee. They can go down to local churches and attend a 
service. And in all of those, the people of the community accept 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of being principal in that 
community for a number of years, and one of the things that the 
high school does on a regular basis is basically set up a field 
day or a sports day for the clients of what has been known as 
the Menno Home. And I was proud of those kids, Mr. Speaker, 
because they spent the whole day with them in various kinds of 
activities, had a good understanding and appreciation for 
everyone in this society — something that I think is very unique 
in this province and very special in that community. 
 
And I hope it’s not lost because this government doesn’t know 
what it’s doing with social services and doesn’t know what it’s 
doing with health. And anyone that questions that statement, 
Mr. Speaker, should go to the community of Waldheim and find 
out some of the difficulties that they’re having there. 

We had a statement made earlier on this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, about the Pool elevator system and people that have 
worked there. Well if we go to the community of Hepburn, we 
will find a museum that’s dedicated to the grain industry; an old 
Pool elevator that the local community has put . . . kept and 
developed into a museum of grain so that our young people will 
be able to go to that particular location and see what it was like 
for people in decades gone by and how their grain was handled 
and how it was taken care of. A fine facility; a fine community. 
 
And need I say something on schools? Their school is actually 
in such sad shape in some places they had to close down a 
classroom recently because people were actually falling through 
a hole in the floor. And the Department of Education had no 
money for a better facility. 
 
The last community in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, is 
Dalmeny, which probably the best word to describe that 
community is just it’s a pretty community. The development 
that’s taken place there, the housing that’s taken place, the 
planning has been such that it is just a beautiful town to be in — 
a town that has a lot of spirit, a lot of faith and pride in itself. 
And they will do well and they are doing well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mine is a constituency of hope but it’s also a 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, of frustration — frustration that 
when they hear a speech like what we heard in the Speech from 
the Throne, they would say, there’s nothing there. There is no 
leadership; there is no guidance. There is no plan. There are no 
ideas. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, speaks to the point of what the 
government is all about. They are devoid of plans; they are 
devoid of ideas. The only hope that’s out there, Mr. Speaker, is 
in the hearts of the citizens of this province hoping that 
someday this government will not be there. 
 
And that’s where there’s a light at the end of the tunnel, Mr. 
Speaker. Because these people know out there in Saskatchewan 
that the days of this NDP government are numbered. And when 
that time comes — and it’s coming very quickly and it will be 
here very soon — it’ll be a glad day for all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Because I mentioned earlier, my constituency, Mr. Speaker, has 
proudly never voted NDP and never will. And the rest of the 
province is looking at that constituency and saying, there is a 
model constituency where there is hope and there’s 
development; if we go the same way, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be 
able to do that. All the way from Hepburn down to Herschel, 
they know that’s the truth. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity of addressing this 
House and the people of this province that were watching via 
television. And hopefully that as they continue to watch, they 
will see that there is hope, there are ideas. But they’re over here, 
they’re in the Saskatchewan Party, and that will bring this 
province into the future that they’re hoping for. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, members 
of the Legislative Assembly, it is with appreciation that I rise in 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

the House today. It’s a great privilege and honour to address 
you, the entire Assembly, and first and foremost the people of 
Saskatchewan, in my response to the 1998 throne speech. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, before I begin, I wish to welcome the new 
pages and also to express my gratitude to all of the legislative 
staff and constituency assistants who support our work. In 
addition, Mr. Speaker, I commend you for the fair manner in 
which you preside over this Assembly daily. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when citizens of this province elect governments, 
they entrust that government as a custodian of the public purse 
and the public good. This is indeed a sacred trust. And each and 
every one of us, Mr. Speaker, that are elected members must 
never forget that we sit in this legislature through the goodwill 
and the grace of our constituents, the people of Saskatchewan, 
and we are duty bound to respect those people regardless of 
their political coloration. We must respect their intelligence and 
knowledge and their ability to digest and deal with the issues 
which face government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not convinced that this NDP government and 
the ministers have that respect. As an example I refer to the 
recent mismanagement of the NDP government regarding the 
Channel Lake fiasco. And I ask that the Premier and the 
minister responsible do not insult the intelligence of the people 
of this province by claiming that you had no recourse other than 
to pay Jack Messer $300,000 severance. 
 
How, how can a president and a CEO, who gets paid over 
$200,000 in salary and emoluments, be found to be anything 
but negligent and liable for the $5 million Channel Lake loss, 
when he and his management team do not bother to read a 
contract before signing it. This severance, Mr. Speaker, is 
nothing but a political payola, pure and simple. Every person in 
Saskatchewan knows this. 
 
Where, where is the management and ministerial responsibility 
and accountability? Mr. Speaker, I have stated before in this 
legislature that government members exist to serve the people, 
not to line the pockets of their political henchmen through 
patronage appointments to positions for which they have little 
or no qualifications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have stated before that government exists to 
serve people and not to dictate to them. An administration that 
acts in a high-handed manner, knows-it-all manner, big-brother 
fashion, does so at its own peril. The arrogance, Mr. Speaker, of 
the Blakeney administration, with its family of Crown 
corporations, and its failure to inform, consult and truly listen to 
the people, led to its stunning electoral defeat in 1982. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this administration is heading down that same slippery 
slope at breakneck speed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of this Assembly represent different 
political parties, but constituents expect all of us, at all times, to 
act with integrity and competence and to safeguard the interests 
and the well-being of all Saskatchewan people regardless of 
race, creed and colour. 
 
And in particular, in the true Saskatchewan spirit of compassion 
and caring as reflected in the immensely successful 
Telemiracles, we are entrusted to look out for and help those 

less fortunate. This is what Saskatchewan is all about — people 
helping people. Communities and individuals cooperating and 
sharing common values and working towards common goals. 
Empowering individuals and communities is the key to carrying 
a strong, vibrant, prosperous and sustainable Saskatchewan past 
the fast approaching millennium and into the 21st century. 
 
“. . . times they are a-changin’ ”, sings that ‘60s troubadour and 
icon, Bob Dylan. I have been continually amazed at how the 
last two and a half years have been for me, both a tremendous 
challenge and an unbelievable privilege and blessing to serve 
my constituents and all the people of Saskatchewan in general. 
 
The winds of change blow constantly through our personal 
lives, our communities, our province, and our great country of 
Canada. There are many issues that daily confront our people 
— health care issues, education issues, unsafe roads, and social 
services. But regardless of what issue our people may identify, 
the key to survival will be always the local community — 
vibrant, increasingly autonomous and self-reliant local 
groupings of people that emphasize sharing, cooperation, and 
living in harmony with Mother Earth and those around us. They 
will enhance their ability to survive as a healthy, happy, and 
caring people. 
 
It is therefore incumbent, Mr. Speaker, upon leadership within 
provincial and federal governments to support and encourage 
both rural and urban communities in their efforts. With their 
requisite financial and human resources base, communities are 
perfectly capable of identifying their needs and their problems, 
and strategically planning and executing plans suitable and 
tailored to their requirements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regrettably this government has gone in the 
opposite direction. It has balanced the budget on the backs of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, and by downloading with vengeance 
on local governments and communities. Community 
infrastructure is in shambles, our roads are killer roads, and 
scores of people face life-threatening waits for a variety of 
medical treatments and procedures. 
 
It is only because of the resilience, the perseverance and the 
eternal optimism of Saskatchewan’s people, that our province 
has not been drastically depopulated. As it is, in these so-called 
good times that the government keeps telling us about, our 
young people and our future are leaving for challenging and 
well-paying jobs in other, neighbouring provinces. 
 
In the words of the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, communities 
are the bedrock of Saskatchewan. Yes, fine words, but 
considering the wealth of our human and natural resources, and 
the income generated by these, not to mention the ill-gotten 
gains from gaming, it is amazing and it is shameful how the 
present NDP government has failed to recognize and support 
the needs of the bedrock of Saskatchewan prosperity and 
progress, namely, our local communities. 
 
In spite of this government’s neglect, Mr. Speaker, 
communities, through their own foresight, ingenuity, and their 
hard work, are making headway, because people have faith in 
their future and they know that only be investing and creating 
job opportunities with their children and grandchildren will they 
stay, resulting in vibrant and sustainable communities. 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that there are a number of such 
communities in the Humboldt constituency. My constituents 
have inherited and exercised the entrepreneurial spirit and 
tradition of their grandparents and parents, and are in turn 
passing it on to their children and grandchildren. 
 
At the core of their work and celebration of life, are their shared 
values and firm belief in the innate goodness and decency of 
people. They believe in the building of their communities 
through mutual respect, mutual benefits for each other, and the 
preservation and conservation of the environment of which they 
are a part. 
 
And some examples of that entrepreneurial spirit are Bourgault 
Industries, and Free Form Plastic Products in St. Brieux; 
Hillcrest Farms of Bruno; Bell Pulse in Belleview; Horizon 
Seeds in Aberdeen; CIM Manufacturing; Feed-Rite; Humboldt 
Flour Mills in Humboldt. These businesses, as well as a myriad 
of businesses in the Humboldt constituency, contribute to the 
economic and social well-being of their employees and others 
each and every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, David Suzuki states that the need for community 
and its rituals is an ancient need. It has been built into the 
human psyche over thousands of generations and hundreds of 
thousands of years. If it is frustrated, we will feel alienated and 
that will result in many, many problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am somewhat bemused by this NDP’s 
administration’s incessant assertions that good times and happy 
times are here again, or as the throne speech states, and I quote: 
 

. . . the people of Saskatchewan. (They) have overcome a 
dark period of our history, and inaugurated one of its 
brightest, in a few short years. 
 

The rhetoric simply does match the reality as evidenced by the 
many problems frustrating our communities — lack of health 
care facilities, rail-line abandonment, elevator closures, school 
closures, and underfunding of our school system, undriveable 
roads, problems which you are ignoring and you are neglecting. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I am hearing from my constituents as needed 
from this government is financial assistance from the province 
for farmers to set up short-line railways; accelerated road repair 
programs; accessible rural health care; moratorium on school 
closures; and proper funding for education; job opportunities 
for young people; and more than part-time and minimum wage 
jobs; lowering of personal income taxes and surtaxes; ensuring 
the testing of rural water supplies; the review of the Young 
Offenders Act; improved social structure for the well-being of 
our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in all these areas my constituents give the 
government a failing grade. I note with interest, Mr. Speaker, 
the commitment in the throne speech to press the federal 
government for reform of the young offenders system. There is 
certainly a province-wide ground swell for a reform, and I 
personally welcome it. 
 
At the same time, I urge the Minister of Justice to consider 

carefully and with an open mind a community-based, 
restorative justice approach for first-time and non-violent 
offenders rather than simply incarceration, which often does 
nothing to promote healing and reconciliation. Whitespruce 
near Yorkton was a good example of that kind of facility, of 
that kind of justice. But it is now closed at the direction of this 
NDP administration, an administration that is more concerned 
about VLTs (video lottery terminal) than preventative drug 
treatment facilities. 
 
It gets another failing grade in supervising its Crown 
corporations. The sorry spectacle of this government’s 
mishandling of Guyana and Channel Lake reinforces the crying 
need for a public utility review board. Saskatchewan is the only 
jurisdiction in North America without one and probably in the 
world, except perhaps for some banana republics. The continual 
refrain of this lackadaisical administration has been that a 
public utility review board is too expensive. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
such a review board cannot possibly be more costly than the 
multimillion-dollar Guyana and Channel Lake fiascos. 
 
Perhaps the members opposite will come to their senses and put 
in place a review mechanism to ride herd on a seemingly 
incompetent and illiterate SaskPower management, to prevent it 
from entertaining and entering into any further hare-brained 
schemes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is much more to talk about and reflect on 
about the state of affairs and the future direction of 
Saskatchewan, but that will have to wait until after the budget 
because, as the saying goes, the devil is in the details. Suffice it 
to say that the people of Saskatchewan expect and deserve 
greater integrity and competence from this administration than 
displayed by the sorry spectacles and debacles of Guyana, 
Channel Lake, and Jack Messer’s unconscionable severance 
package. 
 
For, Mr. Speaker, for these reasons and the government’s 
inability to truly empower communities throughout the 
province, I cannot support the Speech from the Throne. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am happy 
to take part in the Speech from the Throne. But first, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I would like to wish the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview well in his endeavours. I’m sure that 
government side of the House is going to miss him for a good 
job that he’s done. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well the other side will miss him too. 
 
Mr. Langford: — Right. I would like to compliment the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains constituency; the 
seconder, the member from Estevan constituency, for such a 
great speech, also those colleagues that have spoken. They will 
be very tough to follow. I would like to tell my colleagues, it’s 
great to be back in session with them again. I would also like to 
welcome back the opposition Tories, the third party, and the 
independent party. 
 
I want to welcome you back, Mr. Speaker. You have done a 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

great job in conducting the House in the past, and I know you 
will do well in the future. I would like to welcome the young 
men and women who are our pages; hope you have an 
enjoyable time working here. I would also like to welcome the 
Clerk at the Table and the Sergeant-at-Arms, as well as the 
commissionaires. Also I would like to welcome back the 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate you on the work you 
have been doing in the province, working with young people. I 
have had the pleasure to be with you on three different 
occasions — that was in the Birch Hills School, Wesmor 
School in Prince Albert, and the Choiceland School. I would 
like to say, I was very impressed and entertained. I know the 
teachers and students also felt the same way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that I am happy to be here on 
behalf of the constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. I would like 
to describe my constituency and how it has diversified. 
 
First, there are a number of small towns, farmland, a national 
park, provincial parks, farmland, and lots of lakes and bushes. I 
welcome everyone to come and tour the beautiful part of 
Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Rivers constituency extends 
around Prince Albert, boundaries Birch Hills to the south, the 
national park to the north, MacDowall to the west, and White 
Fox to the east. There are five reserves in the constituency — 
Little Red River Reserve, Sturgeon Lake Reserve, Wahpeton 
Reserve, Muskoday Reserve, and James Smith. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like I said, this constituency is very diversified. 
There is a number of game farmers that raise ostriches, elk, 
buffalo, and wild boar. There are feedlots and hog farmers; also 
a lot of specialty crops grown in the area such as peas, canola, 
key weed, potatoes, and feed grains. 
 
There is a number of ways people are employed in my 
constituency. First of course is agriculture. We have the pulp 
mill; also there is a number of small saw mills mostly along the 
forest fringe — places like Tweedsmuir, Smeaton, Choiceland, 
Garrick, Love, and White Fox. There is also manufacturing 
such as shakes and shingles in the Candle Lake area. Tourism is 
a great big industry also in the Saskatchewan Rivers 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that kind of explains the constituency. Now I’d 
like to turn to some of the issues that are taking place in my 
constituency. I would like to first talk about rail-line 
abandonment. This has put pressure on our local roads and our 
provincial highways, which meant there was no more grain 
going out west. 
 
Just on rail-line abandonment, Mr. Speaker. A few years ago 
the line from Meath Park to Henribourg was abandoned, which 
meant there was no more grain going west from Meath Park to 
Prince Albert. Then the line was taken out from Paddockwood 
to Henribourg, then between Shellbrook and P.A. (Prince 
Albert). This meant no more grain going west of Prince Albert. 
Then the line between Henribourg and White Star was taken 
out. That meant about 100 kilometres of rail line had been taken 
out. 
 
But that isn’t all, Mr. Speaker. Now the rail-line companies 

want to abandon the line from Meath Park to Choiceland. This 
will mean another 50 kilometres. Also the rail line company is 
abandoning the line from P.A. to Birch Hills. This is the 
shortest line from P.A. to link up with the rail line that runs to 
the Port of Churchill. Mr. Speaker, the federal government will 
not listen to the farmers, the local government, or the provincial 
government as . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nor the people. 
 
Mr. Langford: — . . . or the people, as they have asked to stop 
abandoning rail lines until a plan can be put in place to look at 
short-lines, roads, and highways. 
 
The federal government has protected the railroad companies 
and has forgotten about the farmers. Farmers have to haul their 
grain farther to the elevators, Mr. Speaker. The federal 
government has not only protected the railroad companies and 
allowed the rail-line abandonment, but they are asking the 
people of Saskatchewan and the farmers of Saskatchewan to 
pay for all the road damages. 
 
The federal Liberal government does not even look after their 
national highway system. Mr. Speaker, not only is the federal 
government not saying anything about the national highways, 
but also the opposition Tories or Liberals are asking the people 
of Saskatchewan to pay for the national highway system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just before I take my place I would like to say a 
few words about our Crowns. We heard from the Tories and 
Liberals about government not being able to manage our 
Crowns. Let’s talk about some of the good things that the 
government has done — all the good things the government has 
done. For instance, the Cameco shares. 
 
Let’s look if we would have caved in to the pressure of the 
Tories in November of 1991. The Tories have dispensed 
already 11.7 million Cameco shares, selling 6.4 million shares 
for 12.50 apiece in January 1991; another 5.3 million shares at 
14.75 apiece in 1991. Ottawa also unloaded 4 million shares in 
1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of pressure to have the NDP 
again to unload the Cameco shares for $20.50 after Ottawa sold 
their 5 million shares in May of 1993. That was the Liberal and 
Tory governments. In 1996 uranium prices were going through 
the roof. This government chose to sell 10.5 million shares at 
$71.50 a share. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — And at that time, Mr. Speaker, Ottawa had 
sold their shares for less than half. Cameco shares are selling 
now for less than $42.50. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, Husky oil upgrader, something Tories and 
Liberals were wanting this government to sell the same time as 
the federal Liberals and the Alberta government had sold. That 
was for 7.5 cents on the dollar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have sold our share and recovered every dollar 
that we’ve invested. 
 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from the 
Daily Herald, Murray Mandryk: 
 

The NDP, as government, has developed an uncanny knack 
for selling things at precisely the right time. The NDP-run 
Crown Investments Corporation’s record here has been 
nothing short of amazing. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — He goes on to say: 
 

And if anyone thinks it has just been dumb luck, consider 
how foolish they’d have looked had they followed the lead 
advice of other provincial governments, Ottawa, or our 
wizards in opposition. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Tories opposite are making a lot of noise. 
They are a new Tory Party and they say they are listening to the 
grass roots people. Well first, Mr. Speaker, I think they should 
all resign and go to the grass root people and take their chance 
of being elected to the new Tory government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — They are only kidding themselves when they 
think people don’t know what they are up to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know there is much more I could say, but I will 
leave that to my colleagues. I support the Speech from the 
Throne and will oppose the amendment. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
certainly welcome you and the Speaker to another session of the 
Legislative Assembly. I know that your guidance and wisdom 
will add greatly to the demeanour of this House, and I know 
that it will be run in a very proper . . . and conducted in a proper 
manner. 
 
I also want to thank, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the mover, the MLA 
from Wascana Plains, and the seconder, the MLA from 
Estevan, I think for setting the tone for this Throne Speech, and 
the tone for this government in terms of where we are going to 
be investing in the province of Saskatchewan; in terms of some 
key areas of transportation, in the areas of people, in the areas 
of families, in these areas that are critical to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But the advantage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you get to a 
throne speech is that you do have the latitude to speak on many 
subjects. And a subject that I wish to speak about today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, has a bearing on the throne speech. Yesterday, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had a sad, I consider it a sad day in the 
House, when a friend of mine, Mr. Bob Pringle, the MLA from 
Eastview, stepped down from this Legislative Assembly. 
 
The member from Eastview, before his political career at this 

House and throughout his political career here and will be after 
he leaves this institution, has been a voice for those people who 
have not had a voice. He has dedicated his life to do this, and to 
me, this is a very positive message for the life that he has led in 
terms of the way he continues to deal in terms of those people 
who suffer in our society. 
 
And he’s played an important role in this throne speech. The 
member from Eastview, I feel, as being a very dear friend, has 
always stood for very important principles and values. And 
these principles and values that he stands for speak in this 
throne speech today. 
 
(1530) 
 
And I can go directly to those areas by which it is a measure of 
the MLA from Eastview’s mark, that being Mr. Pringle. The 
area that I want to go to is the area, investing in families. And I 
want to quote directly from the throne speech in a statement in 
terms of there. 
 

My Government will introduce amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Assistance Act to implement the Building 
Independence — Investing in Families strategy. Through 
this fundamental reform of welfare, we will be creating: 
 
a new Child Benefit, . . . 
 
a new Saskatchewan Employment Supplement; 
 
new supplementary Family Health Benefits; 
 
and training programs . . . 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these programs can clearly be shown to be 
the initiative of the MLA of Eastview when he was the minister 
of Social Services and carried on by the present minister. And 
to me, these are important initiatives, initiatives in terms of the 
child tax credit that will have national implications. 
 
And as the days unfold in this government, the other initiatives 
that I talked about today will change the face of welfare reform 
in the province of Saskatchewan and nationally; that this 
province will be a leader in dealing with the people that are on 
welfare and dealing with the people that are on low income, Mr. 
Speaker. To me this is the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — This is a very important step. And that’s 
why I say these are one of the initiatives that the MLA from 
Eastview can be proud of as being part of that team that put it 
together, as a strong spokesman in terms of providing the voice 
for these people, as I’ve said. 
 
We talk about the question of support for people on low 
incomes. And I always think from a personal point of view, 
what would our family life be like at home if we suffered under 
these kind of conditions. I consider us blessed right now, Ruth 
and I with our four children, that, you know, we live a good life. 
But what about those people out there who don’t? 
 
And I try and place myself in those situations and how I would 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

react to them and how I would feel. I could certainly feel the 
frustration, the frustration of trying to meet day-to-day 
commitments. I could certainly feel the anger, the anger of 
trying to lash out at the rest of society, trying to deal with 
what’s going on and the pressures that are going on. And I 
could feel the depression, the depression that it doesn’t seem to 
be getting any better. 
 
And when I put those things all together, to me it isn’t fair — it 
isn’t fair for elements of our society to suffer in this way, and 
we need to do things about that. And that has been the message 
from the MLA from Eastview in terms of what he’s told us as a 
caucus and other members of this caucus as a team. And now 
we are embarking, I think, on a program that is going to shine 
the light in that area. And I say to the opposition members: 
watch where we are going to go because we are going to see the 
dawning and that sunlight coming up for those people that 
suffer in society. 
 
Talking about serving these people in a meaningful way — in a 
meaningful way — not simply by giving cheques out. But to me 
it will be a system that will be far better than we’ve ever seen. 
 
Another area that I want to talk about that I believe has a direct 
relationship to the work of the member that I referred to, deals 
with, is in the area of democratic reform. There is a small piece 
in the throne speech that talks about: 
 

. . . further progress (as I quote) towards democratic 
reform, my government will introduce legislation to make 
the Chief Electoral Officer an officer of the Legislature 
(and) appointed through a non-partisan process. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are initiatives that have begun with this 
government when we came to power in 1991 — many 
initiatives. And the MLA I spoke of was one of a team of 
MLAs that had put forward democratic reforms for the province 
of Saskatchewan in 1989-1990. Things that talked about 
by-elections every six months — by-elections every six months. 
Before then, there were no rules. If one can remember, the seat 
of Kindersley went for over two years without a representative. 
North-east, one year. This was not fair to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have seen major electoral reform in The Election Act — 
major electoral reform to deal with these kind of problems that 
have existed in terms of allowing people proper conditions in 
terms of voting, allowing for the proper recording of expenses 
in terms of elections, and defining the responsibilities of those 
people that are involved in the election process in order that we 
can put faith back into the democratic system. If there have 
been problems before 1991 in this House and in the House of 
Commons when we had Brian Mulroney as prime minister, it’s 
that people grew tired of politicians because they used the 
system, they destroyed the system and destroyed the faith of 
people of Saskatchewan in the faith in the political system. 
 
We have had to legislate back into the system integrity and 
honesty and truth into the system which disappeared under the 
government previously in 1991. That can be . . . (inaudible) . . . 
That can be shown to be directly related to the work, as I said, 
of the team but of the MLA also of Eastview, Mr. Bob Pringle. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when I talk about democratic reform in terms of 
dealing with the orderliness of the electoral system, we have 
come a long ways — we have come a long ways. Have we 
come far enough? I don’t know. But we have instituted the 
conflict of interest legislation for members. One of the most 
thorough pieces of legislation in North America in terms of 
dealing with the members of the Assembly and dealing with the 
question that there is full disclosure in terms of what goes on so 
the public has full confidence in those people that they elect to 
this Chamber. These are important things to recognize, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As I’ve talked about, Mr. Speaker, this is a throne speech about 
investment as I talked about the investment in families; as I 
talked about the other initiatives in terms of democratic reform, 
the other investments are in health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am saddened to hear when I hear reports from 
other provinces of what’s going on there. We see emergency 
centres in Edmonton and in Calgary plugged. We see the same 
kind of situation in Ontario. We see the extent now in Alberta 
where in Edmonton hospitals they have cut back health care so 
bad that they are now shipping patients to Saskatchewan, to 
Saskatoon. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Yes. The opposition says no. God forbid, I 
heard it on the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
radio. Two weeks ago on CBC radio I heard about the program 
where they were shipping patients to Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that I’ve hit a nerve. When we hear what 
goes on in other provinces where budgets have been cut in 
health care, particularly when the federal government had cut 
back in transfer payments, this province had not cut back. Not 
cut back 1 cent in terms of the budget of health care. And when 
the feds pulled out, we moved in. 
 
And some of you say, well, that’s not true. Well take the 
line-to-line documents in terms of estimates, in terms of money 
that’s been spent. And further to that, we invested last year $40 
million into the system in addition to what we said in the 
budget. To me, this is putting more into the health care system. 
This is an investment into the health care system. Mr. Speaker, 
it shows this government’s commitment to health care and it 
shows this government’s commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have to talk about my favourite subject, Mr. Speaker, to close: 
investing in transportation. Mr. Speaker, when we talk about 
transportation in general in terms of putting a system together, 
this government is working with the people of Saskatchewan to 
develop plans in terms of how the grain handling system is 
changing. And it is changing rapidly. We are seeing other 
alternatives being looked at in terms of short-line railways. 
 
We are hearing now from opposition parties maybe there’s need 
for more regulation in the system to now protect producers. It 
would be less than five years ago that I heard the same 
opposition parties say, when they wanted a change to the 
method of payment, that we needed less regulation. Less 
regulation will move the grain, will save the producers money, 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

and it will mean larger grain handing systems and fewer 
railways. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have it. We have more terminals; we 
have fewer railways. The cost to producers has gone up and, the 
example of last year and even this year, the ability to move 
grain by the railways has stalled. And these are the friends, you 
know, of the opposition parties now calling for regulation, now 
on the bandwagon that maybe we should be protecting the 
railway system. 
 
The MLA for Kindersley was at the group of farmers who were 
loading an off-track loading of grain in Eston-Elrose along that 
track, thinking it’s a good idea that that track should stay there. 
Before it would have been, you know, deregulation, let’s get rid 
of it. Now we need more regulation to protect that track. 
 
But what gets me, Mr. Speaker, you know what the gall of this 
whole system in terms of the railway system is that we’ve got to 
buy it back from the federal government. 
 
(1545) 
 
That track that travels from Delisle to the Alberta border was 
bought and paid for by the people of Canada and the people of 
Saskatchewan with a branch rehabilitation program from the 
’70s and ’80s. That track has the same high standard of steel 
that the main track has going through Rosetown-Kindersley, 
and we have to buy it for scrap? The producers have to buy it 
for scrap from CN (Canadian National) in order to do this? 
 
It is time, Mr. Speaker, that we tell the federal government’s 
producers in this province that we want control of the 
transportation system. It is our turn to take control. We’re tired 
of experts telling us from Ottawa this is the thing we need to do. 
We’re tired of organizations like the Western Wheat Growers 
saying that we should get rid of these branch lines and have the 
most efficient system possible. It’s not fair and it’s not right. 
 
But we’ve come full circle. The opposition parties have come 
full circle. They’ve come to join us in this area. Now this is 
amazing, Mr. Speaker. This is simply amazing. 
 
But we are acting; we are working with those groups out there 
through the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of 
Highways, that we can develop a system not just for grain 
handling but for all our commodities in Saskatchewan. And also 
develop a transportation system that meets the needs in terms of 
economic development for rural Saskatchewan and for urban 
Saskatchewan, because this is a partnership of growth. This is a 
partnership of growth and this is what is the most important 
issue. And we are dealing with it. And we are committed to 
that. 
 
And what is the commitment? — $2.5 billion over 10 years to 
the highway system alone in order to improve it. We know the 
commitment that has to be made to the highway systems. But 
the question has to be asked is that, where do you make those 
investments? And we are working with partners in this province 
to make those kind of investments. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, I think the opposition want to play 
politics. I think they want to determine what roads they want 

built and they don’t want built. I think they have an agenda that, 
I want to build this road here and that road here but they don’t 
want to bring them together. 
 
But you know planning, and positive planning, will be the 
success of this. And the people of Saskatchewan will have the 
system that they need. Despite what’s going on around us, 
despite what’s going on around us, we will have that system, we 
will have that system that will meet the commitments of the 
energy needs of this province in terms of energy production, in 
terms of mining production, in terms of grain handling, in terms 
of our manufacturing system. It will take time but, Mr. Speaker, 
we will do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will do it. I have confidence in this 
government, Mr. Speaker. I have confidence in this throne 
speech, Mr. Speaker, and I will be very pleased to support the 
throne speech today. I will not support the amendment, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 3:50 p.m. until 4 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 7 
 
Krawetz Toth D’Autremont 
Boyd Draude Heppner 
Goohsen   
 

Nays — 34 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 
MacKinnon Shillington Tchorzewski 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Upshall Kowalsky Calvert 
Trew Lorje Bradley 
Scott Nilson Cline 
Hamilton Stanger Sonntag 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Murray Jess Langford 
Murrell Thomson Osika 
Hillson McPherson Aldridge 
McLane   
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Oh I’m glad the members opposite are so enthusiastic 
in looking forward to what I’ve got to say. I just hope they are 
just as enthusiastic after I am finished with what I’ve got to say, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to begin, Mr. Speaker, by saying to you . . . Obviously 
they’re not going to be. 
 
I want to say first of all, Mr. Speaker, in beginning my 
comments here this afternoon, how proud I am to rise and speak 
in this debate on behalf of the constituents of Regina Dewdney. 
I have the honour of representing Regina Dewdney, and prior to 
that, it was Regina Northeast, now since the fall of 1985 and the 
constituents of that riding have been a great people to work 
with. They’ve provided me with all the advice that I need, the 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

patience when it was necessary, and the understanding, which is 
so important when one is in the legislature having to deal with 
issues that are important but sometimes difficult. 
 
I think that it is important that we all listen to our constituents. 
And I want to say that in listening to my constituents, I know 
that this throne speech reflects very well the thoughts and the 
understanding, the aspirations and the hopes for the future of 
Saskatchewan people. This is what people in Regina Dewdney, 
as they have throughout Saskatchewan, have said to me before 
the throne speech was delivered by the Lieutenant Governor in 
this House. And it is what they are saying now that the throne 
speech or the Speech from the Throne has been presented and 
they have had an opportunity to know what it was saying. 
 
And because of that, Mr. Speaker, I will have no hesitation in 
supporting the Speech from the Throne and the motion . . . the 
move by the member for Wascana and seconded by the member 
for Estevan. 
 
On that, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that both the mover and 
the seconder spoke eloquently and passionately in moving that 
motion. I say that, and I did say it to them after they spoke, that 
they were one of the better movers and seconder speeches I 
have heard in this House in all the years that I have been here. 
And I want to pay that compliment to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, their speeches set a very 
high standard for this debate. And I want to join my colleagues 
who already have done so in congratulating them for their 
important contribution to it. 
 
I also want to commend all the members who have spoken for 
their presentations here in this debate. I note that members 
opposite have been reluctant to take part in the debate, which is 
somewhat surprising for opposition members because I recall 
the days when I was on opposition, one of the most important 
things that members wanted to do is get up and carry on the 
debate and say what needed to be said about what was not and 
what was in throne speeches or in budgets. 
 
So I’m somewhat surprised at the reluctance of members 
opposite to get involved and to take part. But for the few who 
have, I want to assure them — and if they are not here to listen 
then they can read it in Hansard — I want to assure them that I 
will have some things to say about what they have said, in the 
remarks that I am about to make. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to 
express my best wishes to you as you guide all of us through 
this session of the legislature. I know that yours is not an easy 
task. But even when some of us may show some impatience or 
frustration, please be assured that you have our utmost respect 
for how you carry out your responsibilities. 
 
Others have noted your important work throughout 
Saskatchewan by speaking to students in our schools about the 
legislature and how it works and its importance. And I 
commend you for that, as I have in my previous opportunities to 
speak in debates like this. 
 

Hopefully your efforts will not only provide important 
knowledge to students but would also inspire our schools and 
our teachers to make a stronger effort to teach our young people 
about our democratic system, about our democratic institutions, 
and of our democratic system of government. And how 
important it is for them, when their day comes, when they 
become adults, to get involved and take part in that system. 
 
But the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, spoke about the recent 
Olympics and the tremendous achievements of our Canadian 
and Saskatchewan athletes. They were nothing short of 
outstanding. And if other people were like me, and I’m sure 
there were many thousands who were, I’m sure they too were 
up at 2 and 3 o’clock in the morning to see our athletes perform 
and put pride in our hearts about not only them, but through 
them, in our country in which we live. 
 
A strong nation is built in many ways. And the pride that 
Canadians feel in the performance of our very best athletes, or 
whatever field our Canadians may be taking part in, but in this 
case our athletes in events such as the Olympics, that is an 
important part of developing a strong sense of nationhood. And 
so I want to honour, in my remarks today, the contributions that 
our Canadian athletes made in the Olympics of 1998. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the Speech from the Throne 
acknowledges the fact that we live in a world of change. Only if 
we recognize this can we as legislators come to grips with what 
is happening and mould it in the interests of people. If we don’t, 
then people will be forgotten in that process and that rapid 
change that’s taking place. And the rich will continue to get 
richer while the poor will get poorer and their numbers will 
grow. 
 
And if governments don’t do their part, our democracy and the 
democracies of the world will become subservient to the 
decisions made in boardrooms of the world’s largest 
corporations in the world — the boardrooms in places like New 
York and in Bay Street and in Zurich and so on. And fewer of 
those decisions will be made in the legislatures of Alberta or 
Saskatchewan or Manitoba or countries wherever they may be. 
 
So there is no doubt that those decisions will not take into 
consideration, Mr. Speaker, the needs and the dreams and the 
aspirations of people. Now the recent developments in the 
economies of the countries like South Korea and Indonesia and 
even in Japan — one of the strongest economies of the world — 
should be a wake-up call to all nations about what people who 
control investment capital around the world can do to a nation 
and its people if they can set their own rules that suit only 
themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think, Mr. Speaker, what is happening 
in the world today and particularly in the Pacific Rim is worth 
noting as we look at the kind of changes that are taking place. 
 
The member from Humboldt asked an important question about 
the MAI (multilateral agreement on investment) negotiations 
which are presently taking place in the western world. And this 
is an issue so important and can have such wide-reaching 
implications for the future, for the future well-being of people, 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

the environment, and the ability of the democratically elected 
governments to exercise the will of their citizens who elect 
them, that to have it put in place without full involvement by 
the people of Canada in that decision would be one of the 
greatest betrayals of trust by the Liberal government in Ottawa 
in the history of our country. 
 
It is not acceptable for our federal government to negotiate in 
secrecy without consulting Canadians and not explaining what 
it is doing in any deal that can have such huge implications. 
And the least they could do is have a parliamentary committee 
hold hearings in all of the provinces of Canada so that 
Canadians can ask for explanations and express their views. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members of the new Tory Party and the 
Liberal Party refuse to recognize that those major changes are 
happening. One only has to listen to the debate that they have 
carried out in this legislature in the last week or so. I regret that 
the members opposite — both the Tories and the Liberals, the 
third party — in their remarks have reflected their desire to look 
to the past and propose ideas that have not worked in that past 
to try to deal with the problems that we face in the present and 
in the future. 
 
They seem to believe that government has no role in a 
democracy. They have the view that we should let the chips fall 
where they may. Just leave it to the interests of the lobby groups 
like the taxpayers federation and all will be okay, is what they 
seem to be saying in the remarks that they have made here. 
 
I think it’s instructive to look at comments that the Leader of 
the Liberal Party review . . . made and revealed a very 
fundamental flaw in his party when he made some very 
significant remarks soon after his leadership. On September 26, 
1997 — this is when I saw it in the Leader-Post — he said, I 
quote: “In fact, the Liberal strength may be that the party has no 
particular ideology.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in the life of politics that’s like having no 
soul. It means never having to develop nor ever having to 
explain where your political party would take this province or 
country if it ever got elected in government. 
 
It is no wonder that on March 9, the Leader-Post again 
commented on the state of the opposition parties when it was 
written in that newspaper, and I want to quote again: 
 

Our beef is with both opposition parties that make costly 
promises without providing credible explanations about 
how they will pay for them. The Liberals want to inject 
untold millions into health care and the Saskatchewan 
Party wants to cut untold millions in taxes. And both are 
laudable goals, but what’s the trade-off? Tell the public 
now or your credibility problems will get even worse. 
 

(1615) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s a very telling statement. And if this is 
the test of credibility, then certainly we have seen an experience 
in this House that shows that they have failed the test. 
 
I’ve listened to members in this House opposite say many 
things. They’ve said them in this debate and they’ve said them 

outside of the House. I want to talk about some of those things 
because they tell you about the position of the different political 
parties in this province on issues. 
 
The member for Kelvington-Wadena— well she made her new 
Tory Party’s position quite clear on how they view the world in 
the Leader-Post on October 14 of 1997 when she was 
struggling to explain why she would not resign and run in the 
by-election after betraying her constituents who elected her as a 
Liberal in 1995. And she said that she and her colleagues, and I 
quote: 
 

 . . . didn’t resign and run again in by-elections because no 
new policies had been developed for the Saskatchewan 
Party yet. The MLAs wouldn’t have been able to answer 
voters asking what do you believe in and where are you 
going. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that says a lot. It says that the former 
Liberals and the Tories who now have joined under a new 
name, hoping to cover up their past, don’t know what they 
believe in nor do they know where they’re going. 
 
The Leader of the Official Opposition, the Leader of the 
Official Opposition said in the debate in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, “The eight of us who put our political careers on the 
line and decided to leave our former caucuses did so with an 
idea of creating something new on the political landscape in this 
province.” 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if they really wanted to put their political 
careers on the line when they did what they did, they should 
have resigned and asked their voters to make judgement upon 
them in a by-election, and they didn’t do that. They betrayed 
their constituents; they betrayed the people who worked for 
them; they betrayed the people who voted for them; and then 
they did what they did and try to make excuses. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t say this, the member for Wadena 
said it, and she said it on behalf of all of her colleagues who sit 
with her on that side of the House. Now, Mr. Speaker, the 
public of Saskatchewan knows that this new party is nothing 
more than the old Tory Party of Grant Devine trying to hide 
from his past and hoping to pull a political fraud on the voters, 
to get hopefully elected yet one more time. 
 
Just look at it, just look at it. The same back-room people and 
hangers-on who were there when the former Tory government 
under Mr. Devine, under the leadership of Mr. Devine and Mr. 
Berntson, were in power. The same people, the same office staff 
who were there before the change in the name, and who were 
mostly there as executive assistants in that former government 
in the 1980s; former Liberal MLAs, elected in good faith by 
their constituents, who at times in the past not only supported 
but also worked for the Tory Party which was elected in the 
1980s — not one of those MLAs were elected to be part of this 
new party. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is a combination of disaffected and 
disgruntled Liberals who have no idea of what the word loyalty 
and teamwork means, and Tories who could no longer 
withstand the public scrutiny and the shame of this party’s past. 
 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

And, Mr. Speaker, this new party was secretly born in the dead 
of night behind closed doors. It’s the illegitimate child of crass 
opportunism and political chicanery. Well the member for 
Canora should patiently wait because I have something to say 
about some of the things he’s had to say, and I’m sure, I’m sure, 
Mr. Speaker, that he will be interested in hearing what it is that 
he once said about all of this. 
 
But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you a story, and 
I want for you to tell the House a story. I want to tell you a story 
about my father. Mr. Speaker, my father used to tell me and my 
eight brothers and sisters that if you made mistakes — speaking 
to us — he said if you made mistakes or if you got into trouble 
and you learned from those mistakes and that trouble . . . 
 
Ah, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
touched a chord here, and it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the 
members of the new Tory Party under a new name are a little 
touchy about the truth. But they can shout from their seats all 
they want. Today they’re going to hear the truth because, Mr. 
Speaker, it needs to be said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my father said to his children, if you get into 
trouble or if you make mistakes, as long as you learn from 
them, that he would forgive us. And he was always true to his 
word, and it was good advice. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, he also said something else to us. 
He said that if we ever lied to him or anyone else, it would be 
difficult for him to ever believe us again. And he was right on 
that too. And this is the truth. That’s exactly what he used to tell 
us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And to this day I remember that advice and I have always 
remembered it and it has served me very well. And I believe 
that most Saskatchewan people would share that view, and 
that’s why I suggest that this Tory Party, under a new name, 
will find it hard to convince Saskatchewan people that it can be 
trusted. 
 
Let’s examine some of the important history around all of this, 
a history which Saskatchewan people know only too well, Mr. 
Speaker. In the Liberal leadership convention in November of 
1996, the member for Canora-Pelly said, and I quote, it comes 
from the Leader-Post: “If you committed yourself to be part of 
a team, or part of a project, you did it.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think, Mr. Speaker, that this was before he 
was defeated in his attempt for the Liberal leadership at the 
convention. Because then in 1997 after a three-hour caucus 
meeting, the new Liberal leader, flanked by the member of 
Saltcoats and the member for Canora, went before the cameras 
to say all was well in the Liberal caucus. The Liberal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. All hon. members will 
recognize that there are rules that we abide by in conducting 
debate in the House, and that the one that should be heard most 
clearly should be the member who’s speaking. It’s not in order 
for all other members to be shouting their advice back and forth 
to one another. And I’ll ask the cooperation of all other 
members to allow the member for Regina Dewdney to be heard. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Liberal leader said in that interview before the cameras in 
1997 after this important caucus meeting, I quote, here’s what 
he said: 
 

“There is no merger. (He said). No future talks will be 
entertained with the PCs,” Melenchuk told reporters. 
 

And this seems to reinforce statements made by members for 
Saltcoats and Canora, Mr. Speaker, so obviously they all had to 
agree very sincerely, the statements which they had made on 
April 3 in 1996. The member for Canora said — and I won’t 
mention his name, although it’s in the article — so asked about 
crossing the floor, he said: 
 

“It’s totally false and nothing but an attempt by the Tories 
to grab media attention. We have (listen to this, because 
this is really important. He said: We have . . . ) a signed 
document from all members and I can say unequivocally 
there is no truth to it.” 
 

Star-Phoenix, April 3, 1996. 
 
Well what did the member for Saltcoats say on that same day, 
Mr. Speaker? — No, not the same day; this is a little later. This 
is on April 10. On April 10 the member said: 
 

“As ludicrous as these reports are I want to assure you, the 
people of Saltcoats (he’s now talking to his constituents. I 
want to talk assure you, the people of Saltcoats) 
constituency, that I remain committed to you, (I remain 
committed to) the Liberal party and my caucus colleagues. 
 

And: 
 

As further sign of my loyalty and that of my colleagues, we 
have each signed a document in which we unequivocally 
deny any intention of join any other political party. 

 
Now the story didn’t end there, Mr. Speaker, because on August 
8, 1997, both of these members then announced that they were 
going to back on those . . . going back on those solemn 
promises and they’re going to join the Tory Party, pretending to 
be something else under a new name. 
 
But I wouldn’t want to just pick on those two, Mr. Speaker. I 
just wouldn’t want to pick on those two because there were 
others. There was the member from Melfort-Tisdale, who said 
on April 2 of 1996, no, absolutely no, not with the Tory Party or 
any other party. I am a Liberal member of the legislature from 
Melfort-Tisdale and that is what I will stay. 
 
And then he went again when he was asked about crossing the 
floor, he said: 
 

I absolutely can say I have never even considered, never 
mind participated, in any discussions (quote, in quotation 
marks) ‘to cross the floor’. It’s almost too ridiculous to 
imagine. I was elected in Melfort-Tisdale as a Liberal and 
will continue to represent Melfort-Tisdale as a Liberal, and 
none of our members have initiated or participated in 
discussions with any political party. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s interesting to ask, it’s 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

interesting to ask — if people in Saskatchewan heard this and if 
they read about it, which they have — when this so-called new 
Conservative Party goes to the polls, whenever the election 
might be, and says, trust us, here is our word, here is our 
platform, is it fair to ask that it would be unfair if people of 
Saskatchewan to be just a little suspicious about those promises 
and just a little doubtful about whether they are going to be the 
truth? 
 
Now it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that by August — I could go 
on because I have others but I think the point has been made — 
it’s interesting that by August of ’97 all of these had broken 
their promises and allowed themselves to become part of an 
attempt to hide the mistakes of the Tory government of the 
1980s behind a new name. 
 
There’s nothing new here, Mr. Speaker, nothing new here. It’s 
the same political party that caused cynicism about politics, the 
same political party that gave politicians a bad name and caused 
governments to mismanage and bring provinces like this one to 
the brink of bankruptcy in the 1980s. Same political party, same 
organization, same back-room people, same politicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, politics is about trust. It’s about being honest. It’s 
about keeping your word. And that does not only apply in 
politics, Mr. Speaker, it applies in life. And people once misled 
by a political party or by individual politicians will not easily 
trust that party or that politician again in the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, now that I’ve got the attention of the 
members opposite, now that I’ve got their attention, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to now go on to say that the throne speech 
spoke about a lot of important things. It spoke about this 
government’s commitment to investing in families and jobs and 
education and training and health care and transportation. And 
I’ve heard no disagreement with this strategy. I’ve heard from 
members opposite some disagreement in degree, and the 
amounts, and this kind of thing, but no disagreement with the 
overall strategy. 
 
Nor should there be, because these are the priorities that 
Saskatchewan people have said to us are their priorities. These 
are the kinds of priorities governments and legislatures are 
expected to identify and to pursue. And this will be done while 
balancing the budget yet once again so that we don’t further 
mortgage the future of our children, as the old Tory government 
did in the 1980s. 
 
(1630) 
 
And I’m especially proud of the commitment that the 
government has made to invest in families, Mr. Speaker. Here is 
an initiative that will finally begin to deal with the poverty of 
our working poor, and child poverty, as well as reforming a 
welfare system which does not recognize the changes that have 
taken place in our economy and the workforce since the 1960s. 
 
And most people would rather get a pay cheque, Mr. Speaker, 
we all know that. Most people would rather get a pay cheque 
than a welfare cheque. And the trouble is that the present 
system puts obstacles in the way and forces some parents, Mr. 
Speaker, to choose welfare in the interest of the well-being of 
their children. 

And just as it took a CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) government to introduce medicare in 1962, Mr. 
Speaker, it is an NDP government that is once again providing 
the leadership for Canada in reforming our welfare system and 
providing hope and a better future for thousands of low income 
families and their children. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the comments on this initiative by the Leader 
of the Official Opposition were somewhat interesting, and I’m 
glad he spoke to this issue because it’s an important issue. But 
once again, if I may comment on those comments, once again 
he exposed the party, his new Conservative Party, as not 
understanding how our economy and how our society has 
changed. 
 
He opposes this new reform and he says so in his speech. He 
opposes this new reform and he says, why not simply invest in 
families by reducing their taxes. That’s what he said. How 
simplistic. How unthinking. How simplistic, Mr. Speaker, that 
he does not recognize that most of the people who are going to 
be helped with this, these working poor don’t make enough 
money to pay taxes. 
 
It’s the traditional historic Conservative approach to solving the 
problems and the dilemmas of the poor, Mr. Speaker. They say 
cut taxes is going to help the poor, even those that don’t have 
taxes. And in the end all it does is make them poorer, makes 
more people poorer, and makes some of the people who are 
extremely rich even richer. 
 
And the member from Canora might ask his high-priced 
research staff, the leader . . . well not any more the leader of the 
Liberal Party. I almost forgot that he had moved over there. But 
he might ask his other research staff in his new party, the old 
Conservative research staff, to do some more adequate research 
into this. And they would advise him that that system that he 
proposes on behalf of his party has never worked since the 
1930s in the Depression, and will not work, unless you have 
some programs that are targeted specifically to help these 
people and deal with the kind of problem which they have to 
deal with in their lives from day to day to day. 
 
He may want to vote against this measure in the throne speech 
and in the budget when the details of it come out. And members 
opposite may want to do that. But I say to them, that would not 
surprise me and it would not surprise the people of 
Saskatchewan. Because just as Liberals and Conservatives 
fought against and voted against medicare in 1962, they 
probably will fight against and vote against the most important 
social measure to help our working poor, and our poor and 
hungry and poor children in 30 years in Saskatchewan when it 
comes up for a vote here today. So it would not surprise me. 
 
But I would challenge them to reconsider because it is an 
important measure, and it’s going to help literally thousands 
and tens of thousands of families and people who need to have 
that kind of help. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, another important issue raised in the Speech 
from the Throne is transportation. And for a province like this it 
is extremely important. Not that it’s not extremely important for 
all of Canada, because in our country it is. Because our country 
depends on transportation in order that our economy can 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

function at its best, because we are an exporting nation. 
 
Investing in transportation is also investing in people. And this 
government increased spending in highways in 1997-98 in the 
budget by nearly 20 per cent and made a commitment over 10 
years to our highways of $2.5 billion. And this is a major 
commitment of dollars that must be allocated throughout the 
province, Mr. Speaker, not on one stretch of road. 
 
But it’s a major commitment that has to be allocated throughout 
the province and that’s why it’s important to work in close 
partnership with the rest of the community so that these funds 
are invested wisely. And where we have, Mr. Speaker, in this 
province 185,000 kilometres of roads and highways, a distance 
that many people have said before that would circle the world 
four and a half times around the equator. 
 
And we should know that establishing the right priorities for the 
future is important. And it’s a tragedy to me and I’m sure it’s a 
tragedy to most other people that this country’s future economic 
development is so dependent on our transportation system, but 
our federal government refuses to recognize it. Canada is the 
only country in the western world that does not have a national 
highway and transportation system. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a tragedy for our nation. 
 
This is not to say, Mr. Speaker, this is not to say that the federal 
government doesn’t spend money on highways, because it does 
spend money on highways. And in spite of what the Liberal 
cabinet minister for Regina and Saskatchewan says, the federal 
Liberal government spends money on highways, and lots of it. 
 
But Liberals need to explain, Mr. Speaker, Liberals need to 
explain why 98 per cent of the money they spend on highways, 
about $500 million is spent only in eastern Canada. Now that’s 
good for eastern Canada, Mr. Speaker. It’s part of my country 
and I hope that they can get all the help that they need. But 
that’s not the way a country based on cooperative federalism is 
supposed to work. 
 
And even more specific, Mr. Speaker, most of that money has 
been and continues to be spent in New Brunswick so that 
former Liberal cabinet ministers like Doug Young and his 
company can have the federal government, with taxpayers’ 
money, build a road so that their management company can 
manage it and charge whole fees and benefit from it. 
 
And Liberals, besides that, Mr. Speaker, need to explain why 
between 1991 and 1996 the federal government contributed 
only 5.4 per cent of all money spent on municipal roads, 
highways, and airports in Saskatchewan, a sum of some $74.7 
million while the province spent $1.29 billion on 94 per cent. 
The tragedy goes further than that. 
 
As my colleague from Rosetown . . . Saskatoon Westmount . . . 
Saskatoon Northwest — I’m sorry — was referring to a little 
while ago in his speech, the federal government has done things 
that have done a great deal of damage to our transportation 
system and put pressures on it that are going to have a big price 
to pay particularly by our producers. 
 
It has eliminated the Crow benefit for farmers without any 
consultations — $320 million. It has allowed rail-line 

abandonment and changes to the grain handling system that 
have meant increased loads on our highways. Federal 
deregulation has led to decisions by the railways that pose a 
fundamental threat to our existing grain handling system and to 
the economic well-being of Saskatchewan grain producers, and 
offload traffic onto our rural and road network. 
 
And all that we hear from the Liberals in this legislature is a 
defence of their Liberal cousins in Ottawa. Saskatchewan’s 
Liberal cabinet minister in Ottawa comes up with a big goose 
egg. Doug Young comes up with $500 million. And when he is 
asked at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) convention, why don’t you put on a moratorium 
on the rail-line abandonment, what does he have to say? He 
says that would not be appropriate. He says he can only say that 
introducing legislation to restrict abandonment now is just not 
an option. 
 
He should have listened to what Mr. Estey, his commissioner 
said only about three days before then when asked by the media 
about rail-line abandonment. While he is doing his study, Mr. 
Estey said . . . Mr. Estey said, it’s not my responsibility, it’s a 
matter of policy by the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a cop-out. It is an unforgivable shirking of 
responsibility by the minister from Saskatchewan and by 
Liberals. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, there is no political 
will on his part or that of the federal government to deal with 
this issue. They appointed a commissioner to study their whole 
transportation system. They have refused to allow . . . to put in a 
moratorium, so that by the time the commissioner finishes his 
report there may very well be no branch lines left on which 
something can be done in order to accommodate the report that 
he might present. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that tells you a lot about what is wrong with 
this country. And that tells you a lot about why in some parts of 
this country there are some people who sometimes think that — 
and I think they’re wrong; I think they’re wrong — but 
sometimes why they think that they might not be better to be 
part of the country, but go their own way. It’s because of these 
kinds of decisions by a national Liberal government, which is 
not something new. It’s something that has been taking place in 
this country for as long as the Liberal government have been in 
power, and they’ve been in power in this country for much too 
many years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to close briefly and quickly now to 
make some comments on an issue which is, and has been for a 
long time, very close to me and very important to me. And I 
want to close my remarks today by talking about what has been 
happening in Canada for far too long. 
 
In December this legislature did something historically 
significant, something very special. All members put aside their 
political . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. Members opposite 
ask, is it the unity issue. Well I want to say to the members 
opposite . . . I want to say to the members opposite, yes. 
Because unlike some members, I consider it to be an important 
issue. And I think most members in this legislature consider this 
to be an important issue. 
 
And that’s why I’m prepared to stand here because members 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

did not have an opportunity to do it in December. The leaders 
did, and that was the way it should have been. But what was 
done here in this legislature in December was extremely 
important. Our members put aside their political partisanship 
and considered a set of principles called the Calgary 
Declaration, a framework for discussion on Canadian unity. 
 
And it was my hope that this might begin some recognition by 
all members that some things are so important to the future of 
our country and our province that they could rise above 
partisanship. And I still hope that there is some of that 
sentiment and understanding and that although in our 
parliamentary system of government, party positions and party 
beliefs and ideology and philosophy may differ — and probably 
should differ in order that all sides of all issues can be debated 
and considered — that sometimes that in some debates, such as 
the one in December, legislators could share a common vision 
because something very important is at stake. And I want to 
commend the opposition parties, the independent members as 
well as the government on what was done here in that debate 
and in that resolution. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, you must be surprised to 
hear me say that I was somewhat disappointed and saddened to 
hear the member from Kelvington-Wadena say on March 12 in 
this Assembly, “Why did you spend thousands of dollars to deal 
with the national unity question when it was not necessarily 
your jurisdiction?” And I want to say to her, Mr. Speaker, 
through you, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to her through you that 
the future of my country, of your country, of our country is 
everyone’s jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker. Whether our country stays 
united should not be as much concern to the member for . . . 
should be as much concern to the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, and I’m not suggesting it’s not. I really 
think it is. But it should be as it is to me or any citizen 
anywhere in Canada or to a Member of Parliament in Ottawa. 
 
It is unacceptable for anyone or any member of any party who 
is in any capacity in this legislature to support the process last 
fall and then be party . . . and be party to a unanimous vote on 
the seven principles because it may have been politically 
expedient at that time, and three months later try to dredge up 
old resentments and old prejudices in order to try and make a 
political point. 
 
I was disappointed in that. Now this country in its future, Mr. 
Speaker . . . this future, Mr. Speaker, is important, is too 
important for that kind of politics. History will speak very well 
of what happened here last December and I hope future 
generations will look at what we did and what other provincial 
legislatures did and be able to say that those actions and dreams 
were an important part of why their country is — our country 
— their country is united and strong and prosperous and have a 
place so good in which to live that Canada was still the envy of 
people in nations around the world. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, and I want to say this very sincerely, if 
some politicians on any side of this House or any political party 
think that immediate political gain and opportunism is more 
important for their short-term political ambitions than a united 
country in the long term, all that was gained in December may 
be jeopardized. 
 

And so I hope that all members here will think about this 
sincerely and decide to renew the commitments made in 
December. That when it comes to the unity and future of 
Canada as a nation, we can put aside partisanship and instruct 
our speech-writers and those who write questions for the 
opposition members accordingly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, events are taking place in Ottawa and 
Quebec surrounding the leadership of the Liberal Party of 
Quebec which may change the political landscape in Quebec 
but also in Canada. 
 
(1645) 
 
And if Mr. Charest decides to return to Quebec it may give the 
federalist forces in that province some new-found strength. And 
the present separatist government may be defeated in the next 
election. But we all know that the sands of politics can shift 
very quickly and nothing is certain. 
 
If Mr. Charest decides to make the move, I for one will wish 
him well. It’s not my decision, it’s not our decision. It’s his 
decision. But if that’s a move, Mr. Speaker, that can help to 
unify this country, I wish him well. But I will do so, Mr. 
Speaker, knowing that this alone will not settle this debate on 
national unity which has plagued this country for far too many 
decades. 
 
It will take the kind of goodwill that we saw in our province in 
October and November and December to determine and put into 
place an acceptable solution. It will require the kind of strong 
national leadership that the nine premiers and territorial leaders 
showed in the Calgary Declaration, and the mistrust and the 
tarnished egos in Ottawa must end. 
 
And the Prime Minister will need to rise above poor personal 
relations of the past, and other national leaders will have to rise 
above those poor personal relations in the past and recognize 
that in this country, cooperative federalism works, cooperative 
federalism works. It has worked in the past and it can work to 
unite this country in the future. 
 
In his speech at Harvard University, our Premier quoted from a 
speech to the Canadian Assembly on June 22. He quoted in a 
speech from George Brown, who made the following remarks 
on June 22 of 1864. And he was commenting on the almost 
unanimous endorsement of a coalition aimed at a new vision for 
Canada and a major step towards Confederation. And here is 
what he said: 
 

“But party alliances are one thing, and the interests of our 
country another . . . let us try to rise superior to the 
pitifulness of party politics . . . let us unite to consider this 
question as a great national issue, in a manner worthy of us 
as a people.” 

 
The next day, on June 23, the Quebec Canadien, a newspaper, 
wrote the following: 
 

Yesterday’s session opened up a new era in our political 
existence . . . ranking among the most memorable in our 
parliamentary history. 

 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

And as our Premier said of the Calgary accord, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In moving forward this way, we may have rediscovered a 
small piece of the original genius of Confederation itself. 
 
The Calgary Declaration is genuinely a message from the 
people of Canada outside Quebec. The people of Canada 
are getting their say about the message they want to send. 
We have, perhaps as much by accident as by design, found 
the route on this that we have not previously found. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that the political leaders in Ottawa have 
taken note and have learned from this, and I hope that we all 
have. And I hope that in the near future, newspapers and 
television and radio and the Internet will be able to report a 
story similar to that that was reported on June 23 of 1964 in that 
Canadien, after Mr. George Brown spoke and after that 
Assembly had taken its vote. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that because this throne speech, 
as I said at the beginning of my remarks, reflects the views and 
the opinions and the wishes and the aspirations and the dreams, 
to a large extent, of Saskatchewan people — it talks about 
health care, it talks about education for our children, it talks 
about training for people so that they can get the new jobs that 
are being created today. It talks about transportation, it talks 
about reforming our welfare system and helping our working 
poor and our poor children — and so, Mr. Speaker, because it 
does all of that, it is my intention to support the motion moved 
by the member for Wascana and the member from Estevan, and 
I urge all members of the House to join me in supporting that 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to rise here this afternoon on behalf of my 
constituents in Regina Sherwood and enter this throne speech 
debate. 
 
But before I start, I’d first like to bring greetings again to 
yourself and add to the compliments of many other hon. 
members, the outreach work that you have been doing. We were 
pleased to have you at St. Mary School a year ago up in our 
constituency, and I must compliment you for the work that you 
have been doing there. 
 
I also want to welcome the Clerks and the assistant Clerks, our 
Sergeant-at-Arms, the new pages, and all the members of the 
Legislative Assembly staff. It’s great to be back and it’s great to 
be working with everybody again. 
 
To the people of Hansard, I promise when I do a speech in 
French or German or Polish, I’ll supply a translation this year, 
and I set a good example yesterday in that. So, Hansard, don’t 
sweat it, I’ll make sure I give translations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also would like to take a moment, which I didn’t 
have a chance to in our session in December, to thank the 
constituents of Regina Sherwood for their participation and 
input during the unity consultation process which took place in 
November. And I especially wish to give thanks to Francoise 
Stoppa, my citizen Co-Chair from the constituency of Regina 

Sherwood. Your input was well received and a credit to the 
whole process that this Legislative Assembly engaged in last 
November. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise here this evening, or 
this afternoon, to support the Speech from the Throne which 
was moved so eloquently by my colleague, the member from 
Regina Wascana Plains and seconded by the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this throne speech, “Investing in People”, is 
something that the people and my constituents in Regina 
Sherwood can relate to. But my constituency of Regina 
Sherwood, Mr. Speaker, consists of the communities of Mount 
Royal, Prairie View, Normanview, Normanview West, and 
Walsh Acres. It is an area of the city of Regina that I and my 
wife have lived in for almost 23 years now. It’s a great area. 
People with good . . . hardworking people with good, common 
values, who value the cooperation and sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a speech that they can relate to, and I would 
like now to take a few minutes to start to go through the various 
components of this throne speech which I think sets very well 
or continues very well the course first outlined by this 
government a little over a year ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, “Investing in People”, building on our common 
values, the speech outlined from the 1998 Speech from the 
Throne, is a clear vision of our government’s plans for the 
future. It is a vision and plan that is well thought out in 
cooperation with all the people of Saskatchewan, from all walks 
of life, in close consultation with them. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, it represents a very important blueprint to put 
Saskatchewan in line for the new millennium. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but first, as outlined by His Honour in the Speech 
from the Throne, there are six major components to the 
“Investing in People” program. These components, Mr. 
Speaker, the first one outlined by His Honour, described 
investing in families. Mr. Speaker, this is one of our major, 
major priorities. 
 
I would like to take a couple of minutes and perhaps talk about 
what accomplishments have been made in this area in the past 
year, and before I talk about the thrust of the year to come. Mr. 
Speaker, in the area of investing in families, I’d like to . . . 
people should know that funding for the action plan for children 
was doubled during the last fiscal year, which meant $13.3 
million in expenditures in helping children and families. 
 
During this year as well, 6 million of transitional funding was 
targeted to fight child poverty immediately instead of waiting 
for the federal program which will start later in 1998. 
 
The Family Income Plan was improved, Mr. Speaker. Benefits 
to low income families increased by $15 a month per child. 
Family income threshold to receive maximum benefits 
increased from $725 to $850 a month. Children of families, Mr. 
Speaker, receiving family income benefits now receive the 
same supplemental health benefits as those on social assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province provided 1.3 million to help youth at 
risk, including community-based projects to help youth safely 



March 17, 1998 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

off the street; a restorative youth justice program and 
coordination of services for youth with challenging behaviours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a comprehensive and firm strategy to combat child 
prostitution, including street outreach services, strict law 
enforcement, public education, and tracking and monitoring 
their perpetrators, has been implemented. 
 
Money has been provided for school expenses to families on 
social assistance. Tougher penalties, including the authority to 
suspend drivers’ licences for people who refuse to meet child 
support payments, have also been implemented. The basic care 
rates to foster parents has increased more than 8 per cent in the 
past year, Mr. Speaker. Since 1992, more than 3.7 million has 
been targeted to expand and enhance child care services in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In the last fiscal year, 150,000 of additional funding was 
provided to key . . . (inaudible) . . . centres, 500,000 of wages of 
child care workers, and 1 million available for renovation and 
improvement of facilities and equipment. The province is 
working with first nations also to help establish their own child 
and family service agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not all. Two community projects are in 
place in Saskatoon and Prince Albert to assist low income 
families to purchase their own homes in core areas of the city. 
Over three years, 8 million will be used to develop adequate, 
affordable housing for northern residents of our province. 
 
The prevention of social assistance fraud has been improved 
through computer registration and by sharing information with 
other provinces. Mr. Speaker, this government’s strategy is a 
success. Since May of 1997, more people are working and 
social assistant case-loads have dropped steadily. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a trend that is continuing to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other elements of the throne speech 
debate that I’d like to get into, but seeing it’s getting to that 
time of the afternoon, I would at this moment move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 
 
 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1998 

CORRIGENDUM 
 

In Hansard No. 6A, Monday, March 16, 1998, 1:30 p.m., the 
date on page 2 onwards should read, March 16, 1998. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................153 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................153 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................153 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................153 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................153 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................153 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................153 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................153 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................154 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................154 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................154 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................154 
  McPherson.................................................................................................................................................................................154 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................154 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................154 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Haverstock.................................................................................................................................................................................154 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................155 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................155 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................155 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................155 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................155 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Agriculture and Food Week 
  Flavel..........................................................................................................................................................................................155 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................156 
 St. Patrick’s Day 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................156 
 National Nutrition Month 
  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................156 
 Humboldt Businessman Wins Dealer of the Year Award 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................156 
 St. Patrick’s Day 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................157 
 Tribute to Allan Blakeney 
  Lorje...........................................................................................................................................................................................157 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Sale of Channel Lake 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................157 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................157 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................159 
 Examination of Channel Lake 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................159 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................159 
 Plains Health Centre Closure 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................159 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................159 
 SaskPower Board Dismissal Vote 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................160 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................160 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................160 
 Teacher Salary Increases 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................161 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................161 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 230  The Plains Health Centre Preservation Act (“Save the Plains”) 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................162 
 
 



 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Closure of Plains Health Centre 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................162 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................162 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................167 
  Langford ....................................................................................................................................................................................169 
  Whitmore...................................................................................................................................................................................171 
 Recorded Division.........................................................................................................................................................................173 
  Tchorzewski ..............................................................................................................................................................................173 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................180 
CORRIGENDUM ............................................................................................................................................................................182 
 


